The history of the world Raleigh, Sir, Walter, 1552?-1618. The history of the world Raleigh, Sir, Walter, 1552?-1618. THE MINDE OF THE FRONT. FRom Death, and darke Obliuion (neere the same) The Mistresse of Mans life, graue HISTORY, Raising the World to good, or euill FAME, Doth vindicate it to ETERNITY. High PROVIDENCE would so: that nor the Good Might be defrauded, nor the Great secur'd, both might know their waies are vnderstood, And the , and punishment . This makes, that lighted by the beamy hand Of TRVTH, which searcheth the most hidden springs, And guided by EXPERIENCE, whose streight Wand, Doth mete, whose Line doth sound the depth of things; She chearefully supporteth what she reares: Aissisted by no strengths, but are her owne. Some note of which each varied Pillar beares, By which, as proper titles, shee is knowne, Times Witnesse, Herald of Antiquitie, The Light of Truth, and Life of Memorie. THE PREFACE. HOw vnfit, and how vnworthy a choice I haue made of my selfe, to vndertake a worke of this mixture; mine owne reason, though exceèding weake, hath sufficiently resolued me. For had it beene begotten then with my first dawne of day, when the light of common knowledge began to open it selfe to my younger yeares: and before any wound receiued, either from Fortune or Time: I might yet well haue doubted, that the darkenes of Age and Death would haue couered ouer both It and Mee, long before the performance. For beginning with the Creation: I baue proceede a with the History of the World; and lastly purposed (some few sallies excepted) to con∣fine my Discourse, within this our renowned Iland of Great Brittaine. I confesse that it had better sorted with my disability, the better part of whose times are runne out in other trauailes; to haue set together (as I could) the vnioynted and scattered frame of our English affaires, than of the vniuersall: in whom, had there beene no other defect, (who am all defect) then the time of the day, it were enough; the day of a tempestuous life, drawne on to the very euening ere began. But those inmost, and soule∣peircing wounds, which are euer aking while vncured: with the desire to sa∣tisfie those few friends, which I haue tryed by the fire of Aduersitie; the for∣mer enforcing, the latter perswading; haue caused me to make my thoughts legible, and my selfe the subiect of euery opinion wise or weake. To the World I present them, to which I am nothing indebted: neither haue others that were, (Fortune changing) sped much better in any age. For, Prosperity and Aduersity haue euer-more tyed and vntied vulgar Affections. And as we see it in experience, That dogs doe alwayes barke at those they know not; and that it is their nature to accompany one another in those clamours: so it is with the inconsiderate multitude. Who, wan∣ting that vertue which wee call Honesty in all men, and that especiall gift of GOD which we call Charity in Christian men; condemne, without ; and wound, without offence giuen: led there-vnto by vncertaine report only; Daemonolog. l. 3. c. 1. which his Maiesty truly acknowledgeth for the Author of all lies. Blame no man (saith Siracides) before thou haue enquired the matter; vn∣derstand Eccl. c. 11. v. 7. first, and then reforme righteously. Rumor, res sine teste, sine iudice, maligna, fallax; Rumor is without witnesse; without iudge, malicious and deceiuable. This vanity of vulgar opinion it was, that gaue St. Augustine Argument to affirme, That he feared the praise of â , & ama∣ri 3 malis . good men, & detested that of the euill. And herein no man hath giuen a beter rule, then this of Seneca; Conscientiae satisfaciamus: nihil in famam . de ira. . 3. c. 22. laboremus; sequatur velmala, dum bene merearis. Let vs our owne consciences, and not trouble our selues withfame: bee it neuer so ill, it is to be despised so we deserue well. For my selfe, if I haue in any thiug serued my Country, and prised it before my priuate: the general acceptation can yeeld me no other profit at this time than doth a faire sunshine day to a Sea-man after shipwrack; & the contrary no other harme than an outragious tempest after the Port attained. I know that I lost the loue of many, for my fidelity towards Her, whom I must still honor in the dust; though further then the defence of her excellent person, I neuer persecuted any man. Of those that did it, and by what deuice they did it: He that is the Supreame Iudge of all the world, hath taken the accompt; so as for this kinde of suffering, I must say with Seneca, Mala opinio, bene parta, delectat. As for other men; if there be any that haue made themselues Fathers of that fame, which hath beene begotten for them: I can neither enuy at such their purchased glory, nor much lament mine owne mishap in that kind; but content my selfe to say with Virgil, Sic vos non vobis, in many particulers. To labour other satisfaction, were an effect of phrenzy, not of hope: seeing it is not Truth, but Opinion, that can trauell the World without a pass-port. For were it otherwise; and were there not as many internall formes of the minde, as there are externall figures of men; there were then some possibi∣lity, to perswade by the mouth of one Aduocate, euen Equity alone. But such is the multiplying and extensiue vertue of dead Earth, and of that breath-giuing life whch GOD hath cast vp Slime and Dust: as that among those that were, of whom we read and heare, and among those that are, whom we see and conuerse with; euery one hath a seuer all picture of face, and euery one a diuers picture of minde; euery one a forme apart, euery one a fancy and cogitation differing: there being nothing wher∣in Nature so much triumpheth, as in dissimilitude. From whence it commeth that there is found so great diuersity of opinions; so strong a contrariety of inclinations; so many naturall and vnnaturall; wise, foolish; manly, and childish affections; and passions in mortall Men. For it is not the visible fa∣shion and shape of plants, and of reasonable Creatures, that makes the diffe∣rence, of working in the one, and of condition in the other; but the forme internall. And though it hath pleased GOD, to reserue the Art of reading mens thoughts to himselfe: yet, as the fruit tells the name of the Tree; so doe the outward workes of men (so farre as their cogitations are acted) giue vs whereof to guesse at the rest. Nay, it were not hard to expresse the one by the other, very neare the life: did not craft in many, feare in the most, and the worlds loue in all, teach euery capacity, according to the compasse it bath, to qualifie & maske ouer their inward deformities for a time. Though it be also true, Nemo potest personam ferre fictam: cito in natu∣ram suam residunt, quibus veritas non subest. No man can long continue masked in a counterfeite behauiour the thinges that are forced for pretences, hauing no ground of truth, cannot long dissemble their owne natures. Neither can any man (saith Plu∣tarch so change himselfe, but that his heart may be sometime seene at his tongues end. In this great discord and dissimilitude of reasonable Creatures, if wee direct our selues to the Multitude; Omnis honestae rei malus iudex est vulgus. The common people are euill Iudges of honest things, and whose wisedome (saith Ecclesiastes) is to be despised; if to the better sort; euery vnderstanding hath a peculiar iudgement, by which it both cen∣sureth other men, and valueth it selfe. And therefore vnto me it will not seeme strange, though I finde these my wortbles papers torne with Rats: seeing the slothfull Censurers of all ages haue not spared to taxe the Reue∣rend Fathers of the Church, with Ambition; the seuerest men to themselues, with Hypocrisie; the greatest louers of Iustice, with Popularity; and those Eccl. c. 11. of the truest valour and fortitude, with vaine-glorie. But of these na∣tures which lye in wait to finde fault, and to turne good into euill, seeing Nibil , quam . Salomon complained long since: and that the very age of the world ren∣ders it euery day after other more malitious; I must leaue the professors to their easie wayes of reprehension, than which there is nothing of more facility. To me it belongs in the first part of this Preface, following the common and approued custome of those, who haue left the memories of time past to after ages; to giue, as neare as I can, the same right to History which they haue done Yet seeing therein I should but borrow other mens wordes; I will not trouble the Reader with the repetition. True it is that among ma∣ny other benefits, for which it hath beene honoured; in this one it trium∣phetb ouer all humane knowledge, That it hath giuen vs life in vnder∣standing, since the world it selfe had life and beginning, euen to this day: yea it hath triuphed ouer time, which besides it nothing but eternity hath trium∣phed ouer: for it hath carried our knowledge ouer the vast and deuouring space of so many thousands of yeares, and giuen so faire and peircing eies to our minde; that we plainly behold liuing now (as if we had liued then) that great World, Magni Dei sapiens opus, the wise worke (saith Hermes) of a great GOD, as it was then, when but new to it selfe. By it I say it is, we liue in the very time when it was created: we behold how it was gouerned: how it was couered with waters, and againe repeopled: How Kings and Kingdomes florishid and fallen; and for what ver∣tue and piety GOD made prosperous; and for what vice and defor∣mity he made wretched, both the one and the other. And it is not the least debt which we owe vnto History, that it hath made vs acquainted with dead Auncestors; and, out of the depth and darkensse of the earth, deli∣uered vs their memory and fame. In a word, wee may gather out of History a policy no lesse wise than eternall; by the comparison and appli∣cation of other mens fore-passed miseries, with our owne like errours and ill deseruings. But it is neither of Examples the most liuely instructions, nor the words of the wisest men, nor the terror of future torments, that hath yet so wrought in our blind and stupified mindes; as to make vs remember, That the infi∣nite eye and wisdome of GOD doth peirce through all our pretences; as to make vs remember, That the iustice of GOD doth require none other ac∣cuser, than our owne consciences: which neither the false beauty of our appa∣rent actions, nor all the formallitie, which (to pacifie the opinions of men) we put on; can in any, or the least kind, couer from his knowledge. And so much did that Heathen wisdome confesse, no way as yet qualified by the knowledge of a true God. If any (saith Euripides) hauing in his life com∣mitted wickednesse, thinke he can hide it from the euerlasting gods, he thinkes not well. To repeat GODS iudgements in particular, vpon those of all degrees, which haue plaied with his mercies; would require a volume a part: for the Sea of examples hath no bottome The markes, set on priuat men, are with their bodies cast into the earth; and their fortunes, written onely in the memories of those that liued with them: so as they who succeed, and haue not seene the fall of others, doe not feare their owne faults. GODS iudg∣ments vpon the greater and greatest, haue beene left to posterity; first, by those happy hands which the Holy Ghost hath guided; and secondly, by their vertue, who haue gathered the acts and ends of men, mighty and remarke∣able in the world. Now to poynt farre off, and to speake of the conuersion of Angells into Deuills, for Ambition: Or of the greatest and most glorious Kings, who haue gnawne the grasse of the earth with beasts, for pride and ingratitude towards GOD: Or of that wise working of Pharao, when he slue the Infants of Israel, ere they had recouered their Cradles: Or of the policy of Iezabel, in couering the Murder of Naboth by a triall of the Elders, according to the Law: with many thousands of the like: what were it other, than to make an hopelesse proofe, that farre-off exam∣ples would not be left to the same farre-off respects, as heretofore? For who hath not obserued, what labour, practise, perill, bloudshed, and cruelty, the Kings and Princes of the world haue vndergone, exercised, taken on them, and committed; to make them-selues and their issues maisters of the world. And yet hath Babylon, Persia, Egypt, Syria, Macedon, Carthage, Rome, and the rest, noe fruit, flower, grasse, nor leafe, springing vpon the face of the earth, of those seeds: No; their very roots and ruines doe hardly remaine. Omnia quaemanu homi∣num fact a sunt, vel manu hominum euertuntur, vel stando & duran, do deficiunt: All that the hand of man can make, is either ouer∣turnd by the hand of man, or at length by standing and continuing consumed. The reasons of whose ruines, are diuersly giuen by those that ground their opinions on second causes. All Kingdomes and States haue fallen (say the Politicians) by outward and forraine force, or by inward negligence and dissension, or by a third cause arising from both: Others ob∣serue, That the greatest haue sunck downe vnder their owne weight; of which Liuie bath a touch: eo creuit, vt magnitudine laboret sua: Others, That the diuine prouidence (which Cratippus obiected to Pom∣pey) set downe the date and period of euery estate, before their first foundation and erection. But hereof I will giue my selfe a day ouer to resolue. For seeing the first bookes of the folowing story, haue vndertaken the discourse of the first Kings and Kingdomes: and that it is impossible for the life of a Preface, to trauaile after and ouer-take farre off Anti∣quity, and to iudge of it; I will, for the present, examine what profit hath beene gathered by our owne Kings, and their Neighbour Princes: who hauing beheld, both in diuine and humane letters, the successe of in∣side litie, iustice, and crueltie, haue (notwithstanding) planted after the same patterne. True it is that the indgements of all men are not agreeable; nor (which is more strange) the affection of any one man stirred vp a-like with ex∣amples of like nature: But euery one is touched most, with that which most neerely seemeth to touch his priuate; Or otherwise best suteth with his apprehension. But the iudgements of GOD are for euer vn∣changeable; neither is hee wearied by the long processe of time, and won to giue his blessing in one age, to that which hee hath cursed in another. Wherefore those that are wise, or whose wisedome, if it be not great, is true and well grounded; will be able to discerne the bitter fruites of ir∣religious policie, as well among those examples that are found in ages re∣moued farre from the present, as in those of latter times. And that it may no lesse appeare by euident proofe, than by asseueration, That ill doing hath alwaies beene attended with ill successe; I will here, by way of , runne ouer some examples, which the worke ensuing not reached. Among our Kings of the Norman race, we haue no sooner passed ouer the violence of the Norman Conquest, than we encounter with a singular and most remarkable example of Gods Iustice, vpon the children of Henry the first. For that King, when both by force, craft and cruelty, hee had dispossest ouerreacht, and lastly made blinde and destroyed his elder Brother Robert Duke of Normandy, to make his owne sonnes Lords of this Land: GOD cast them all, Male and Female, Nephewes and Neeces ( Maud excepted) into the bottome of the Sea, with aboue a hundred and fifty others that attended them; whereof a great many were Noble, and of the King dearely beloued. To passe ouer the rest, till we come to Edward the Second; it is certaine, that after the murder of that King, the issue of blood then made, though it had sometimes of stay and stopping, did againe breake out; and that so often and in such aboundance, as all our Princes of the Masculine race (very few excepted) dyed of the same disease. And although the young yeares of Edward the Third, made his knowledge of that horrible fact no more then suspitious: yet in that he afterwards caused his owne Vncle the Earle of Kent to die, for no other offence than the desire of his Brothers redemp∣tion, whom the Earle as then supposed to be liuing; the King making that to be treason in his Vncle, which was indeed treason in him-selfe, had his Vncles intelligence beene true) this I say made it manifest, that he was not ignorant of what had past, nor greatly desirous to haue had it other∣wise; though he caused Mortimer to dye for the same. This cruelty the secret and vnsearchable iudgement of GOD reuen∣ged, on the Grand-child of Edward the Third: and so it fell out, euen to the last of that line, that in the second or third descent they were all buried vnder the ruines of those buildings, of which the Mortar had beene tempe∣red with innocent bloud For Richard the second, who saw, both his Treasurers, his Chaucellor, and his Steward, with diuers others of his Counsailours, some of them slaughtered by the people, others in his absence executed by his enemies; yet he alwayes tooke himselfe for ouer wise, to be taught by examples. The Earles of Huntington and Kent, Montague and Spencer, who thought themselues as great Politicians in those dayes, as others haue done in these: hoping to please the King, and to secure them∣selues, by the Murder of Gloucester; died soone after, with many other their adherents, by the like violent hands; and farre more shamefully then did that Duke. And as for the King himselfe (who in regard of many deedes, vnworthy of his Greatnesse, cannot bee excused, as the disauowing him selfe by breach of Faith, Charters, Pardons, and Patents) He was in the prime of his youth deposed; and murdered by his Cosen Germane and vassall, Henry of Lancaster; afterwards Henry the fourth. This King, whose Title was weake, and his obtaining the Crowne trai∣terous: who brake faith with the Loraes at his landing, protesting to in∣tend onely the recouery of his proper inheritance; brake faith with Richard himselfe; and brake Faith with all the Kingdome in Parliament, to whom he swore that the deposed King should liue. After that he had enioyed this Realme some few yeares, and in that time had beene set vpon on all sides by his Subiects, and neuer free from conspiracies and rebellions: he saw (if Soules immortall see and discerne anythinges after the bodies death) his Grand-childe Henry the sixt, and his Son the Prince, suddenly, and with∣out mercy, ; the possession of the Crowne (for which he had caused so much blood to be poured out) transferred his race; and by the Is∣sues of his Enemies worne and enioyed: Enemies, whom by his owne pra∣ctise hee supposed, that he had left no lesse power lesse, than the succes∣sion of the Kingdome questionlesse; by entailing the same vppon his owne Issues by Parliament. And out of doubt, humane reason could haue iudged no otherwise, but that these cautious prouisions of the Father, seconded by the valour and signall victories of his sonne Henry the fift, bad buried the hopes of euery Competitor, vnder the despaire of all reconquest and re∣couery. I say, that humane reason might so haue iudged: were not this pas∣sage of Gasaubon alsatrue; Dies, hora, monumentum euertendis do∣minationibus sufficit, quae adamantinis credebantur radicibus esse fundatae; A day, an houre, a moment, is enough to ouerturne the things, that seemed to haue beene founded and rooted in Adamant. Now for Henry the sixt, vpon whom the great storme of his Grandfa∣fathers grieuous faultes fell, as it formerly had done vpon Richard the Grand-childe of Edward: although he was generally esteemed for a gen∣tle and innocent Prince; yet as he refused the daughter of Armaignac, of the House of Nauarre, the greatest of the Princes of France, to whom hee was affianced (by which match he might haue defended his Inheritance in France) and married the Daughter of Aniou, (by which he lost all that hee had in France) so as in condiscendiug to the vnworthy death of his Vncle of Glocester, the maine acd strong of the house of Lancaster; Hee drew on himselfe and this kingdome the greatest ioynt losse & dishonor, that euer it sustained since the Norman Conquest. Of whom it may truly be said which a Counsellor of his owne spake of Henry tht third of France, Q'uil estoit vne fort gentile Prince; mais son reigne est aduenu en vne mauuois . That he was a very gentle Prince; but his raigne happened in a very vnfortunate season. It is true that Buckingham and Suffolke were the practisers & contri∣uers of the Dukes death: Buckingham and Suffolk, because the Duke gaue instructions to their authority, which otherwise vnder the Queene had bin absolute; the Queene, in respect of her personall wound, spretaeque formae, because Glocester disswaded her marriage. But the fruit was answer able to the seed; the successe to the Counsaile. For after the cutting downe of Gloucester, Yorke grew vp so fast, as hee dared to dispute his right both by arguments and armes; in which quarrell, Suffolke and Buck∣ing ham, with the greatest number of their adherents, were dissolued. And although for his breach of Oath by Sacrament, it pleased God to strike down Yorke: yet his sonne the Earle of March, following the plaine path which his Father had troden out, despoyled Henry the Father, and Edward, the sonne, both of their liues and Kingdomes. And what was the end now of that politique Lady the Queene, other then this, That she liued to behold the wretched ends of all her pertakers: that she liued to looke on, while her Husband the King, and her onely sonne the Prince, were hewen in sunder; while the Crowne was set on his head that did it. Shee liued to see her selfe despoyled of her Estate, and of her moueables: and lastly, her Father, by rendring vp to the Crowne of France the Earledome of Pro∣uence and other places, for the payment of fifty thousand crownes for her Ransome, to become a starke Beggar. And this was the end of that subtilty, which Siracides calleth fine but vnrighteous: for other fruit hath it neuer 19. yeelded the world was. And now it came to Edward the fourths turne (though after many dif∣ficulties) to triumph. For all the Plants of Lancaster were rooted vpp; One onely Earle of Richmond excepted: whome also hee had once bought of the Duke of Brittaine, but could not hold him. And yet was not this of Edward such a Plantation, as could any way promise it selfe stability. For this Edward the King (to omit more than many of his other cruel∣ties) beheld and allowed the slaughter, which Gloucester, Dorset, Has∣tings, and others, made of Edward the Prince in his owne presence: of which tragicall Actors, there was not one that escaped the iudgement of GOD in the same kinde. And Hee, which (besides the execution of his brother Clarence, for none other offence then hee him-selfe had formed in his owne imagination) instructed Gloucester to kill Henry the fixt, his Predecessour; taught him also by the same Art to kill his owne sonnes and Successors Edward and Richard. For those Kings which haue sold the blood of others at a low rate; haue but made the market for their owne enemies, to buy of theirs at the same price. To Edward the fourth succeeded Richard the Third, the greatest Maister in mischiefe of of all that fore-went him: who although, for the necessity of his Tragedie, hee had more parts to play, and more to per∣forme in his owne person, then all the rest; yet hee so well fitted euery affection that playd with him, as if each of them had but acted his owne interest. For he wrought so cunningly vpon the affections of Hastings, and Buckingham, enemies to the Queene and to all her kindred, as hee easily allured them to condiscend, that Riuers and Grey, the Kings Mater∣nall Vncle and halfe brother, should (for the first) be seuered from him: se∣condly, hee wrought their consent to haue them imprisoned, and lastly) for the avoyding of future inconuenience) to haue their heads seuered from their bodies. And hauing now brought those his chiefe instruments to ex∣ercise that common precept, which the Deuill hath written on euery post, secle∣ribus Sen: de . namely, To depresse those whom they had grieued, and to destroy those whom they had deprest; Hee vrged that argument so farre and so forcibly; as no∣thing but the death of the yong king himself, and of his brother, could fashion the conclusion. For he caused it to be hammered into Buckinghams head, That, whensoeuer the king or his brother, should haue able yeares to exercise their power; they would take a most seuere reuenge of that curelesse wrong, offered to their Vncle and Brother, Riuers and Grey. But this was not his manner of reasoning with Hastings, whose fidelity to his Masters Sonnes was without suspect: and yet the Diuell, who neuer disswades by impossibility, taught him to try him. And so he did. But when hee found by Catesby, who sounded him, that he was not fordable; He first resolued to kill him in councell: wherein hauing fayled with his sword; He set the Hangman vpon him, with a weapon of more weight. And because nothing else could moue his appetite; He caused his head to be strick∣en off, before he eate his dinner. A greater iudgement of GOD, than this vpon Hastings, I haue neuer obserued in any storie. For the selfe same daie that the Earle Riuers, Grey, and others, were (without triall of Law, or offence giuen) by Hastings aduice executed at Pomfret: I say Hastings him-selfe in the same daie, and (as I take it) in the same houre, in the same law-lesse manner, had his heaa stricken off in the Tower of London. But Buckingham liued a while longer; and with an eloquent oration perswaded the Londoners to elect Richard for their king. And hauing receiued the Earldome of Hereford for reward, besides the high hope of marrying his daughter to the Kings onely sonne; after many grie∣uous vexations of mind, and vnfortunate attempts, being in the end betray∣ed and deliuered vp by his trustiest seruant; He had his head seuered from his body at Salisbury, without the trouble of any of his Peeres. And what successe had Richard himself after all these mischefes and murders, policies, and counter-policies to Christian religion: and after such time, as with a most mercilesse hand he had pressed out the breath of his Nephews and Naturall Lords; other than the prosperity of so short a life, as it tooke end, ere him∣selfe could well looke ouer and discerne it? the great outcry of innocent bloud, obtaining at GODS hands the effusion of his; who became a spectacle of shame and dishonor, both to his friends and enemies. This cruell King, Henry the seauenth cut off; and was therein (no doubt) the immediate instrument of GODS iustice. A politicke Prince hee was if euer there were any, who by the ingine of his wisdome, beat downe and ouerturned as many strong oppositions both before and after hee ware the crowne as euer King of England did: I say by his wisdome, because as he euer left the raines of his affections in the hands of his profit, so he alwaies way∣ed his vndertakings by his abillities, leauing nothing more to hazard than so much as cannot be denied it in all humaine actions. Hee had well obserued the proceedings of Loys the eleuenth, whom hee followed in all that was royall or royal like, but hee was farre more iust, and begun not their processes whom hee hated or feared by the execution, as Loys did. Hee could neuer indure any mediation in rewarding his seruants, and therein exceeding wise, for what so euer him-selfe gaue, he him-selfe recei∣ued backe the thanks and the loue, knowing it well that the affections of men (purchased by nothing so reddely as by benefits) were traynes that better be∣came great Kings, than great subiects. On the contrary, in what so-euer he greeued his subiects, he wisely put it off on those, that he found fit ministers for such actions. How-so-euer, the taking off, of Stanles head, who set the Crowne on his, and the death of the young Earle of Warwick, sonne to George D. of Clarence, shews, as the successe also did, that hee held some∣what of the errors of his Ancesters, for his possession in the first line ended in his grand children, as that of Edward the third and Henry the fourth bad done. Now for King Henry the eight: if all the pictures and Patternes of a mercilesse Prince were lost in the World, they might all againe be painted to the life, out of the story of this King. For how many seruants did hee ad. uance in hast (but for what vertue no man could suspect) and with the change of his fancy ruined againe; no man knowing for what offence? To how ma∣ny others of more desert gaue hee aboundant floweres from whence to gather hony, and in the end of Haruest burnt them in the Hiue? How many wiues did he cut off, and cast off, as his fancy and affection changed? How many Princes of the bloud (whereof some of them for age could hardly crawle to∣wards the block) with a world of others of all degrees (of whom our com∣mon Chronicles haue kept the accompt) did he execute? yea, in his very death∣bed, and when hee was at the point to haue giuen his accompt to GOD for the aboundance of bloud already spilt: He imprisoned the Duke of Nofolke the Father; and executed the Earle of Surrey the sonne; the one, whose deser∣uings he knew not how to value, hauing neuer omitted any thing that con∣cerned his owne honour, and the Kings seruice; the other, neuer hauing com∣mitted any thing worth of his least displeasure: the one exceeding valiant and aduised; the other, no lesse valiant than learned, and of excellent hope. But besides the sorrowes which he heaped vpon the Fatherlesse, and at home: and besides the vaine enterprises abroade, wherein it is thought that hee consumed more Treasure, than all our victorious Kinges did in their seuer all Conquests. what causelesse and cruell warres did he make vpon his owne Nephew King Iames the fift? What Lawes and Wills did he deuise, to establish this Kingdome in his owne issues? vsing his sharpest weapons to cut off, & cut downe those branches, which sprang from the same roote that him-selfe did. And in the end (not withstanding these his so many irreligious prouisions) it pleased GOD to take away all his , without increase; though, for themselues in their seuer all kindes, all Princes of eminent vertue. For these wordes of Samuell to Agag King of the Amalikites, haue beene verified vpon many others: As thy sword hath made other women childlesse: so shall thy mother be childlesse among other women. And that blood, which the same King Henry af∣firmed, that the cold aire of Scotland had frozen vp in the North, GOD hath diffused by the sunshine of his grace: form whence His now liuing, and long to liue, is descended. Of whome I may say it truely, That if all the malice of the world were infused into one eie: yet could it not dis∣cerne in His life, euen to this daie, any of those foule spots, by which the Consciences of all the forenamed Princes (in effect) haue beene defiled; nor any droppe of that innocent blood on the sword of his iustice, with which the most that fore-went him, haue stayned both their hands and fame. And for this Crowne of England; it may truely be a vowed. That he hath re∣ceiued it euen form the hand of GOD, and hath stayed the time of putting it on, howsoeuer he were prouoked to hasten it: That Hee neuer tooke re∣uenge of any man, that sought to put him beside it: That Hee refused the assistance of Her enemies, that wore it long, with as great glory as euer Princesse did. That his Maiesty entred not by a breach, nor by blood; but by the Ordinary gate, which his owne right set open; and into which, by a generall loue and Obedience, Hee was receiued And howsoeuer His Ma∣iesties praeceding title to this Kingdome, was preferred by many Princes (witnesse the Treaty at Gambray in the yeare, 1559) yet hee neuer, plea∣sed to dispute it, during the life of that renowned Lady his Praedecessor; no, notwithstanding the iniury of not being declared Heire, in all the time of Her long raigne. Neither ought wee to forget, or neglect our thankefullnesse to GOD for the vniting of the Northern partss of Brittany to the South, to wit of Scotland to England, which though they were seuered but by small brookes and bankes, yet by reason of the long continewed , and the cruelties ex∣crcised vpon each other, in the affection of the Nations, they were infinitly seuered. This I say is not the least of Gods blessings which His Maiesty bath brought with him vnto this Land: No, put all our petty greeuances together, and heap them vpto their hight, thy wil appeare but as a Mole-hil compared with the Mountaine of this concord. And if all the Historians since then; haue acknowledged the vniting of the Red-Rose, and the White, for the greatest happinesse, (Christian Religion excepted) that euer this King∣dome receiued from GOD, certainely the peace betweene the two Lions of gold and gules, and the making them one, doth by many degrees exceed the former; for by it, besides the sparing of our british blood, heretofore and du∣ring the difference so often & aboundantly shed, the state of England is more assured, the Kingdome more inable to recouer her auntient honor and rights, and by it made more inuincible, than by all our former alliances, practices, po, licies and conquests. It is true that hereof we do not yet finde the effect. But had the Duke of Parma in the yeare 1588, ioyned the army which hee com∣manded, with that of Spaine, and landed it on the south coast; and had his Maiesty at the same time declared himselfe against vs in the north: it is ea∣sie to diuine what had become of the liberty of England, certainely we would then without murmur haue brought this vnion a farre greater praise than it hath since cost vs. It is true, that there was neuer any Common weale or Kingdome in the world, wherein no man had cause to lament. Kings liue in the world and not aboue it. They are not infinit to examine euery mans cause, or to re leiue euery mans wants. And yet in the latter, (though to his owne preiu∣dice) His Maiestey hath had more compassion of othermens necessities, than comment. in Sal. 1. K 4. of his owne Coffers. Of whome it may be said as of Salomon Dedit Deus Salomonilatitudinem Cordis: Which if other men doe not vnderstand with Pineda, to be ment by Liberality, but by Latitude of knowledge; yet may it bee better spoken of His Maiesty, than of any King that euer England had; who as well in Diuine, as Humane vnderstanding, hath exceeded all that fore-went him, by many degrees. I could say much more of the Kings Maiestey, without flatterie: did I not feare the imputation of presumption, and withall suspect, that it might befall these papers of mine, (though the losse were little) as it did the Pic∣tures of Queene Elizabeth, made by vnskilfull and common Painters; which by her owne Commandement, were knockt in peeces and cast into the fire. For ill Artists, in setting out the beauty of the externall: and weake writers, in describing the vertues of the internall; doe often leaue to poste∣rity, of well formed faces a deformed memory; and of the most perfect and Princely minaes, a most defectiue repraesentation. It may suffice, and there needes no other discourse; if the honest Reader but compare the cruell and turbulent passages of our former Kings, and of other their Neighbour-Prin∣ces (of whome for that purpose I haue inserted this breife discourse) with His Maiesties temperate, revengelesse, and liberall disposition: I say, that if the honest Reader weigh them iustly, and with an euen hand: and withall but bestow euery deformed child on his true Parent; He shall find, that there is no man that hath so iust cause to complaine, as the King him-selfe hath. Now as we haue told the successe of the trumperies and cruelties of our owne Kings, and other great personages: so we fiende, that GOD is euery where the same GOD. And as it pleased him to punish the vsurpation, and vnnaturall cruelty of Henry the first, and of our third Edward, in their Children for many generations: so dealt He with the sonnes of Loys Debonaire, the sonne of Charles the great, or Charlemaine. For after such time as Debonaire of France, had torne out the eies of Bernard his Nephew, the sonne of Pipen, the eldest sonne of Charlemaine, and heire of the Empire, and then caused him to die in prison, as did our Henry to Ro∣bert his eldest brother: there followed nothing but murder; vpon murders, poysoning, imprisonments, and ciuill warre; till the whole race of that fa∣mous Emperour was extinguished. And though Debonaire, after he had rid himselfe of his Nephew by a violent death; and of his Bastard Brothers by a ciuill death (hauing in∣closed them with sure gard, all the daies of their liues, within a Monasterie) held him selfe secure from all opposition: Yet GOD raised vp against him (which hee suspected not) his owne sonnes, to vex him, to inuade him, to take him prisoner, and to depose him; his owne sonnes, with whome (to satisfie their ambition) hee had shared his estate, and giuen them Crownes to weare, and Kingdomes to gouerne, during his owne life. Yea his eldest sonne Lothaire (for hee had foure, three by his first wife, and one by his second; to wit, Lothaire, Pipen, Loys, and Charles ) made it the cause of his deposition, That he had vsed violence towards his Brothers and Kinsmen; and that he had suffered his Nephew (whome Step. Pasquiere recher. l. 5. c. 1. hee might haue deliuered) to be slaine, eo quod, saith the Text, fratri∣bus et propinquis violentiam intulerit, et nepotem suum, quem ipse liberare poterat, interfici permiserit. Because he vsed violence to his Brothers and Kinsmen, and suffred his Nephew to be slain whom he might haue deliuered. Yet did hee that which few Kings doe; namely, repent him of his cruel∣tie. For among many other things, which hee performe in the Generall Assemblie of-the States, it followes. Post haec autem palam se errasse cō∣fessus, & imitatus Impe ratoris exemplum, paenitentiam Pasq . spontaneam suscepit, tam de his, quam quae in Bernardum nepotem gesserat. After this hee did openly confesse him-selfe to haue erred, and following the example of the Emperour Theodofius hee vnder-went voluntary penance, as well for his other offences, as for that which hee had done against his owne Nephew. This hee did: and it was praise-worthie. But the bloud that is vniustly spilt, is not againe gathered vp from the ground by repen∣tance. These Medicines, ministred to the dead, haue but dead rewards. This King, as I haue said, had foure Sonnes. To Lot haire his eldest he gaue the Kingdome of Italy; as Charlemaine, his Father, had done to Pepin the Father of Bernard, who was to succeed him in the Empire. To Pepin the second sonne he gaue the Kingdome of Aquitaine: to Loys, the Kingdome of Bauier: and to Charles, whome hee had by a second wife, called Iudith, the remainder of the Kingdome of France. But this second wife, being a Mother-in-law to the rest, perswaded Debonaire to cast his sonne Pipen out of A ; thereby to greaten Charles: which, after the death of his sonne Pipen, he prosequted to effect, against his Grandchild bearing the same name. In the meane while, being inuaded by his sonne Loys of Bauier, he dies for greife. Debonaire dead: Loys of Bauier, and Charles afterwards called the bald, and their Nephew Pipen of A quitaine, ioyne in league against the Emporour Lothaire their eldest Brother. They fight neare an Auxerre the most blody battle that euer was stroken in France: in which, the losse of Nobility, and men of warre, gaue courage to the Sara∣cens to inuade Italie; to the Hunnes, to fall vpon Almaine; and the Danes, to enter vpon Normandy. Charles the Bald by treason seizeth upon his Nephew Pepin, kills him in a Cloyster, Carloman rebells against his Father Charles the Bald, the Father burnes out the eies of his sonne Carloman; Bauire inuades the Emperour Lothaire his Brother, Lothai∣re quits the Emperour, Hee is assailed and wounded to the heart by his owne conscience, for his rebellion against his Father, and for his other cruelties, and dies in a Monestarie. Charles the Bald the Vncle oppresseth his Ne∣phewes the sonnes of Lothaire, hee vsurpeth the Empire to the preiudice of Loys ef Bauire his elder Brother, Bauiers armies and his sonne Carlo∣man are beaten, hee dies of griefe, and the Vsurper Charles is poysoned by Zedechias a Iew his Phisitian, his sonne Loys le Beque dies of the same drinke Beque had Charles the simple, and two Bastards, Loys and Car∣loman, they rebell against their Brother, but the eldest breakes his Neck, the younger is slaine by a wild Bore; the sonne of Bauiere had the same ill destiny and brake his neck by a fall out of a Window in sporting with his companions Charles the grosse becomes Lord of all that the sonnes of Debonaire held in Germanie, where with not contented, hee inuades Charles the simple, but being for saken of his Nobility, of his wife, and of his vnderstanding, hee dies a distracted begger. Charles the simple is held in Wardship by Eudes Maior of the Pallace, then by Robert the Brother of Eudes, and lastly being taken by the Earle of Vermandois, hee is forced to die in the prison of Peron: Loyes the sonne of Charles the simple breakes his Neck in Chasing a Wolfe, and of the two sonne of this Loys, the one dies of poysou, the other dies in the prison of Orleans, after whome Hugh Capet, of ano∣ther race, and a stranger to the French, makes him-selfe King. : These miserable ends had the issues of Debonaire: who after hee had once apparrelled iniustice with authority, his sonnes and successours tooke vp the fashion; and wore that Garment so long without other prouision, as when the same was torne from their shouldiers, euery man despised them as misera∣ble and naked beggers. The wretched successe they had, (saith a learned French-man) shewes, què en ceste mort il y avoit plus du fait des hommes que de Dieu, ou de la iusticè: that in the death of that Prince, to wit of Bernard the sonne of Pepin, the true heire of Charlemaine, men had more medling, than either GOD, or Iustice had. But to come nearer home; it is certaine that Francis the first, One of the worthiest Kings (except for that fact) that euer the French men had, did neuer enioy him-selfe; after hee had commended the destruction of the Protestants of Mirandol and Cabrieres, to the Parliament of Prouence, which poore people were there-vpon burnt, and murdered; men, woemen, and children. It is true, that the said King Francis repented him-selfe of the fact, and gaue Charge to Henry his sonne, to doe iustice vpon the Murderers; threatning his sonne with GOD Siudgmeuts, if he neglected it. But this vnseasonable care of his, GOD was not pleased to accept for payment. For after Henry him-selfe was slaine in sport by Mont∣gomery; we all may remember what became of his foure sonnes, Francis Charles, Henry, and Hercules. Of which although three of them became Kings, and were married to beautifull and vertuous Ladies: Yet were they, one after another, cast out of the world, without stock or seed. And not-with-standing their subtilty, and breach offaith; with all their Massa∣cres, vpon those of the religion, and great effusion of bloud; the Crowne was set on his head, whom they all laboured to dissolue; the Protestants remaine more in number than euer they were; and hold to this day more strong citties than euer they bad. Let vs now see if GOD be not the same GOD in Spaine, as in Eng∣land and France. Towards whom we will looke no further backe than to Don Pedro of Castile: in respect of which Prince, all the Tyrants of Sicil, our Richard the third, and the great Euan Vasilowick of Moscouia, were but pettie ones: this Castilian, of all Christian and Heathen Kings, hauing beene the most mercilesse. For besides those of his owne bloud and Nobility which hee caused to be slaine in his owne Court and Chamber, as Sancho Ruis the grert Master of Calatraua, Ruis Gonsales, Alphonso Tello, and Don Iohn of , whom he cut in peeces and cast into the streets, denying him Christian buriall: I say besides these, and the slaughter of Gomes Manriques, Diego Peres, Alphonso Gomes, and the great commander of Castile; He made away the two Infants of Arragon his Cosen-germans, his brother Don Frederick, Don Iohn de la Cerde, Al∣buquergues, Nugnes de Guzmā, Cornel, Cabrera, Tenorio, Mendes de Toledo, Guttiere his great Treasurer, and all his Kindred; and a world of others. Neither did he spare his two youngest brothers, innocent Prin∣ces: whom after hee had kept in close prison from their Cradles, till one of them had liued yeares, and the other, foureteene; hee murdered them there. Nay hee spared not his Mother, nor his wife the Lady Blanch of Bourbon. Lastly as he caused the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Deane, to bee killed of purpose to enioy their treasures: so did he put to death Maho∣met . of Spaine Aben Alhamar King of Barbary, with seauen and thirty of his ; that came vnto him for succour, with a great summe of money, to leuy (by his fauour) some companies of souldiers to returne withall. Yea, would needs assist the Hangman with owne hand, in the execution of the old King; inso much as Pope Vrban declared him an enemie both to GOD and Man. But what was his end? Hauing beene formerly beaten out of his Kingdome, and re-established by the valour of the English Na∣tion, led by the famous Duke of Lancaster: He was stabbed to death his younger Brother the Earle of Astramara, who dispossest all his Children of their inheritance; which, but for the Fathers iniustice and cruelty, had ne∣uer beene in danger of any such thing. If we can parallell any man with this King, it must bee Duke Iohn of Burgoigne: who, after his traiterous murder of the Duke of Orleans, caused the Constable of Armagnac, the Chancelour of France, the Bishops of Constance, Bayeux, Eureux, Senlis, Saintes, and other religious and reuerend Church-men, the Earle of Prè, Hector of Chartres, and (in effect) all the Officers of iustice, of the Chamber of Accompts, Treasurie, and Request, (with hnndred others to accompany them) to bee sud∣denly and violently slaine. Hereby, while he hoped to gouerne, and to haue maistred France: He was soone after strucken with an axe in the face, in the presence of the Dauphin; and, without any leisure to repent his . in Anno. 1418. misdeeds, presently slaine. These were the Louers of other mens mise∣ries: and miserie found them out. Now for the Kings of Spaine, which liued both with Henry the se∣uenth, Henry the eight, Queene Mary, and Queene Elizabeth; Fer∣dinand of Arragon was the first: and the first that layd the foundation of the present Austrian greatnesse. For this King did not content him-selfe to hold Arragon by the vsurpation of his Ancestor; and to fasten there∣vnto the Kingdome of Castile and Leon, which Isabel his wife held by strong hand, and his assistance, from her owne Neece the Daughter of the last Henry: but most cruelly and craftily, without all colour or pretence of right, Hee also cast his owne Neece out of the Kingdome of Nauarre; and, con∣trarie to faith, and the promise that hee made to restore it, the best places, and so wasted the rest, as there was no meanes left for any army to inuade it. This King I say, that betrayed also Ferdinand and Frederick Kings of Naples, Princes of his owne bloud, and by double alliance vnto him; sold them to the French: and with the same Army, sent for their suc∣cour vnder Gonsaluo, cast them out; and shared their Kingdome with the French, whom afterwards he most shamefully betrayed. This and politique King, who sold Heauen and his owne Honour, to make his sonne, the Prince of Spaine, the greatest Monarch of the world: saw him die in the flower of his yeares; and his wife great with childe, with her vntimely birth, at once and together buried. His eldest daughter married vnto Don Alphonso Prince of Portugall, beheld her first husband breake his neck in her presence; and being with childe by her second, dyed with it. A iust iudgement of GOD vpon the race of Iohn, father to Alphonso, now wholly extinguished: who had not onely left many disconsolate Mothers in Portugall, by the of their children; but had formerly slaine with his owne , the sonne and onely comfort of his Aunt the Lady Beatrix, Duchesse of Viseo. The second Daughter of Ferdinand, married to the Arch-duke Philip, turned foole; and died mad and depriued. His third daughter, bestowed on King Henry the eight, He saw cast off by the King: the mother of many in England; and the mother of a Daughter, that in her vnhappy zeale shed a world of innocent bloud; lost Callice to the French; and died heart-broken without increase. To conclude: all those Kingdomes of Ferdinand haue maisters of a new name; and, by a strange family are gouerned and possest. Chatles the , sonne to the Arch-duke Philip, in whose vaine enter∣prises vpon the French, vpon the Almans, other Princes and States, so many multitudes of Christian souldiers, and renowned Captaines, were consumed: who gaue the while a most perilous entrance to the Turkes, and suffered Rhodes, the Key of Christendome, to be taken; was in conclu∣sion chaced out of France, and in a sort out of Germany; and left to the French, , Toule, and Verdun, places belonging to the Empire; stole away from ; and scaled the Alpes by torch-light, pursued by Duke Maurice; hauing hoped to swallow vp all those dominions, wherein hee nothing saue his owne disgraces. And hauing, after the slaughter of so many Millions of men, no one foote of ground in eyther: Hee crept into a , and made himselfe a Pensioner of an hundred Nehter. Hist. l. 7. sol. 313: thousand by the yeare to his sonne Philip; from whom he very slow∣ly his meane and ordinary maintenance. His Sonne againe King Philip the second, not satisfied to hold Holland and , (wrested by his ancestors from Iaqueline their lawfull Prin∣cesse) and to possesse in peace many other Prouinces of the Nether∣lands: perswaded by that mischieuous Cardinall of Granuile, and other Romish Tyrants; not onely forgot the most remarkable serui∣ces, done to his Father the Emperour by the Nobilitie of those countries; not onely forgot the present, made him vpon his entrie, of forty millions of Florens, called the Nouale aide; nor onely forgot, that hee had twice most solemnly sworne to the Generall States, to maintaine and preserue their aun∣cient Histo: of the Netherlands. rights, priuiledges, and customes, which they had enioyed vnder their thirty and fiue Earles before him, Conditionall Princes of those Prouin∣ces: but beginning first to constraine them, and enthrall them by the Spanish Inquisition, and then to impouerish them by many new deuised and impositions; Hee lastly, by strong hand and maine force, attempted to make him-selfe not onely an absolute Monarch ouer them, like vnto the Kings and Souer aignes of England and France; but Turke-like, to tread vnder his feet all their Nationall and fundamentall Lawes, Priuiledges, and ancient Rights. To effect which, after he had easily obtained from the Pope a Dispensation of his former Oathes (which Dispensation was the true cause of all the warre and bloudshed then) and after he had tryed what hee could performe, by diuiding of their owne Nobilitie, vnder the gouern∣ment of his base , Margaret of Austria, and the Cardinall Granuile; Hee employed that most mercilesse Spaniad Don Ferdinand of Toledo, Duke of Alua, followed with a powerfull army of strange Nations: by whom he first slaughtered that renowned Captaine the Earle of Egmont, Prince of Gauare; and Philip Montmorency Earle of Horn: made away Montigue, and the Marquis of Bergues; and cut off in those yeares (that Alua gouerned) of Gentlemen and others, eighteene thousand and hundred, by the hands of the Hangman, besides all his other barba∣rous murders and massacres. By whose ministry when hee could not yet brings his affaires to their wished ends, hauing it in his hope to worke that by subtlety, which hee had failed to performe byforce: Hee sent for gouer∣nour his bastard brother Don Iohn of Austria; a Prince of great hope, and very gracious to those people. But hee, the same Papall aduantage that his predecessors had done: made no scruple to take Oath vpon the Holy Euangelists, to obserue the treaty made with the Generall States; and to discharge the Low Countries of all Spaniards, and other strangers, there∣in garrisond. Towards whose Pay and Pasport, the Netherlands strai∣ned them-selues to make payment of hundred thousand pounds. Which monies receiued, He suddenly surprised the Citadells of Antwerp and Ne∣meures: not doubting (being vnsuspected by the States) to haue possest him-selfe of all the maistring places of those Prouinces. For whatsoeuer hee ouertly pretended: He held in secret a contrary councell with the Secre∣tary Escouedo, Rhodus, Barlemont, and others, Ministers of the Spanish tyranny; formerly practised, and now againe intended. But let vs now see the effect and end of this periurie, and of all other the Dukes cruelties. First, for him-selfe; after hee had murdered so many of the Nobilitie; executed (as aforesaid) eighteene thousand hundred in yeares; and most cruelly slaine Man, Women, and Childe, in Mecklin, , Naerden, and other places: and after hee had consumed sixe and thirty millions of treasure in yeares: notwithstanding his Spanish vant, That hee would suffocate the Hollanders in their owne butter-bar∣rells, and milke-tubbs: He departed the country no otherwise accompanied, than with the curse and detestation of the whole Nation; leauing his Mai∣sters affaires in a tenfold worse estate, than hee found them at his first arri∣uall. For Don , whose haughty conceipt of him-selfe ouer-came the greatest difficulties; though his iudgement were ouer-weake to mannage the least: what wonders did his fearefull breach of faith bring forth, other than the King his brothers and distrust; with the vntimely death that seized him, euen in the of his youth. And for Escouedo his sharpe Secretarie, who in his owne imagination had conquered for his Maister both England and the Netherlands; being sent into Spaine vpon some new proiect, He was at the first arriuall, and before any accesse to the King, by certaine appointed by Anthony Peres (though by better warrant than his) rudely murdered in his owne lodging. Lastly, if wee consider the King of Spaines carriage, his counsaile, and successe in this ; there is nothing left to the memory of man more remarkeable. For hee hath paid aboue an hundred Millions, and the liues of aboue foure hundred thousand Christians, for the of all those countries; which, for beauty, gaue place to none; and for reuenue, did equall his VVest Indies: for the losse of a nation, which most willingly obeyed him; and who at this day, after forty yeares warre, are in of all his forces become free E∣state, and farre more rich and powerfull, than they were, when hee first to and oppresse them. Oh by what plots, by what for swearings, betrayings, oppressions, impri∣sonments, tortures, poysonings, and vnder what reasons of State, and poli∣tique subteltie, haue these forenamed Kings, both strangers, and of our owne Nation, pulled the vengeance of GOD vpon them-selues, vpon theirs, and vpon their prudent ministers! and in the end haue brought those things to passe for their enemies, and seene an effect so directly contrary to all their owne counsailes and cruelties; as the one could neuer hoped for them∣selues; and the other neuer haue succeeded; if no such opposition had euer beene made. GOD said it and performed it : Perdam sapi∣entiam sapientum, I will destroy the wisdome of the wise. But what of all this? and to what end doe we lay before the eyes of the li∣uing, the fal and fortunes of the dead: seeing the world is the same that it hath bin; & the children of the present time, wil still obey their parents? It is in the present time, that all the wits of the world are exercised. To hold the times we haue we hold all things lawfull: and either we hope to hold them for euer; or at least wee hope, that there is nothing after them to be hoped for. For as wee are content to forget our owne experience, and to counterfeit the ignorance of our owne knowledge, in all things that concerne our selues; or perswade our selues, that GOD hath giuen vs letters patents to pursae all our irreligious affections, with a non obstante: so wee neither looke behinde vs what hath beene, nor before vs what shall be. It is true, that the quantitie which we haue, is of the body: wee are by it ioyned to the earth: wee are compounded of earth; and wee inhabit it. The Heauens are high, farre off and vnsearchable: we haue sense and feeling of corporall things; and of eternall grace, but by reuelation. No meruaile then that our thoughts are also earthlie: and it is lesse to be wondred at, that the words of worthlesse men cannot cleanse them; seeing their doctrine and in∣struction, whose vnderstanding the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to inhabite, haue not performed it. For as the Prophet Esai cryed out long agone, Lord, who hath beleeued our reports? And out of doubt, as Esai com∣plained then for him selfe and others: so are they lesse beleeued, euery day after other. For although Religion, and the truth thereof, be in euery mans mouth, yea in the discourse of euery woman, who for the greatest num∣ber are but Idols of vanitie: what is it other than an vniuersall dissimu∣lation? Paul to Titus Ch. 1. . 10. Wee professe that wee know GOD: but by workes wee deny him. For Beatitude doth not consist in the knowledge of diuine things, but in a diuine life: for the Diuells know them better than men. Beatitudo non est diuinorum cognitio, sed vita diuina. And certainly there is nothing more to be admired, and more to be lamented, than the priuate contention, the passionate dispute, the personall hatred, and the perpetuall warre, mas∣sacres, and murders, for Religion among Christians: the discourse where∣of hath so occupied the World, as it hath well neare driuen the practise there∣of out of the world. Who would not soone resolue, that tooke knowledge but of the religious disputations among men, and not of their liues which dispute, that there were no other thing in their desires, than the purchase of Heauen; and that the World it selfe were but vsed as it ought, and as an Inne or place, wherein to repose our selues in passing on towards our celestiall habitation? when on the contrary, besides the discourse and outward profes∣sion, the soule hath nothing but hypocrisie. We are all (in effect) become Comae∣dians in religion: and while we act in gesture and voice, diuine vertues, in all the course of our liues wee renounce our Persons, and the parts wee play. For Charitie, Iustice, and Truth, haue but their being in termes, like the Philosophers Materia prima. Neither is it that wisdome, which Salomon defineth to be the Schoole∣Mistresse of the knowledge of God, that hath valuation in the world: it is enough that we giue it our good word; but the same which is altogether ex∣ercised in the seruice of the World, as the gathering of riches chiefly; by which we purchase and obtaine honour, with the many respects which attend it. These indeed be the markes, which (when wee haue bent our consciences to the highest) wee all shoote at. For the obtaining whereof it is true, that the care is our owne; the care our owne in this life, the perill our owne in the : and yet when wee haue gathered the greatest abundance, wee our selues enioy no more thereof, than so much as belongs to one man. For the rest; Hee that had the greatest wisdome, and the greatest abilitie that euer man had, hath told vs that this is the vse: VVhen goods increase . 5. 10. (saith Salomon) they also increase that them; and what good com∣meth to the Owners, the beholding thereof with their eyes? As for those that deuour the , and follow vs in faire weather: they againe forsake vs in the first tempest of misfortune, and steere away before the Sea and Winde; leauing vs to the of our destinies. Of these, among a thousand examples, I will take but one out of Maister Dannet, and vse his owne words. VVhilest the Emperour Charles the fift, after the resig∣nation of his Estates, stayed at Vlushing for winde, to carry him his last iournie into Spaine; Hee conferred on a time with Seldius, his brother Fordinands Embassadour, till the deepe of the night. And when Seldius should depart: the Emperour calling for some of his seruants, and no bodie answering him (for those that attended vpon him, were some gone to their lodgings, and all the rest a sleepe) the Emperour tooke vp the candle him-selfe, and went before Seldius to light him downe the staires; and so did, notwithstanding all the re∣sistance that Seldius could make. And when Hee was come to the staires foot, He said thus vnto him: Seldius, remember this of Charles the Emperour, when hee shall be dead and gone, That Him, whom thou hast knowne in thy time enuironed with so many mighty Ar∣mies, and Guards of souldiors, thou hast also seene alone, abandoned, and forsaken, yea euen of his owne domesticall seruants, &c. I ac∣knowledge this change of Fortune to proceed from the mighty hand of GOD; which I will by no meanes goe about to withstand. But you will say that there are some things else, and of greater regard than the former. The first, is the reuerend respect that is held of great men, and the Honour done vnto them by all sorts of people. And it is true indeed: prouided, that an inward loue for their iustice and piety, accompany the worship giuen to their places and power; without which what is the ap∣plause of the Multitude, but as the outcrie of an Heard of Animals, who without the knowledge of any true cause, please themselues with the noyse they make? For seeing it is a thing exceeding rare, to distinguish Vertue and Fortune: the most impious (if prosperous) haue euer beene applauded; the most vertuous (if vnprosperous) haue euer beene despised. For as Fortunes man rides the Horse, so Fortune her-selfe rides the Man. Who, when hee is descended and on foote: the Man taken from his Beast, and Fortune from the Man; a base groome beates the one, and a bitter contempt spurnes at the other, with equall libertie. The second, is the greatning of our posterity, and the contemplation of their glory whom wee leaue behinde vs. Certainly, of those which conceiue that their soules departed take any comfort therein, it may truly be said of them, which Lactantius spake of certaine Heathen Philosophers, quod sapien∣tes sunt in re stulta. For when our spirits immortall shall be once seperate Lact. de sap 3. c. 19. from our mortall bodies, and disposed by GOD: remaineth in them no other ioy of their posteritie which succeed, doth of pride in that stone, which sleepeth in the Wall of a Kings Palace; nor any other sorrow for their pouertie, than there doth of shame in that, which beareth vp a Beg∣gars cotage. Nesciunt mortui, etiam sancti, quid agunt viui, etiam S. Aug pro . eorum filij, quia animae mortuorum rebus viuentium non intersunt. The dead though holy, know nothing of the liuing, no, not of their owne children: for the soules of those departed, are not conuersant with their affaires that remaine. And if wee doubt of Saint Augustine, wee cannot of Iob; who tels vs, That wee know not if our sonnes Iob 1. 14. 21. shall be honourable: neither shall we vnderstand concerning them, whether they shalbe of low degree. Which Ecclesiastes also confirmeth: Man walketh in a shadow, and disquieteth him-selfe in vaine: hee . 9. 5. & 1. 2. heapeth vp riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. The li∣uing (saith hee) know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all: for who can shew vnto man, what shall be after him vnder the Sunne? Hee therefore accompteth it among the rest of worldly vanities, to labour and trauaile in the world; not knowing after death, whether a foole or a wise man should enioy the fruits thereof: which made mee (saith hee) endeauour euen to abhorre mine owne labour. And what can other men hope, whose blessed or sorrowfull estates after death GOD hath reser∣ued? mans knowledge lying but in his hope; seeing the Prophet Esai confes∣seth of the elect, That Abraham is ignorant of vs, and Israel knowes . 63. 16. vs not. But hereof wee are assured, that the long and darke night of death: (of whose following day we shall neuer behold the dawne, till his returne that hath triumphed ouer it) shall couer vs ouer, till the world be no more. Af∣ter which, and when we shall againe receiue Organs glorified and incorrup∣tible, the seats of Angelicall affections: in so great admiration shall the soules of the blessed be exercised, as they cannot admit the mixture of any second or lesse ioy; nor any returne of foregone and mortall affection towards friends, kindred, or children. Of whom whether wee shall retaine any particular knowledge, or in any sort distinguish them: no man can assure vs; and the wisest men doubt. But on the contrary; If a diuine life retaine any of those faculties, which the soule exercised in a mortall body; wee shall not at that time so diuide the ioyes of Heauen, as to cast any part thereof on the memory of their felicities which remaine in the World. No; be their estates grea∣ter than euer the World gaue, wee shall by the difference knowne vnto vs) euen detest their consideration. And whatsoeuer comfort shall remaine of all forepast, the same will consist in the charity, which we exercised liuing: and in that Pietie, Justice, and firme Faith, for which it pleased the infi∣nite mercy of GOD to accept of vs, and receiue vs. Shall wee therefore value honour and riches at nothing? and neglect them, as vnnecessary and vaine? Certainly no. For that infinite wisdome of GOD, which hath distinguished his Angells by degrees: which hath giuen greater and lesse light and beauty, to Heauenly bodies: which hath made differences be∣tweene beasts and birds: created the Eagle and the Flye, the Cedar and the Shrub: and among stones, giuen the fairest tincture to the Rubie, and the quickest light to the Diamond; hath also ordained Kings, Dukes or Leaders of the people, Magistrates, Judges, and other degrees among men. And as honour is left to posteritie, for a marke and ensigne of the vertue and vn∣derstanding of their Ancestors: so, seeing Siracides preferreth Death be∣fore Sica. c. 40. . 28 Beggery: and that titles, without proportionable estates, fall vnder the miserable succour of other mens pitty; I accompt it foolishnesse to con∣demne such a care: Prouided, that worldly goods be well gotten, and that wee raise not our owne buildings out of other mens ruines. For as Plato Pla. de leg. 1. 2. 6. in . doth first preferre the perfection of bodily health; secondly, the forme and beauty; and thirdly, Diuitias nulla fraude quaesitas: so Hieremie cryes, VVoe vnto them that erect their houses by vnrighteousnesse, and Ier. 22. 13. their chambers without equitie: and Esai the same, VVoe to those that spoyle and were not spoyled. And it was out of the true wisdome of Salomon, that hee commandeth vs, not to drinke the wine of vio∣lence; . . 18. 12. not to lie in wait for bloud; and not to swallow them vp aliue, . 23. 1. 3. 8. 9. . 9. 8. whose riches we couet: for such are the wayes (saith hee) of euery one that is greedy of gaine. And if wee could affoord our selues but so much leisure as to consider, That he which hath most in the world, hath, in respect of the world, nothing in it: and that he which hath the longest time lent him to liue in it, hath yet no proportion at all therein, setting it either by that which is past, when we were not, or by that time which is to come, in which we shall abide for euer: I say, if both, to wit, our proportion in the world, and our time in the world, differ not much from that which is nothing; it is not out of any excellency of vnderstanding, that wee so much prise the one, which hath (in effect) no be∣ing: and so much neglect the other, which hath no ending: coueting those mortall things of the world, as if our soules were therein immortall, and neg∣lecting those things which are immortall, as if our selues after the world were but mortall. But let euery man value his owne wisdome, as hee pleaseth. Let the Rich man thinke all fooles, that cannot equall his abundance; the Reuen∣ger esteeme all negligent, that haue not trodden downe their opposites; the Politician, all grosse, that cannot merchandize their faith: Yet when wee once come in sight of the Port of death, to which all windes driue vs; and when by letting fall that fatall Anchor, which can neuer be weighed againe, the Nauigation of this life takes end: Then it is I say, that our cogi∣tations (those sad and seuere cogitations, formerly beaten from vs by our Health and Felicitie) returne againe, and pay vs to the vttermost for all the pleasing passages of our liues past. It is then that wee crie out to GOD, for mercie; then, when our selues can no longer exercise cruelty towards others: and it is onely then, that wee are strucken through the soule with this terrible sentence, That GOD will not be mockt. For if Gala. 6. 7. according to Saint Peter, The righteous scarcely be saued: and that Pet. 1. 4. GOD spared not his Angels: where shall those appeare, who, hauing serued their appetites all their liues, presume to thinke, that the seuere Com∣mandements of the All-powerfull GOD were giuen but in sport; and that the short breath, which wee draw when death presseth vs, if wee can but fashion it to the sound of Mercy (without any kinde of satisfaction or amends) is sufficient? O quam multi, saith areuerend Father, Cum hac spe ad aeternos labores & bella descendunt: I confesse that it is a great comfart to our friends, to haue it said, that we ended well: for we all desire (as Balaam did) to die the death of the righteous. But what shall wee call a disesteeming, an apposing, or (indeed) a mocking of GOD: if those men doe not appose him, disesteeme him, and mocke him, that thinke it enough for GOD, to aske him forgiuenesse at leisure, with the remainder and last drawing of a malicious breath? For what doe they otherwise, that die this kinde of well-dying, but say vnto GOD as followeth? Wee beseech thee O GOD, that all the falshoods, for swearings, and treacheries of our liues past, may be pleasing vnto thee; that thou for our sakes (that haue had no leisure to doe any thing for thine) change thy nature (though impos∣sible) and forget to be a iust GOD; that thou wilt loue iniuries and op∣pressions, call ambition wisdome, and charitie follisbnesse. For I shall pre∣iudice my sonne (which I am resolued not to doe) if I make restitution; and confesse my selfe to haue beene vniust, (which I am too proud to doe) if I deliuer the oppressed. Certainly, these wise worldlings haue either found a new GOD; or haue made One: and in all likelihood such a Leaden One, as Lewis the eleuenth ware in his Cappe; which, when he had caused any that he feared, or hated, to be killed, he would take it from his head and kisse it: beseeching it to pardon him this one euill act more, and it should be the last, which, (as at other times) hee did; when by the practise of a Cardinall and a falsified Sacrament, hee caused the Earle of Armagnack to be stabbed to death; mockeries indeed fit to be vsed towards a Leaden, but not towards the euer-liuing GOD. But of this composition are all the deuout louers of the World, that they feare all that is durelesse and ridiculous: they feare the plots and practises of their opposites, and their very whisperings: they feare the opinions of men which beat but vpon shadowes: they flatter and forsake the prosperous and vnprosperous, be they friends or Kings: yea they diue vnder water, like Ducks, at euery pebble stone, that's but throwne towards them by a powerfull hand: and on the contrary, they shew an obstinate and Giant-like valour, against the terrible iudgements of the All-powerfull GOD: yea they shew themselues Gods against GOD, and slaues towards men; towards men whose bodies and consciences are alike rotten. Now for the rest: If wee truly examine the difference of both conditions; to wit, of the rich and mighty, whom wee call fortunate; and of the poore and oppressed, whom wee account wretched: wee shall finde the happinesse of the one, and the miserable estate of the other, so tied by GOD to the ve∣ry instant, and both so subiect to enterchange (witnesse the sodaine downe∣fall of the greatest Princes, and the speody vprising of the meanest persons) as the one hath nothing so certaine, whereof to boast; nor the other so vn∣certaine, whereof to bewaile it selfe. For there is no man so assured of his honour, of his riches, health, or life; but that hee may be depriued of ei∣ther or all, the very next houre or day to come. Quid vesper vehat, in∣certum est, VVhat the euening will bring with it, it is vncertaine. And yet yee cannot tell (saith Saint Iames) what shalbe to morrow. Iam. 4. 14. To day hee is set vp; and to morrow hee shall not be found: for hee is turned into dust, and his purpose perisheth. And although the aire which compasseth aduersitie, be very obscure: yet therein wee better dis∣cerne GOD, than in that shining light which enuironeth worldly glorie; through which, for the clearenesse thereof, there is no vanitie which es∣capeth our sight. And let aduersitie seeme what it will; to happy men, ridiculous, who make them-selues merry at other mens misfortunes; and to those vnder the crosse, grieuous: yet this is true, That for all that is past, to the very instant, the portions remaining are equall to either. For be it that wee haue liued many yeares, and (according to Salomon) in them all wee haue reioyced; or be it that wee haue measured the same length of daies, and therein haue euer-more sorrowed: yet looking backe from our pre∣sent being, we finde both the one and the other, to wit, the ioy and the woe, sai∣led out of sight; and death, which doth pursue vs and hold vs in chace, from our infancie, hath gathered it. Quicquid aetatis retro est, mors te∣net: VVhat-so-euer of our age is past, death holds it. So as who∣so-euer hee be, to whom Fortune hath beene a seruant, and the Time a friend: let him but take the accompt of his memory (for wee haue no other keeper of our pleasures past) and truly examine what it hath re∣serued eyther of beauty and youth, or fore-gone delights; what it hath saued, that it might last, of his dearest affections, or of what-euer else the amorous Spring-time gaue his thoughts of contentment, then vnualuable; and hee shall finde that all the art which his elder yeares haue, can draw no other vapour out of these dissolutions, than heauy, secret, and sad sighes. Hee shall finde nothing remaining, but those sorrowes, which grow vp after our fast-springing youth; ouer-take it, when it is at a stand; and ouer-top it vtterly, when it beginnes to wither: in so much as looking backe from the very instant time, and from our now being; the poore, diseased, and cap∣tiue creature, hath as little sence of all his former miseries and paines; as hee, that is most blest in common opinion, hath of his fore-passed pleasures and delights. For what-so-euer is cast behinde vs, is iust nothing: and what is to come, deceiptfull hope hath it. Omnia quae euentura sunt, in incerto iacent. Onely those few blacke Swannes I must except: who ha∣uing had the grace to value worldly vanities at no more than their owne price; doe, by retayning the comfortable memory of a well acted life, be∣hold death without dread, and the graue without feare; and embrace both, as necessary guides to endlesse glory. For my selfe, this is my consolation, and all that I can offer to others, that the sorrowes of this life, are but of two sorts: whereof the one hath respect to GOD; the other, to the World. In the first wee complaine to GOD against our selues, for our offences against him; and confesse, Et tu iustus es in omnibus quae venerunt super nos, And thou O Lord art iust in all that hath befallen vs. In the second wee complaine to our selues against GOD: as if hee had done vs wrong, either in not giuing vs worldly goods and honours, answering our appetites: or for taking them againe from vs hauing had them; forgetting that humble and iust acknow∣ledgement of Iob, The Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken. To the first of which Saint Paul hath promised blessednesse; to the second, death. And out of doubt hee is either a foole or vngratefull to GOD, or both, that doth not acknowledge, how meane so-euer his estate be, that the same is yet farre greater, than that which God oweth him: or doth acknowledge, how sharpe so-euer his afflictions be, that the same are yet farre lesse, than those which are due vnto him. And if an Heathen wise man call the aduersities of the world but tributa viuendi, the tributes of liuing: a wise Christian man ought to know them, and beare them, but as the tributes of offending. He ought to beare them man-like, and resoluedly; & not as those whining souldiors doe, qui gementes sequuntur imperatorē, For seeing God, who is the Author of all our tragedies, hath written out for vs, and appointed vs all the parts we are to play: and hath not, in their distribution, beene partiall to the most mighty Princes of the world; That gaue vnto Darius the part of the greatest Emperour, and the part of the most miserable begger, a begger begging water of an Enemie, to quench the great drought of death; That appointed Baiazet to play the Gran Signior of the Turkes in the morning, and in the same day the Foot∣stoole of Tamerlane (both which parts Valerian had also plaid, being taken by Sapores) that made Bellisarius play the most victorious Captaine, and lastly the part of a blinde beggar; of which examples many thousands may be produced: why should other men, who are but as the least wormes, complaine of wrongs? Certainly there is no other account to be made of this ridiculous world, than to resolue, That the change of fortune on the great Theater, is but as the change of garments on the lesse. For when on the one and the other, euery man weares but his owne skin; the Players are all alike. Now if any man, out of weaknesse, prise the passages of this world otherwise (for saith Petrarch, Magni ingenij est reuocare mentem a sen∣sibus) it is by reason of that vnhappy fantasie of ours, which forgeth in the braines of Man all the miseries (the corpor all excepted) whereunto he is subiect: Therein it is, that Misfortune and Aduersitie worke all that they worke. For seeing Death, in the end of the Play, takes from all, whatsoeuer Fortune or Force takes from any one: it were a foolish madnesse in the ship∣wracke of worldly things, where all sinkes but the Sorrow, to saue it. That were, as Seneca saith, Fortunae succumbere, quod tristius est omni fato, to fall vnder Fortune, of all other the most miserable destinie. But it is now time to sound a retrait; and to desire to be excused of this long pursuit: and withall, that the good intent, which hath moued me to draw the picture of time past (which wee call Historie) in so large a table, may also be accepted in place of a better reason. The examples of diuine prouidence, euery where found (the first diuine Histories being nothing else but a continuation of such examples) haue per∣swaded me to fetch my beginning from the beginning of all things; to wit, Creation. For though these two glorious actions of the Almightie be so neare, and (as it were) linked together, that the one necessarily implyeth the other: Creation, inferring Prouidence: (for what father for saketh the childe that he hath begotten?) and Prouidence presupposing Creation) Yet many of those that haue seemed to excell in worldly wisedome, haue gone about to this coherence; the Epicure denying both Creation and Prouidence, but granting that the world had a Beginning; the Aristotelian granting Proui∣dence, but denying both the Creation and the Beginning. Now although this doctrine of Faith, touching the Creation in time (for by Faith we vnderstand, that the world was made by the word of God) be too weighty a worke for Aristotles rotten ground to beare vp, vpon which he hath (notwithstanding) founded the Defences & Fortresses of all his Verball Doctrine: Yet that the necessity of infinite power, and the worlds beginning, and the impossibility of the contrary euen in the iudgement of Naturall rea∣son, wherein hee beleeued, had not better informed him; it is greatly to be maruailed at. And it is no lesse strange, that those men which are of knowledge (seeing Aristotle hath failed in this maine point; and taught little other than termes in the rest) haue so retrencht their mindes from the following and ouertaking of truth, and so absolutely subiected them selues to the law of those Philosophicall principles; as all contrary kinde of teaching, in the search of causes, they haue condemned either for phantasticall, or curi∣ous. But doth it follow, that the positions of Heathen Philosophers, are vndoubted grounds and principles indeed, because so called? Or that ipsi dixerunt, doth make them to be such? certainely no. But this is true, That where naturall reason hath built any thing so strong against it selfe, as the same reason can hardly assaile it, much lesse batter it downe: the same in euery question of Nature, and finite power, may be approued for a fun∣damentall law of humane knowledge. For saith Charron in his booke of wisdome, Tout proposition humaine a autant d'authoritè quel' autre, Charrou de Sagesse. sila raison n'on fait la difference; Euery humane proposition hath equall authoritie, if reason make not the difference, the rest being but the fables of principles. But hereof how shall the vpright and vnpartiall iudgement of man giue a sentence, where opposition and examination are not admitted to giue in euidence? And to this purpose it was well said of Lactantius, Sapientiam sibi adimunt, qui sine vllo iudicio inuenta Lact. de orig: Erroris. l. 2. c. 8. maiorum probant, & ab alijs pecudum more ducuntur: They neg∣lect their owne wisdome, who without any iudgement approue the inuention of those that fore-went them; and suffer them-selues, after the manner of Beasts, to be led by them. By the aduantage of which slouth and dulnesse, ignorance is now become so powerfull a Tyrant: as it hath set true Philosophie, Phisick, and Diuinity, in a Pillory; and written ouer the first, Contra negantem Principia; ouer the second, Vertus speci∣fica; and ouer the third, Ecclesia Romana. But for my selfe, I shall neuer be perswaded, that GOD hath shut vp all light of Learning within the lanthorne of Aristotles braines: or that it was euer said vnto him, as vnto Esdras, Accendam in Corde tuo Lu∣cernam intellectus: that GOD hath giuen inuention but to the Heathen; and that they onely haue invaded Nature, and found the strength and bot∣tome thereof; the same Nature hauing consumed all her store, and left no∣thing of price to after-ages. That these and these be the causes of these and these effects, Time hath taught vs; and not reason: and so hath experi∣ence, without Art. The Cheese-wife knoweth it as well as the Philoso∣pher, that sowre Rennet doth coagulate her milke into a curd. But if wee aske a reason of this cause, why the sowrenesse doth it? whereby it doth it? and the manner how? I thinke that there is nothing to be found in vulgar Philosophie, to satisfie this and many other like vulgar questions. But man to couer his ignorance in the least things, who cannot giue a true reason for the Grasse vnder his feete, why it should be greene rather then red, or of any other colour; that could neuer yet discouer the way and reason of Natures working, in those which are farre lesse noble creatures than him∣selfe; who is farre more Noble than the Heauens them-selues: Man Salomon 1. 9. (saith Salomon) that can hardly discerne the things that are vpon the Earth, and with great labour finde out the things that are before vs; that hath so short a time in the world, as hee no sooner beginnes to learne, than to die; that hath in his memory but borrowed knowledge; in his vn∣derstanding, nothing truly; that is ignorant of the Essence of his owne soule, and which the wisest of the Naturalists (if Aristotle be hee) could neuer so much as define; but by the Action and effect, telling vs what it workes (which all men know as well as hee) but not what it is, which neither hee, nor any else, doth know, but GOD that created it; ( for though I were perfect, yet I know not my soule, saith Iob.) Man J say, that is but an Idiot in the next cause of his owne life, and in the cause of all the actions of his life: will (notwithstanding) examine the Art of GOD in crea∣ting the World; of GOD, who (saith Iob) is so excellent as wee know Iob 26. him not; and examine the beginning of the worke, which had end before Man-kinde had a beginning of being. Hee will disable GODS power to make a world, without matter to make it of. He will rather giue the mothes of the Aire for a cause; cast the worke on necessity or chance; bestow the ho∣nour thereof on Nature; make two powers, the one to be the Author of the Matter, the other of the Forme; and lastly, for want of a worke-man, haue it Eternall: which latter opinion Aristotle, to make him-selfe the Au∣thor of a new Doctrine, brought into the World: and his Sectatours haue maintained it; parati ac coniurati, quos sequuntur, Philosophorum animis inuictis opiniones tueri. For Hermes, who liued at once with, or soone after, Moses, Zoroaster, Musaeus, Orpheus, Linus, Anaxi∣menes, Lact. 5. Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Melissus, Pherecydes, Thales, Cle∣anthes, Pythagoras, Plato, and many others (whose opinions are exquisite∣ly gathered by Steuchius Eugubinus) found in the necessitie of inuincible reason, One eternal and infinite Being, to be the Parent of the vniuersall. Horum omnium sententia quamuis sit incerta, eodemtamen spectat, vt Prouidentiam vnam esse consentiant: siue enim Natura, siue Ae∣ther, siue Ratio, siue mens, siue fatalis necessitas, siue diuina Lex; idem esse quod a nobis dicitur Deus: All these mens opinions (saith Lactantius) though vncertaine, come to this; That they agree vpon one Prouidence; whether the same be Nature, or light, or Reason, or vnderstanding, or destinie, or diuine ordinance; that it is the same which we call GOD. Certainly, as all the Riuers in the world, though they haue diuersrisings, and diuers runnings; though they some times hide them-selues for a while vnder ground, and seeme to be lost in Sea-like Lakes; doe at last finde, and fall into the great Ocean: so after all the sear∣ches that humaine capacitie hath; and after all Philosophicall contemplation and curiositie; in the necessitie of this infinite power, all the reason of man ends and dissolues it selfe. As for others; and first touching those, which conceiue the matter of the World to haue been eternall, and that God did not create the World ex nihi∣lo, but ex materiâ praeexistente: the Supposition is so weake, as is hardly worth the answering. For (saith Eusebius) Mihi videntur qui hoc di∣cunt, Euseh: de prep. Euang. l. 7. c. 8. fortunam quoque Deo annectere, They seeme vnto me, which affirme this, to giue part of the work to God, and part to Fortune: in∣somuch as if God had not found this first matter by chance; Hee had neither beene Author, nor Father, nor Creator, nor Lord of the Vniuersall. For were the Matter or Chaos, eternall: it then followes, That either this supposed Matter did fit it selfe to God; or God, accommodate himselfe to the matter. For the first; it is impossible, that things without sense could proportion themselues to the Workmans will. For the second; it were horrible to conceiue of God, That as an Artificer he applyed himselfe, according to the propor∣tion of Matter which he lighted vpon. But let it be supposed, That this matter had beene made by any Power, not Omnipotent, and infinitely wise: I would gladly learne how it came to passe, that the same was proportionable to his intention, that was Omnipo∣tent and infinitely wise; and no more, nor no lesse, than serued to receiue the forme of the Vniuersall. For, had it wanted any thing of what was suffici∣ent; then must it be granted, That God created out of nothing so much of new matter, as serued to finish the worke of the World: Or had there beene more of this matter, than sufficed; then God did dissolue and annihilate whatsoeuer remained and was superfluous. And this must euery reasonable soule confesse, That it is the same worke of God alone, to create any thing out of nothing, And by the same art and power, and by none other, can those things, or any part of that eternall matter, be againe changed into No∣thing; by which those things, that once were nothing, obtained a beginning of being. Againe, to say that this matter was the cause of it selfe; this, of all other, were the greatest idiotisme. For, if it were the cause of it selfe at any time; then there was also a time when it selfe was not: at which time of not being, it is easie enough to conceiue, that it could neither produce it selfe, nor anything else. For to be, and not to be, at once, is impossible. Nihil au∣têm seipsum praecedit, ne{que} seipsum componit corpus. There is no∣thing that doth praecede it selfe, neither doe bodies compound them∣selues. For the rest; Those that faine this matter to be eternall, must of necessitie confesse, that Infinite cannot be separate from Eternitie. And then had infi∣nite matter left no place for infinite forme, but that the first matter was finite, the forme which it receiued proues it. For conclusion of this part; who-so-euer will make choyce, rather to beleeue in eternall deformitie, or in eternall dead matter, than in eternall light and eternall life: let eternall death be his reward. For it is a madnesse of that kinde, as wanteth tearmes to expresse it. For what reason of man (whom the curse of presumption hath not stupified) hath doubted, That infinite power (of which wee can comprehend but a kind of shadow, quia comprehensio est intra terminos, qui infinito repugnant) hath any thing wanting in it selfe, either for mat∣ter or forme; yea for as many worlds (if such had beene GODS will) as the Sea hath sands? For where the power is without limitation; the worke hath no other limitation, than the workmans will. Yea Reason it selfe findes it more easie for infinite power, to deliuer from it selfe a finite world, without the helpe of matter prepared; than for a finite man, a foole and dust, to change the for me of matter made to his hands. They are Diony∣sius his words, Deus in vna existentia omnia praehabet: and againe, Esse omnium est ipsa Diuinitas, omne quod vides, & quod nō vides; to wit, causaliter, or in better tearmes, non tanquam forma, sed tan∣quam causa vniuersalis. Neither hath the world vniuersall closed vp all of GOD: For the most parts of his workes (saith ) are Cap. 16. v. 211 hid. Neither can the depth of his wisdome be opened, by the glorious worke of the world: which neuer brought to knowledge all it can; for then were his infinite power bounded, and made finite. And here of it comes; That we seldome entitle GOD the all-shewing, or the all-willing; but the all∣mighty, that is, infinitely able. But now for those, who from that ground, That out of nothing no∣thing is made, inferre the Worlds eternity; and yet not so saluage therein, as those are, which giue an eternall being to dead matter: It is true, if the word (nothing) be taken in the affirmatiue; and the making, imposed vpon Naturall Agents and finite power; That out of nothing, nothing is made. But seeing their great Doctor Aristotle him-selfe confesseth, quod omnes antiqui decreuerunt quasi quoddam rerum principium, ipsum{que} infinitum, That all the ancient decree a kinde of beginning, and the same to be infinite: and a little after, more largely and plainely, Principium eius est nullum, sed ipsum omnium cernitur esle princi∣pium, Steuc. Eug. l. 3. c. 9. ex Arist: Phys. 3. 20. ac omnia complecti ac regere: it is strange that this Philosopher, with his followers, should rather make choyce out of falshood, to conclude falsly; than out of truth, to resolue truly. For if wee compare the world Vniuersall, and all the vnmeasurable Orbes of Heauen, and those merueilous bodies of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, with ipsum infinitum: it may truly be said of them all, which him-selfe affirmeth of his imaginary Ma∣teria prima, That they are neither quid, quale, nor quantum; and there∣fore to bring finite (which hath no proportion with infinite) out of infinite (qui destruit omnem proportionem) is no wonder in GODS power. And therefore Anaximander, Melissus, and Empedocles, call the world vniuersall, but particulam Vniuersitatis and infinitatis, a parcell of that which is the vniuersalitie and the infinitie it selfe; and Plato, but a shadow of GOD. But the other, to proue the worlds eternitie, vrgeth this Maxime, That, A sufficient and effectuall cause being granted, an answerable effect thereof is also granted: inferring, that GOD being for euer a sufficient and effectuall cause of the world, the effect of the cause should also haue beene for euer; to wit, the world vniuersall. But what a strange mockery is this in so great a Maister, to confesse a suf∣ficient and effectuall cause of the world, (to wit, an almighty GOD) in his Antecedent; and the same GOD to be a GOD restrained in his conclusion; to make GOD free in power, and bound in will; able to effect, vnable to determine; able to make all things, and yet vnable to make choyce of the time when? For this were impiously to resolue of GOD, as of naturall neces∣sitie; which hath neither choice, nor will, nor vnderstanding; which can∣not but worke matter being present; as fire, to burne things combustible. Againe he thus disputeth, That euery Agent which can worke, and doth not worke: if it after-ward worke, it is either thereto moued by it selfe, or by some-what else; and so it passeth from power to Act. But GOD (saith he) is immouable, and is neither moued by him-selfe, nor by any other; but being alwaies the same, doth alwaies worke: Whence he concludeth, if the world were caused by GOD, that hee was for euer the cause thereof; and therefore eternall. The answer to this is very , For that GODS performing in due time that, which hee euer determined at length to per∣forme, doth not argue any alteration or change, but rather constancie in him. For the same action of his will, which made the world for euer, did also with-hold the effect to the time ordained. To this answere, in it selfe sufficient, others adde further, that the patterne or Image of the World may be said to be eternall: which the Platonicks call, spiritualem mundum; and doe in this sort distinguish the Idaea and Creation in time. Spiritu∣alis ille mundus, mundi huius exemplar, primumque Dei opus, vita Mor. Ficin. de immort. . l. 18. c. 1. aequali est Architecto; fuit semper cum illo, erit que semper. Mun∣dus autem corporalis, quod secundum opus est Dei, decedit iam ab opifice ex parte vna, quia non fuit semper; retinet alteram, quia sit semper futurus. That representatiue, or the intentionall world (say they) the sampler of this visible world, the first worke of GOD, was aequally ancient with the Architect; for it was for euer with him, and euer shalbe. This materiall world, the second worke or creature of GOD, doth differ from the worker in this, That it was not from , and in this it doth agree, that it shall be for euer to come. The first point, That it was not for euer, all Christians confesse: The other they vnderstand no other-wise, than that after the consummation of this World, there shall be a new Heauen and a new Earth; without any new creation of matter. But of these things wee need not here stand to argue: though such opinions be not vnworthy the propounding; in this a∣tion, of an eternall and vnchangeable cause, producing a changeable and tem∣porall effect. Touching which point Proclus the Platonist disputeth, That the compounded essence of the World (and because compounded, there∣fore dissipable) is continued, and knit to the Diuine Being, by an indiuiduall and inseperable power, flowing from diuine vnitie; and that the Worlds naturall appetite of GOD sheweth, that the same proceedeth from a good∣nesse and vnderstanding diuine; and that this vertue, by which the World is continued and knit together, must be infinite, that it may infinitely and euerlastingly continue and preserue the same. Which infinite Vertue, the finite World (saith hee) is not capable of, but receiueth it from the diuine infinite, according to the temporall Nature it hath, successiuely euery mo∣ment by little and little; euen as the whole Materiall World is not alto∣gether: but the abolished parts are departed by small degrees, and the parts yet to come, doe by the same small degrees succeed; as the shadow of a tree in a Riuer, seemeth to haue continued the same a long time in the water, but it is perpetually renued, in the continuall ebbing and flowing thereof. But to returne to them, which denying that euer the World had any begin∣ning, withall denie that euer it shall haue any end; and to this purpose affirme, That it was neuer heard, neuer read, neuer seene, no not by any reason per∣ceiued, that the Heauens haue euer suffered corruption; or that they appeare any way the Elder by continuance; or in any sort other-wise than they were; which they beene subiect to finall corruption, some change would haue beene discerned in so long a time: To this it is answered, That the change as yet perceiued, doth rather proue their newnesse, and that they haue not continued so long; than that they will continue for euer as they are. And if coniectur all arguments may receiue answer by con∣iectures: it then seemeth that some alteration may be found. For either Aristotle, Plinie, Strabo, Beda, Aquinas, and others, were grossely . Met. 2. Plin. l. 2 c. 8. Strab. l. 3. mistaken: or else those parts of the world, lying within the burnt Zone, were not in elder times habitable, by reason of the Sunnes heat; neither Beda de tem. 11. c. 32. were the Seas, vnder the Equinoctiall, nauigable. But wee know by Thom. 1. p. q. 102. art. 2. experience, that those Regions, so , are filled with people, and exceeding temperate; and the Sea, ouer which wee Nauigate, passable enough. Wee read also many Histories of deluges: and how that in the time of , diuers places in the world were burnt vp, by the Sunnes violent heat. But in a Word, this obseruation is exceeding feeble. For we know it for certaine, That stone-wals, of matter moldring and friable, haue stood two, or three thousand yeares: that many things haue beene digged vp out of the earth, of that depth, as supposed to haue beene buried by the generall floud; without any alteration either of substance or figure, yea it is beleiued, and it is very probable, that the gold which is daily found in Mynes, and Rockes, vnder ground, was created together with the Earth. And if bodies elementary, and compounded, the eldest times haue not inuaded and corrupted: what great alteration should wee looke for in and quintessentiall bodies? And yet wee haue reason to thinke, that the Sunne, by whose helpe all Creatures are generate, doth not in these latter Ages assist Nature, as here-to-fore. We haue nei∣ther Gyants, such as the eldest world had: nor mighty men, such as the elder world had; but all things in generall are reputed of lesse vertue, which from the Heauens receiue vertue. Whence, if the nature of a Preface would permit a larger discourse, wee might fetch store of proofe; as that this world shall at length haue end, as that once it had beginning. And I see no good answer that can bee made to this obiection: If the World were eternall; why not all things in the World Eternall? If there were no first, no cause, no Father, no Creator, no in∣comprehensible wisedome, but that euery Nature had beene a-like eternall; and Man more rationall than euery other Nature: Why had not the eternall reason of Man, prouided for his eternall being in the World? For if all were equall: why not equall conditions to all? why should heauenly bodies liue for euer; and the bodies of Men and die? Againe, who was it that appointed the Earth to keepe the center, and gaue Order that it should hang in the Aire: that the Sunne should trauaile betweene the Tropicks, and neuer exceed those bounds, nor to performe that Progresse once in euery yeare: the Moone to liue by bor∣rowed light: the first Starres (according to common opinion) to be fastned like Nailes in a Cart wheele; and the Planets to wander at their plea∣sure? Or if none of these had power ouer other: was it out of Charity and Loue, that the Sunne by his perpetuall trauaile within those two Circles, hath visited, giuen light vnto, and releiued all parts of the Earth, and the Creatures therein, by turnes and times? Out of doubt, if the Sunne haue of his owne accord kept this course in all eternitie: He may iustly be called eternall Charity, and euerlasting Loue. The same may be said of all the Stars: being all of them most large and cleare fountaines of vertue and operation, may also be called eternall vertues: the Earth may be called eternall patience; the Moone, an eternall borrower and begger; and Man of all other the most miserable, eternally mortall. And what were this, but to beleiue againe in the old Play of the gods? Yea in more gods by Millions, than euer Hefiodus dreampt of. But in steed of this mad follie, wee see it well enough with our feeble and mortall eyes: and the eyes of our reason discerne it better; That the Sunne, Moone, Starres, and the Earth, are limited, bounded, and constrained: they haue not constrai∣ned, nor could. Omne determinatum causam habet aliquam effici∣entem, quae illud determinauerit, Euery thing bounded hath some efficient cause, by which it is bounded. Now for Nature; As by the ambiguity of this name, the schoole of Aristotle hath both commended many errours vnto vs, and sought also thereby to obscure the glory of the high Moderator of all things, shining in the Creation, and in the gouerning of the World: so if the best definition be taken out of the second of Aristotles phisicks, or primo de Caelo, or out of the fifth of his Metaphysicks; I say that the best is but nominall, and ser∣uing onely to difference the beginning of Naturall motion, from Artificiall: which yet the Academicks open better, when they call it A Seminary strength, infused into matter by the Soule of the VVorld: giue the first place to Prouidence, the second to Fate, and but the third to Na∣ture. Prouidentia (by which they vnderstand GOD) dux & caput; Fatum, medium ex prouidentia prodiens; Natura postremum. But be it what hee will, or be it any of these (GOD excepted) or participating of all: yet that it hath choice or vnderstanding (both which are necessarily in the cause of all things) no man hath avowed. For this is vnanswerable of Lactantius, Is autem facit aliquid, qui aut voluntatem faciendi habet, aut scientiam; Hee onely can be said to be the doer of a thing, that hath either will or knowledge in the doing it. But the will and science of Nature, are in these words truely exprest by Ficinus: Potest vbique Natura, vel per diuersa media, vel ex diuersis Ficin: in Plat. materijs, diuersa facere: sublata vero mediorum materiarumque di∣uersitate, vel vnicum vel similimum operatur, neque potest quan∣do adest materia non operari; It is the power of Nature by diuersity of meanes, or out of diuersity of matter, to produce diuers things: but taking away the diuersity of meanes, and the diuersity of matter, it then workes but one or the like worke; neither can it but worke, matter being present. Now if Nature made choice of of matter, to worke all these variable workes of Heauen and Earth, it had then both vnderstanding and will; it had counsaile to beginne; reason to dispose; ver∣tue and knowledge to finish; and power to gouerne: without which, all things had beene but one and the same: all of the matter Heauen; or all of the matter of Earth. And if we grant Nature this will, and this vnderstanding, this counsaile, reason, and power: Cur Natura potius quam Deus nomi∣netur? Why should wee then call such a cause rather Nature, than God? Lact. de ira Dei. . 1. c. 10. God, of whom all men haue notion, and giue the first and highest place to Diuine power: Omnes homines notionem deorum habent, omnes{que} Arist. l. 1. de . c. 3. T. 22. summum locum diuino cuidam numini assignant. And this I say in short; that it is a true effect of true reason in man (were there no authority more binding than reason) to acknowledge and adore the first and most sub∣lime power. Vera Philosophia, est ascensus ab his quae fluunt, & ori∣untur, & occidunt, ad ea quae vere sunt, & semper eadem: True Phi∣losophy, is an ascending from the things which flow, and rise, and fall, to the things that are for euer the same. For the rest, I do also account it not the meanest, but an impiety monstrous, to confound God and Nature: be it but in tearmes. For it is God, that only disposeth of all things according to his owne will; and maketh of one Earth, Vessels of honor and dishonor. It is Nature that can dispose of nothing, but according to the will of the matter wherein it worketh. It is God, that commandeth all: It is Nature that is obedient to all. It is God that doth good vnto all, knowing and louing the good hee doth: It is Nature, that seconda∣rily doth also good, but it neither knoweth nor loueth the good it doth. It is God, that hath all things in himselfe: Nature, nothing in it selfe. It is God, which is the Father, and hath begotten all things: It is Nature, which is begotten by all things; in which it liueth and laboureth; for by it selfe it existeth not. For shall we say, that it is out of affection to the earth, that hea∣uy things fall towards it? Shall wee call it Reason, which doth conduct euery Riuer into the salt Sea? Shall we tearme it knowledge in fire, that makes it to consume combustible matter? If it be Affection, Reason, and Knowledge in these: by the same Affection, Reason, and Knowledge it is, that Nature work∣eth. And therefore seeing all things worke as they doe, (call it by forme, by Nature, or by what you please) yet because they worke by an impulsion, which they cannot resist; or by a faculty, infused by the sepremest power: we are nei∣ther to wonder at, nor to worship, the faculty that worketh, nor the Creature wherein it worketh. But herein lyes the wonder: and to him is the worship due, who hath created such a Nature in things, and such a faculty, as neither knowing it selfe, the matter wherein it worketh, nor the vertue and power which it hath; doth yet worke all things to their last and vttermost perfe∣ction. And therefore euery reasonable man, taking to himselfe for a ground that which is granted by all Antiquity, and by all men truly learned that euer the world had; to wit; That there is a power infinit, and eternall (which also necessity doth proue vnto vs, without the helpe of Faith; and Reason, without the force of Authoritie) all things doe as easily follow which haue beene deliuered by letters, as the waters of a running Riuer doe suc∣cessiuely pursue each other from the first fountaines. This much I say it is, that Reason it selfe hath taught vs: and this is the beginning of knowledge. Sapientia praecedit, Religio sequitur: quia Lact. l. 4. c. 4. de Sapi∣entia. prius est Deum scire, consequens colere; Sapience goes before, Religion followes: because it is first to know God, and then to worship . This Sapi∣ence Plato calleth, absoluti boni scientiam, The science of the absolute good: and another, scientiam rerum primarum, sempiternarum, perpe∣tuarum. de defin. For Faith (saith I sidore) is not extorted by violence; but by rea∣son and examples perswaded: fides nequaquam vi extorquetur; sed ra∣tione & exemplis sua detur. I confesse it, That to enquire further, as of the essence of God, of his power, of his Art, and by what meane He created the world: Or of his secret iudgement, and the causes; is not an effect of Reason: Sed cum ratione insaniunt, but they grow mad with reason, that inquire after it: For as it is no shame nor dishonor (saith a French Author) de faire arrest au but qu'on nasceu surpasser, For a man to rest himselfe there, where he finds it impossible to passe on further: so whatsoeuer is beyond, and out of the reach of true reason, It acknowledgeth it to be so; as vnderstan∣ding it selfe not to be infinite, but according to the Name and Nature it hath, Quod est & non secundum , non continetur scientia. Arist. poster. to be a Teacher, that best knowes the end of his own Art. For seeing both Rea∣son and Necessity teach vs (Reason, which is pars diuini spiritus in corpus humanū mersi) that the world was made by a power infinite; and yet how it was made, it cannot teach vs: and seeing the same Reason and Necessity make vs know, that the same infinit power is euery where in the world; and yet how euery where, it cannot informe vs: our beleefe hereof is not weakned, but greatly strengthened, by our ignorance; because it is the same Reason that tels vs, That such a Nature cannot be said to be God, that can be in all con∣ceiued by man. I haue beene already ouer-long, to make any large discourse either of the parts of the following Story, or in mine owne excuse: especially in the excuse of this or that passage; seeing the whole is exceeding weake and defectiue. Among the grosest, the vnsutable diuision of the bookes, I could not know how to excuse, had I not beene directed to inlarge the building after the foun∣dation was laid, and the first part finished. All men know that there is no great Art in the diuiding euenly of those things, which are subiect to number and measure. For the rest, it sutes well enough with a great many Bookes of this age, which speake too much, and yet say little; Ipsi nobis furto subdu∣cimur, We are stollen away from our selues, setting a high price on all that is our owne. But hereof, though a late good Writer, make complaint, yet shall it not lay hold on me, because I beleeue as hee doth; that who so thinkes him∣selfe the wisest man, is but a poore and miserable ignorant. Those that are the best men of war, against all the vanities and fooleries of the World, doe alwaies keepe the strongest guards against themselues, defend them from themselues, from selfe loue, selfe estimation, and selfe opinion. Generally concerning the order of the worke, I haue onely taken counsaile from the Argument. For of the Assyrians, which after the downefall of Babel take vp the first part, and were the first great Kings of the World, there came little to the view of posteritie: some few enterprises, greater in fame than faith, of Ninus and Semiramis excepted. It was the story of the Hebrewes, of all before the Olympiads, that ouercame the consuming disease of time; and it selfe, from the very cradle and beginning to this day: and yet not so entire, but that the large discourses thereof (to which in many Scriptures wee are referred) are no where found. The Fragments of other Stories, with the actions of those Kings and Princes which shot vp here and there in the same time, I am driuen to relate by way of digression: of which we may say with Virgil. Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto; They appeare here and there floting in the great gulfe of time. To the same first Ages doe belong the report of many Inuentions therein found, and from them deriued to vs; though most of the Authors Names, haue perished in so long a Nauigation. For those Ages had their Lawes; they had diuersity of Gouernment; they had Kingly rule; Nobilitie, Pollicie in warre; Nauigation; and all, or the most of needfull Trades. To speake therefore of these (seeing in a generall Historie we should haue left a great deale of Nakednesse, by their omission) it cannot properly be called a digression. True it is that I haue also made many others: which if they shall be layd to my charge, I must cast the fault into the great heape of hu∣mane error. For seeing wee digresse in all the wayes of our liues: yea, see∣ing the life of man is nothing else but digression; I may the better be excu∣sed, in writing their liues and actions. I am not altogether ignorant in the Lawes of Historie, and of the Kindes. The same hath beene taught by many; but by no man better, and with greater breuity, than by that excellent learned Gentleman Sir Francis Ba∣con. Christian Lawes are also taught vs by the Prophets and Apostles; and euery day preacht vnto vs. But wee still make large digressions: yea the teachers themselues doe not (in all) keepe the path which they point out to others. For the rest; after such time as the Persians had wrested Empire from the Chaldaeans, and had raised a great Monarchie, producing Acti∣ons of more importance then were else-where to be found: it was agreeable to the Order of Story, to attend this Empire; whilest it so florished, that the affaires of the nations adioyning had reference there-vnto. The like obseruance was to be vsed towards the fortunes of Greece, when they againe began to get ground vpon the Persians, as also towards the affaires of Rome, when the Romans grew more mighty then the Greekes. As for the Medes, the Macedonians, the Sicilians, the Carthaginians, and other Nations, who resisted the beginnings of the former Empires, and afterwards became but parts of their composition and enlargement: it seemed best to remember what was knowne of them from their seuer all beginnings, in such times and places, as they in their flourishing estates opposed those Monarchies; which in the end swallowed them vp. And herein I haue follow∣ed the best Geographers: who seldome giue names to those small brookes, whereof many, ioyned together, make great Riuers; till such time as they become vnited, and runne in a maine streame to the Ocean Sea. If the Phrase be weake, and the Stile not euery-where like it selfe: the first, shewes their legitimation and true Parent; the second will excuse it selfe vpon the Variety of Matter. For Virgil, who wrote his Eclogues, gracili auena, vsed stronger pipes, when he sounded the warres of Aeneas. It may also be layd to my charge that I vse diuers Hebrew words in my first booke, and else-where: in which language others may thinke, and I my-selfe acknow∣ledge it, that I am altogether ignorant: but it is true, that some of them I finde in Montanus; others in lattaine Carecter in S. Senensis, and of the rest I haue borrowed the interpretation of some of my learned friends. But say I had beene beholding to neyther, yet were it not to be wondred at, ha∣uing had a eleuen yeares leasure, to attaine the knowledge of that, or of any other tongue; How-soeuer, I know that it will be said by many, That I might haue beene more pleasing to the Reader, if I had written the Story of mine owne times; hauing beene permitted to draw water as neare the Well-head as another. To this I answere, that who-so-euer in writing a moderne Hi∣story, shall follow truth too neare the heeles, it may happily strike out his teeth. There is no Mistresse or Guide, that hath led her followers and ser∣uants into greater miseries. Hee that goes after her too farre off, looseth her sight, and looseth him-selfe: and hee that walkes after her at a midle di∣stance; I know not whether I should call that kinde of course Temper or Base∣nesse. It is true, that I neuer trauailed after mens opinions, when I might haue made the best vse of them: and I haue now too few dayes remaining, to imitate those, that eyther out of extreame ambition, or extreame cowardise, or both, do yet, (when death hath them on his shoulders) flatter the world, be∣tweene the bed and the graue. It is enough for me (being in that state I am) to write of the eldest times: wherein also why may it not be said, that in speaking of the past, I point at the present, and taxe the vices of those that are yet li∣uing, in their persons that are long since dead; and haue it laid to my charge? But this I cannot helpe, though innocent. And certainely if there be any, that finding themselues spotted like the Tigers of old time, shall finde fault with me for painting them ouer a new; they shall therein accuse themselues iustly, and me falsly. For I protest before the Maiesty of GOD, That I malice no man vn∣der the Sunne. Impossible I know it is to please all: seeing few or none are so pleased with themselues, or so assured of themselues, by reason of their sub∣iection to their priuate passions; but that they seeme diuers persons in one and the same day. Seneca hath said it, and so doe I: Vnus mihi pro po∣pulo erat: and to the same effect Epicurus, Hoc ego non multis sed ; or (as it hath since lamentably fallen out) I may borrow the resolution of an ancient Philosopher, Satis est vnus, Satis est nullus. For it was for the seruice of that inestimable Prince Henry, the successiue hope, and one of the greatest of the Christian World, that I vndertooke this Worke. It pleased him to pervse some part thereof, and to pardon what was amisse. It is now left to the world without a Maister: from which all that is pre∣sented, hath receiued both blowes and thankes. Eadem probamus, eadem reprehendimus: hic exitus est omnis iudicij, in quo lis secundum plures datur. But these discourses are idle. I know that as the charitable will iudge charitably: so against those, qui gloriantur in malitia, my pre∣sent aduersity hath disarmed me. I am on the ground already; and therefore haue not farre to fall: and for rising againe, as in the Naturall priuation there is no recession to habit; so it is seldome seene in the priuation poli∣tique. I doe therefore for-beare to stile my Readers Gentle, Courteous, and Friendly, thereby to beg their good opinions, or to promise a second and third volume (which I also intend) if the first receiue grace and good ac∣ceptance. For that which is already done, may be thought enough; and too much: and it is certaine, let vs claw the Reader with neuer so many courteous phrases; yet shall wee euer-more be thought fooles, that write foo∣lishly. For conclusion; all the hope I haue lies in this, That I haue already found more vngentle and vncourteous Readers of my Loue towards them, and well-deseruing of them, than euer I shall doe againe. For had it beene otherwise, I should hardly haue had this leisure, to haue made my selfe a foole in print. THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORIE OF THE WORLD: INTREATING OF THE Beginning, and first ages of the same, from the Creation, vnto ABRAHAM. THE FIRST BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of the Creation, and Preseruation of the World. §. I. That the inuisible God is seene in his Creatures. GOD, whom the wisest men acknowledge to bee a Power vneffable, and Vertue infinite, a Light by abundant claritic inuisible, an Vn∣derstanding, which it selfe can onely compre∣hend, an Essence eternall and spirituall, of absolute purenesse and simplicitie, was, and is pleased to make himselfe knowne by the worke of the World: in the wonderfull magnitude whereof, (all which hee imbra∣ceth, filleth, and sustaineth) wee behold the Image of that glorie, which cannot be mea∣sured, and withall that one, and yet vniuersall Nature, which cannot bee defined. In the glorious Lights of Heauen; wee perceiue a shadow of his diuine Countenance; in his mercifull prouision for all that liue, his manifold goodnesse: and lastly, in crea∣ting and making existent the world vniuersall, by the absolute art of his owne word, his Power and almightinesse, which Power, Light, Vertue, Wisedome, and Good∣nesse, being all but attributes of one simple Essence, and one God, wee in all admire, and in part discerne per speculum creaturarum, that is, in the disposition order, and va∣rietie of celestiall and terrestriall bodies: terrestriall, in their strange and manifold di∣uersities; celestiall, in their beautie and magnitude; which in their continuall & con∣trarie motions, are neither repugnant, intermixt, nor confounded. By these potent effects, wee approach to the knowledge of the omnipotent cause, and by these moti∣ons, their Almightie Mouer. Hugo super Ec∣cles. Hom. 8. Greg. in Mor. Herm. ad sil. Tat. l. 5. Vnus verò ingenitus, & non apparens & immanife∣stus, omnia au∣tem manife∣stans, per omnia apparet, & in omnibus. Appa∣rentia solùm ge∣neratorum est, nihil apparitio quàm generatio. Iohn. 5. 3. In these more then wonderfull workes, God (saith Hugo ) speaketh vnto man, and it is true, that these be those discourses of God, whose effects, all that liue, witnesse in themselues; the sensible, in their sensible natures; the reasonable, in their reasonable soules: for according to S. Gregorie, Omnis homo eo ipso quòd rationalis conditus est, ex ip∣sa ratione, illum qui se condidit, Deum esse colligere debet: Euery man, in that he is reaso∣nable, out of the same reason may know, that he which made him, is God. This God all men behold (saith Iob ) which is according to the Fathers, Dominationem illius conspicere in creaturis, to discerne him in his prouidence by his creatures. That God hath beene otherwise seene, to wit, with corporall eyes, exceedeth the small proportion of my vnderstanding, grounded on these places of S. Iohn, and S. Paul, Yee haue not heard his voice at any time, neither haue ye seene his shape. And againe, Whom neuer man saw, nor can see. And this I am sure agreeth with the nature of Gods simplicitie, of which S. Au∣gustine, 1. Tim. 6. 16. Origen. lib. 2. . cap. 22. . & . in Iohn, Hom. 14. Greg. Naz. l. 2. Theolog. . Esaiam. Aug. l. 2. de Trin. c. 12. & 13. Greg. Magn. l. 18. mor. Euar. Epist. 1. Decret. Alouin. l. 2. de Trin. c. 16. D. . c. 4. Cael. Hierar. Thom. p. 2. q. 12. art. 11. & alibi. Ipsa enim natura, vel substantia, vel quolibet alio nomine appellandum est, idipsum quod Deus est, corporaliter videri non potest, That nature, or that substance, or by what∣soeuer name that is to be called which is God, whatsoeuer that be, the same cannot be corporally perceiued. And of this opinion were Origen, Cyrill, Chrysostome, Grego∣rie Nazianzenus, Hierome, Augustine, Gregorie the Great, Euaristus, Alcuinus, Areopagita, Aquinas, and all others of authoritie. But by his owne word, and by this visible world, is God perceiued of men, which is also the vnderstood lan∣guage of the Almightie, vouchsafed to all his Creatures, whose Hieroglyphicall Characters, are the vnnumbred Starres, the Sunne & Moone, written on these large volumes of the Firmament: written also on the Earth and the Seas, by the letters of all those liuing Creatures, and plants, which inhabite and reside therein. Therefore said that learned Cusanus, Mundus vniuersus nihil aliud est, quàm Deus explicatus, The world vniuersall, is nothing else but God exprest. And the inuisible things of God (saith S. Paul ) are seene by creation of the world, being considered in his Creatures. Deus, qui natura est, vt visibilibus pos∣set sciri, opus se∣cit, quod Opifi∣cem sui visibili∣ter manifesta∣vet, vt per cer∣tum incertum sciretur, & ille Deus omnium esse crederetur. Amb. in epist. ad Rom. c. 1. Of all which, there was no other cause preceding, then his owne will, no other mat∣ter then his owne power, no other workman then his owne word, no other conside∣ration, then his owne infinite goodnesse. The example & patterne of these his Crea∣tures, as he beheld the same in all eternitie in the abundance of his owne loue, so was it at length in the most wise order, by his vnchanged will mooued, by his high wise∣dome disposed, and by his almightie power perfected, and made visible. And there∣fore (saith Mirandula ) we ought to loue God, Ex fide, & ex effectibus, (that is) both perswaded by his word, and by the effects of the worlds creation: Ne{que} enim qui cau∣sa caret, ex causa & origine sciri, cognosci{que} potest, sed velex rerum, quae factae sunt, quaeque fiunt & gubernantur obseruatione & collatione, vel exipsius Dei verbo: For he of whom Cusan. de gen. dialog. there is no higher cause, cannot be knowne by any knowledge of cause or beginning, Rom. 1. 20. A. Mont. Nat. Hist. fol. 7. (saith Montanus ) but either by the obseruing and conferring of things, which hee hath, or doth create and gouerne, or else by the word of God himselfe. §. II. That the wisest of the Heathen, whose authoritie is not to be despised, haue acknowledged the world to haue beene created by GOD. THis worke and creation of the world, did most of the ancient & learned Philosophers acknowledge, though by diuers termes, and in a different maner exprest, I meane al those who are entitled by S. Augustine, Summi Herm. in Poe∣mandro, & in . Philosophi, Philosophers of highest iudgement and vnderstanding. Mer∣curius Trismegistus calleth God, Principium vniuersorum, The originall of the vniuersall: to whom he giueth also the attributes of Mens, natura, actus, neces∣sitas, finis, & renouatio. And wherein hee truely, with S. Paul, casteth vpon God all power; confessing also, that the world was made by Gods almighty word, and not by hands: verbo, non manibus fabricatus est mundus. ZOROASTER (whom Heraclitus followed in opinion) tooke the word Fire, to expresse God by (as in Deuterono∣mie, Deut. 4. 24. and in S. Paul it is vsed) Omnia ex vno igne genita sunt; All things (saith be) are Hebr. 12. 19. caused, or produced out of one fire. So did Orpheus plainely teach, that the world had beginning in time, from the will of the most High God; whose remarkeable words are thus conuerted: Cùm abscon∣disset Orph. de sum. Ioue. omnia IVPITER summus, in lumen gratum emisit, ex sacro corde operans cogitata & mirabilia: Of which I conceiue this sense; When great IVPITER had hidden all things in himselfe; working out of the loue of his sacred heart, he sent thence, or brought forth into gratefull light, the admirable workes which he had fore-thought. Pindarus the Poet, and one of the wisest, acknowledged also one God, the most High, to bee the Father and Creator of all things; Vnus Deus Pater Creator summus. Plato calleth God the cause and originall, the nature and reason of the ; to∣tius rerum natura, causa, & origo Deus. But heereof more at large heereafter. Vid. cap. 6. Now, although the curiositie of some men haue found it superfluous, to remem∣ber the opinions of Philosophers, in matters of Diuinity: (it being true, that the Scripture hath not want of any forraine testimony) yet as the Fathers, with others excellently learned, are my examples heerein; so S. Paul himselfe did not despise, but thought it lawfull, & profitable, to remember whatsoeuer he found agreeable to the word of God, among the Heathen, that he might thereby take from them all escape, by way of ignorance, God rendring vengeance to them that know him not: as in his Epistle to Titus, he citeth Epimenides against the Cretians, and to the Corinthians, Me∣nander, and in the seuenteenth of the Acts, Aratus &c. for Truth (saith S. Ambrose ) by whomsoeuer vttered, is of the holy Ghost; Veritas à quocun{que} dicatur, à Spirita sancto est: and lastly, let those kinde of men learne this rule; Quae sacris , pro∣phana non sunt; Nothing is prophane that serueth to the vse of holy things. §. III. Of the meaning of In Principio Genes. 1. 1. THis visible World of which Moses writeth, God created in the begin∣ning, or first of all: in which (saith Tertullian ) things beganne to bee. This word beginning (in which the Hebrewes seeke some hidden my∣sterie, and which in the Iewes Targum is conuerted by the word Sapien∣tia ) cannot be referred to succession of time nor to order, as some men haue conceiued, both which are subsequent: but onely to creation then. For before that beginning, there was neither primary matter to bee informed, nor forme to in∣forme, nor any being, but the eternall. Nature was not, nor the next parent of time begotten, time properly and naturally taken; for if God had but disposed of matter already in being, then as the word beginning could not bee referred to all things, so must it follow, that the institution of matter proceeded from a greater power, then that of God. And by what name shall we then call such a one (saith Lactantius ) as exceedeth God in potencie: for it is an act of more excellencie to make, then tō dis∣pose of things made? whereupon it may be concluded, that matter could not be be∣fore this beginning: except we faine a double creation, or allow of two powers, and both infinite, the impossibilitie whereof scorneth defence. Nam impossibile plura Cusan. demonte lib. 3. esse infinita: quoniam alterum esset in altero finitum; There cannot bee more infinites then one; for one of them would limit the other. §. IIII. Of the meaning of the words Heauen and Earth, Genesis 2. 1. THe vniuersall matter of the world (which Moyses comprehendeth vn∣der the names of Heauen and Earth ) is by diuers diuersly vnderstood: for there are that conceiue, that by those wordes, was meant the first matter, as the Peripatetikes vnderstand it, to which, S. Augustine and seeme to adhere. mundum (saith S. Augustine ) de materia informi, quam fecisti de nulla re, penè nullam rem: (that is) Thou hast made the world of a matter without forme; which matter thou madest of nothing, and being made, it was little o∣ther then nothing. But this potentiall and imaginary materia prima, cannot exist without forme. Peter Lombard; the Schoole-men, Beda, Lyranus, Comestor, Tostatus and others, affirme, that it pleased God first of all to create the Empyrean Heauen: which at the succeeding instant (saith Beda and ) hee filled with Angels. This Empyrean Heauen . Hex. Stra∣bo super Genes. Eug. Cos. & de nat. incorp. Steuchius Eugubinus calleth Diuine claritie, and vncreated: an errour, for which hee is sharply charged by Pererius, though (as I conceiue) he rather failed in the subsequent, when he made it to be a place, and the seate of Angels, & iust Soules, then in the for∣mer affirmation: for of the first, That God liueth in eternall light, it is written; My Psal. 104. 12. non lux facta, sed sapientia Dei, non creata, sed nata. soule, praise thou the Lord, that couereth himselfe with light: and in the Reuelation; the Citie hath no neede of Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it: for the glory of God didlight it. And herein also Iohn Mercer vpon Genesis differeth not in opinion from Eugubinus: for as by Heauen created in the beginning, was not meant the inuisible or Apoc. 21. 23. Mercer. in Gen. cap. 7. vers. 7. supercelestiall, so in his iudgement, because it was in all eternity, the glorious seat of God himselfe, it was not necessary to be created; Quem mundum supercoelestem meo indicio creari (saith MERCER) non erat necesse. But as Moses forbare to speake of Angels, and of things inuisible, and incorporate, for the weakenes of their capacities, whom he then cared to informe of those things, which were more manifest, (to wit) that God did not only by a strong hand deliuer them from the bondage of Egypt, according to his promise made to their forefathers: but also that he created, and was the sole cause of this aspectable, and perceiueable Vniuersall; so on the other side I dare not thinke, that any supercelestiall Heauen, or whatsoeuer else (not himselfe) was increate and eternall: and as for the place of God before the world created, the finite wisedome of mortall men hath no perception of it, neither can it limit the seate of infinite power, no more then infinite power it selfe can be limited: for his place is in himselfe, whom no magnitude else can containe: How great is the House of God (saith BARVCH) how largè is the place of his possessions! it is Bar. 3. 24. 25. great, and hath no end, it is high and vnmeasurable. But leauing multiplicitie of opinion, it is more and allowed, that by the wordes, Heauen and Earth, was meant the solid matter substance, aswell of all the Cusan. in com∣pend. fol. 224. Operis. Heauens, and Orbes supernall, as of the Globe of the Earth and Waters, which co∣uered it ouer, (to wit) that very matter of all things, materia, Chaos, possibilitas, posse fieri. Which matter (saith Caluin ) was so called, quòdtotius mundi semen fuerit; Caluin, in . Because it was the seed of the Vniuersall: an opinion of ancient Philosophers long before. §. V. That the substance of the waters, as mixt in the body of the earth, is by MOSES vnderstood in the word Earth: and that the Earth, by the attributes of vnformed and voide, is described as the of the an∣ctent Heathen. MOSES first nameth Heauen and Earth (putting waters but in the third place) as comprehending waters in the word Earth, but afterwards hee nameth them apart, when God by his Spirit began to distinguish the confused Masse, and (as Basil saith) praeparare naturam aquae ad foe∣cunditatem ; to prepare the nature of water to a vitall fruitfulnesse. For vnder the word Heauen, was the matter of all heauenly bodies, and natures exprest: and by the name of Earth and Waters, all was meant, whatsoeuer is vnder the Moone, and subiect to alteration. Corrupt seedes bring foorth corrupt plants; to which the pure heauens are not subiect, though subiect to perishing. They shall pe∣rish Psal. 102. 26. Esai 11. (saith Dauid) and the heauens shall vanish away like smoke, saith Esay. Neither were the waters the matter of Earth: for it is written, Let the waters vnder the hea∣uens Gen. 1. v. 9. be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appeare: which prooueth that the dry land was mixt and couered with the waters, and not yet distinguished; but no way, that the waters were the matter or seede of the Earth, much lesse of the . Initio tu Domine terram fundasti, Thou, O Lord, in the beginning hast founded the Earth: and againe, The Earth was couered with the Deepe (meaning with waters) as with a gar∣ment, Psal. 104. 6. saith Dauid. And if by naturall arguments it may be prooued, that water by condensation may become earth, the same reason teacheth vs also, that earth rarified may become water: water, aire: aire, fire; and so on the contrary, ignis sub∣stantiam Zeno. per aerem in aquam conuertit, God turneth the substance of fire, by aire, into wa∣ter. For the Heauens and the Earth remained in the same state, in which they were created, as touching their substance, though there was afterwards added multiplicitie of perfection, in respect of beauty and ornament. Coelum & terra in statu Gul. Paris. 600. remanserunt, quantum ad substantiam, licèt multiplex perfectio decoris & ornatus eis postmodùm . And the word which the Hebrewes call Maim, is not to be vnderstood according to the Latine translation simply, and as specifical water; but the same more properly signifieth liquor. For (according to Montanus) Est autem A . denat. Maim liquor geminus, & hoc nomen propter verborum penuriam, Latina lingua plurali numero aquas fecit. For Maim (saith he) is a double liquor, (that is, of diuers natures) and this name or word the Latines wanting a voice to expresse it, call it in the Plural, Aquas, Waters. This Masse, or indigested matter, or Chaos created in the beginning, was without forme, that is, without the proper forme, which it afterwards acquired, when the Spirit of God had separated the Earth, and digested it from the waters: And the earth Gen. . was voide: that is, not producing any creatures, or adorned with any plants, fruits, or flowers. But after the Spirit of God had moued vpon the waters, and wrought this indi∣gested 12. matter into that forme, which it now retayneth, then did the earth budde forth the hearbe, which seedeth seede, and the fruitfull tree according to his kinde, and God saw that it was good; which attribute was not giuen to the Earth, while it was confused, nor to the Heauens, before they had motion, and adornement. God saw that it was good; that is, made perfect: for perfection is that, to which nothing is wanting. Et perfecti Dei perfecta sunt opera, The workes of the perfect God, are perfect. From this lumpe of imperfect matter had the ancient Poets their inuention of De∣mogorgon: HESIODVS and ANAXAGORAS the knowledge of that Chaos, of which : Ante mare, & terras, & (quod tegit omnia) coelum, Ouid. Metam. lib. 1. Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in Orbe, Quem dixere Chaos, rudis indigesta{que} moles. Before the Sea and Land was made, and Heauen, that all doth hide, In all the world one only face of nature did abide: Which Chaos hight, a huge rude heape. §. VI. How it is to be vnderstood that the Spirit of God mooued vpon the waters, and that this is not to be searched curiously. AFter the creation of Heauen and Earth, then voide and without forme, the Spirit of God moued vpon the waters. The Seuenty Interpreters vse the word super-ferebatur, mooued vpon or ouer: incubabat, or (saith Hierome) out of Basil; and Basil out of a Syrian Doctor; Basil. Hexam. non meam tibi, sed viri cuiusdam Syri (saith Basil) which wordes incubare or importing warmth, hatching, or quickening, haue a speciall likenesse. Verbum translatum est ab auibus pullitiei incubantibus, spiri∣tuali, . & planè inenarrabili, non corporali modo; The word is taken of birds hatching their yong, not corporally, but in a spirituall and vnexpressible manner. Some of the Hebrewes conuert it to this effect, Spiritus Dei , The Spirit of God did flutter: the Chaldaean Paraphrast in this sense, ventus à Dei sufflabat, or as other vnderstand the Chaldaean, flabat, pellebat, remouebat: the wind from the face of God did blow vnder, driue, or remoue, or did blow vpon, according to the 147. Psalme. He caused his winde to blow, and the waters increase: but there was yet no winde nor exha∣lation: Psal. 147. 18. Ar. Mont. vt. sup. Eugub. in Cos. fol. 13. Arias Montanus in these wordes, Et spiritus Merachefet, idest, effica∣citèr motitans, , ac agitans super facies gemini liquoris; The Spirit of God effe∣ctually and often mouing, keeping warme, and cherishing, quickning and stirring vpon the face of this double liquor. For he maketh foure originals, whereof three are agents, Ar. Mont. de na∣tura, pag. 149. and the last passiue and materiall, to wit, causa, which is the diuine goodnesse: , which is, fiat, siue erit, let it be, or it shallbe. Quae vox verbo Dei prima prolata fuit: which voice (saith he) was the first that was vttered by the word of God. The third Spi∣ritus Elohim, the Spirit of God, idest, vis quaedam diuina, agilis ac praesens per omnia per∣tingens, omnia complens, that is, a certaine diuine power, or strength euery where, and extending, and stretching through all, filling and finishing all things. The fourth hee calleth Maim, idest, materies adomnem rem conficiendam habilis; matter apt to become euery thing. For my selfe I am resolued (Cùm Deus sit superrationale omni ratione, See∣ing God is in all reason aboue reason) that although the effects which follow his won∣derfull wayes of working, may in a measure be perceiued by mans , yet the manner and first operation of his diuine power cannot bee conceiued by any minde, or spirit, compassed with a mortall body. Animalis quae Dei sunt percipit: For my thoughts (sayth the Lord in Esay) are not your thoughts, neither are your Esay. 55. 8. wayes my wayes. And as the world hath not knowne God himselfe: so are his wayes (according to S. Paul ) past finding out. Orighteous Father, the world hath not knowne thee, saith CHRIST. And therfore, whether that motion, vitality and operation, by incubation, or how else, the maner is onely knowne to God, in omnibus sit rebus vel per essentiam, vel per potentiam, intellect us nofter non capit; For bow God (sayth Aug. Tract. 20. in . 17. 25. S. Augustine, speaking of his Vbiquitie) is in all things, either by essence, presence, or power, our vnderstanding cannot comprehend. Nihil inter Deum distaret, si consilia, & dispositiones illius maiestatis aeternae, cogitatio assequeretur humana: There Lact. in Praefat. would be no difference betweene God and Man, if mans vnderstanding could conceiue the counsels and disposing of that eternall Maiestie; and therefore to be ouer-curious in sear∣ching how the all-powerfull Word of God wrought in the creation of the World or his all-piercing and operatiue Spirit distinguishing, gaue forme to the matter of the Vniuersall, is a labour and search like vnto his, who not contented with a knowne and safe foord, will presume to passe ouer the greatest Riuer in all parts, where hee is ignorant of their depths: for so doth the one lose his life, and the other his vnder∣standing. We behold the Sunne, and enioy his light, as long as we looke towards it, but tenderly, and circumspectly: we warme our selues safely, while we stand neere the fire; but if we seeke to outface the one, to enter into the other, we forth with be∣come blinde or burnt. But to eschew curiositie: this is true, that the English word (moued) is most pro∣per and significant: for of motion proceedeth all production, and all whatsoeuer is effected. And this omnipotent Spirit of God, which may indeede be truely called, Principium motus, and with Mirandula, vis causae efficientis, The force of the cause, Saint Augustine sometimes taketh for the holy Ghost; sometime for a winde or breath, Sub nomine Spiritus, vnder the name of a Spirit, which is sometimes so taken: or for virtualis , for a created virtuality: Tertullian and Theodoret call it also a breath or winde: Mercurius nameth it, Spiritum intelligibilem, a pure or thinne intelligible spirit: ANAXAGORAS, mentem: TOSTATVS, & mentem Dei, The will and minde of God; which mens, Plato in Timaeo, maketh animam mundi, The soule of the world: and in his sixt Booke de Republica, he calleth it the law of Heauen; in his Epistles, the leader of things to come, and the presence of things past. But as Cy∣prian wrote of the Incarnation of CHRIST our Sauiour, Mens deficit, vox silet, & non , sedetiam Angelorum: My minde faileth, my voice is silent, and not mine onely, but the of Angels: so may al men else say in the vnderstanding, and vtterance of the wayes and workes of the Creation; for to him (saith Nazianzenus) there is Nazian. lib. 2. Theol. not one substance by which he is, and another, by which he can, Sed est, quicquid eius est, & quicquidest, Whatsoeuer attribute of him there is, and whatsoeuer he is, it is the very same substance that himselfe is. But the Spirit of God which moued vpon the waters, cannot be taken for a breath or winde nor for any other creature, separate from the infinite actiue power of God, which then and distinguished, and which how sustaineth, and giueth conti∣nuance to the Vniuersall. For the Spirit of the Lord filleth all the world; and the Wisd cap. 1. Vers. 7. same is it which maintaineth all things, saith SALOMON. If thou send forth thy Spirit, (saith DAVID) they are created: And GREGORIE, Deus suo praesentiali esse, omni∣bus rebus esse, ita quòd, sise rebus subtraheret, sicut de factae sunt omnia, sic in defluerent vniuersa; God giueth being to all things, by being present with all things, so as if he should withdraw himselfe from them, then, as of nothing the world was made, it would againe fall away and vanish into nothing. And this working of Gods Spirit in all things, Virgil hath exprest excellently: Principio coelum acterr as, campos{que} liquentes, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 8. 724. Lucentem{que} globum Lunae, Titania{que} astra, Spiritus intus alit: totam{que} infusa per artus, Mens agitat molem, & magno se corpore miscet. The Heauen, the Earth, and all the liquid Mayne, The Moones bright Globe, and Starres Titanian, A Spirit within maintaines: and their whole Masse, A Minde, which through each part infus'd doth passe, Fashions, and workes, and wholly doth transpierce All this great Body of the Vniuerse. And this was the same Spirit, which moued in the Vniuersall, and thereby both distinguished and adorned it. His Spirit garnished the , sayth Iob. So Iob c. 26. . . then the Spirit of God moued vpon the waters, and created in them their spirituali∣tie, and naturall motion; motion brought forth heat; and heat rarifaction, and sub∣tilitie of parts. By this Spirit, (which gaue heat and motion, and thereby, operation to euery nature, while it moued vpon the waters, which were in one indigested lump, Gen. 1. 5. and Chaos, disposed to all formes alike) was begotten ayre: an element superior, as lighter then the waters, through whose vast, open, subtile, diaphanicke, or transpa∣rent body, the light afterwards created might easily transpierce: light, for the excel∣lencie thereof, being the first creature which God called good, whose creation imme∣diatly followed. This Spirit Chrysostome calleth a vitall Operation, aquis à insi∣tam, ex qua aquae non solùm motionem, sed & vim procreandi animalia habuerint. He calleth it, A vitall Operation giuen by God vnto the waters, whereby the water, had not onely moti∣on, but also power to procreate or bring foorth liuing creatures. §. VII. Of the light created, as the materiall substance of the Sunne: and of the nature of it, and difficultie of knowledge of it: and of the excellencie and vse of it: and of motion, and heat annexed vnto it. THese waters were afterwards congregated, and called the Sea: and this light afterwards (in the fourth day) gathered and vnited, and called the Sunne, the Organ, and instrument of created light. For this first and dispersed light did not (as I conceiue) distinguish the night from the day, but with a reference to the Sunnes creation, and the vniting of the dispersed light therein. This is proued by these words, Let there belights in the firma∣ment, to separate the day from the night: which lights in the firmament of heauen were Gen. 1. 14. also made for signes, and for seasons, and for dayes, and for yeeres, implying a moti∣on instantly to follow, by which dayes and yeeres are distinguished; after which succeeded Time, or together with which, that Time (which was the measure of motion) began. For that space of the first three dayes which preceded the Suns crea∣tion, or formall perfection, when as yet there was not any motion to bee measured, and the day named in the fift verse, was but such a space, as afterwards by the Sunnes motion made a ciuill or naturall day. And as Waters were the matter of ayre, of the firmament, and of the lower and vpper waters, and of the Seas, and creatures there∣in: Earth, the matter of Beasts, Plants, Minerals, and Mans body: so may light (for expression sake) be called the Chaos, or materiall substance of the Sunne, and other lights of heauen: Howbeit, neither the Sunne, nor any thing sensible, is that light it Lux dicitur, quae se, & omnia . Cu∣san. in Compend. cap. 7. & . lib. 5. selfe, quae causa est lucidorum, which is the cause that things are lightsome (though it make it selfe and all things else visible) but a body most illightned, which illuminateth the Moone, by whom the neighbouring Region (which the Greekes call Aether, the place of the supposed Element of fire) is affected and qualified, and by it all bodies liuing in this our ayre. For this light Auicenna calleth & fomentum omnium , & impressionum: The conducter, and preseruer or nourisher of all Ce∣lestiall and impressions, nothing descending of heauenly influences, but by the medium, or meanes of light. Aristotle calleth light, a qualitie, inherent, or cleauing to a Diaphanous body, Lumen est qualit as inherens Diaphano: but this may be better a∣uouched of the heat, which it transporteth and bringeth with it, or conducteth: which heat (say the Platonickes) abeunte lumine residet in subiecto, the light being depar∣ted, Ficin. lib. de Lu∣mine. cap. 11. doth reside in the subiect, as warmth in the aire, though the same bee depriued of light. This light Plotinus and all the Academikes make incorporal, and so doth MON∣TANVS, Cui nec duritia resistit, nec spatium: Which neither hardnesse , nor space leaueth. Aristotle findeth corporalitie in the beames of light; but it is but by way of repe∣tition of other mens opinions, saith Picolomineus. Democritus, Leucippus, and Epicurus, . definit. giue materiality to light it selfe, but improperly: for it passeth at an instant from the Heauen to the Earth, nor is it resisted by any hardnesse, because it pierceth through the solid body of glasse, or other Cristalline matter; and whereas it is withstood by vncleane, and vnpure earthy substances, lesse hard, and more to inuade then the former, the same is, Quòd obstaculum natur â terreum at{que} sordidum, non candidam , luminis puritatem: Because an obstacle, by nature earthie and foule, doth not the pure clearenesse of light: alluding to that most diuine light, which onely shineth on those mindes, which are purged from all worldlv drosse, and humane . But of this created light, there is no agreement in opinion; neither doe I maruaile at it, for it cannot be found either in the Fathers, Philosophers, or Schoole-men, or other ancient or later Writers, that any of them vnderstood either it or themselues therein: all men (to cast off ignorance) haue disputed heereof, but there is no man that hath beene taught thereby. Thomas Aquinas (not inferiour to any in wit) as he hath shewed little strength of argument in re uting the opinions of Beda, Hugo, Lom∣bard, Lyranus, and others: so is his owne iudgement heerein, as weake as any mans; and most of the Schoole-men were rather curious in the nature of termes, and more subtile in distinguishing vpon the parts of doctrine already laid down, then discoue∣rers of any thing hidden, either in Philosophie or Diuinitie: of whom it may be tru∣ly said, Nihil sapientiae acumine : Nothing is more odious to w , then too acute sharpnesse. Neither hath the length of time, and the search of many lear∣ned men, (which the same time hath brought forth and deuoured) resolued vs, whe∣ther this light be substantiall, corporall, or incorporall: Corporall they say it cannot be, because then it could neither pierce the Aire, nor those hard, solid, and Diapha∣nous bodies, which it doth, and yet euery day we see the Aire illightened: incorporal it cannot be, because it is sensible: sensible it is, because it somtime affecteth the sight of the eye with offence, and therefore by most of the Fathers so esteemed: others say, (as Patricius ) that it cannot be matter, because no forme so excellent as it selfe to in∣forme it: neither can it be any accident, which is not separable without the destru∣ction of the subiect: for light being taken from the Sunne, the Sunne is no more the Lucida , . . , & & : & & . Sunne in existence. Secondly, if light were proceeding from matter and forme, then either, or both must be one of these, Lucide or bright, darke or opake, Diaphanous or transparent; but darkenesse cannot bee parent of light; and things Diaphanous (being neither light, nor darkenesse, but capable of either) cannot be the cause of ei∣ther, and therefore must the matter, or forme, both, be Lucide and shining. Lucide and shining obtaine their so being of the light; and therefore, if we deriue this being of light from a former, then would the progresse goe on infinitely, and against nature; and therefore he concludeth, that light in the Sunne hath his being primarily, and immediatly of it selfe, and is therefore the Sunnes forme and the forme of all Lucide and shining bodies: but what is taught heereby, let others iudge. But in my vnderstanding lumen, (which may be Englished by the word Shine) is Scal. subt. ex. 71. an intentionall Species of that, which may bee Englished by Light and so, this shi∣ning which proceedeth from the Sun, or other lights of Heauen, or from any other light, is an image, or intentionall Species thereof; and an intentional may be vnderstood by the example of a red, or greene colour, occasioned by the shining of the Sunne through red or greene glasse: for then wee perceiue the same colour cast vpon any thing opposite; which rednesse or other colour, we cal the intentionall Spe∣cies of the colour in that glasse. And againe, as this light, touching his simple nature, is no way yet vnderstood: so it is disputed, whether this light first created, bee the same, which the Sunne inholdeth and casteth forth, or whether it had continuance any longer, then till the Sunnes creation. But by the most wise and vnchanged order, which God obserued in the worke of Genes. 1. the world, I gather, that the light, in the first day created, was the substance of the Sunne: for Moses repeateth twise the maine parts of the vniuersall; first, as they were Vers. 12. created in matter; secondly, as they were adorned with forme: first, naming the 9. Heauens, the Earth, the Waters, all confused, and afterward, the Waters congrega∣ted, the Earth made dry land, and the Heauens distinguished from both, and beauti∣fied. And therefore the Earth, as it was earth, before it was vncouered, and before it was called Arida, or dry land; and the Waters were waters, before they were con∣gregated, and called the Sea, though neither of them perfect, or inriched with their vertuall formes: so the Sunne, although it had not his formall perfection, his circle, beauty, and bounded magnitude till the fourth day, yet was the substance thereof in the first day (vnder the name of Light) created; and this Light formerly dispersed, was in the same fourth day vnited, and set in the Firmament of Heauen: for to Light created in the first day, God gaue no proper place or fixation; and therefore the ef∣fects named by Anticipation, (which was to separate day from night) were precisely performed, after this Light was congregated, and had obtained life and motion. Nei∣ther did the wisedome of God finde cause why it should mooue (by which motion, dayes and nights are distinguished) till then: because there was not yet any Crea∣ture produced, to which, by mouing, the Sunne might giue light, , and opera∣tion. But after the Earth (distinguished from waters) began to budde forth the budde of the herbe, &c. God caused the Sunne to moue, and (by interchange of time) to visite euery part of the inferiour world; by his heat to stirre vp the fire of generati∣on, and to giue actiuity to the seedes of all natures: For as a King, which comman∣deth . dum Rex aliquis &c. Procop. in Gen. 1. some goodly building to bee erected, doth accommodate the same to that vse and end, to which it was ordained; so it pleased God (saith Procopius ) to command the Light to be; which by his all-powerfull word he approued, and approuing it, dis∣posed thereof, to the vse and comfort of his future Creatures. But in that it pleased God to aske of IOB, By what way is the light parted, and where Iob 38. 24. is the way where light ? wee thereby know that the nature thereof falleth not 9. vnder mans vnderstanding; and therefore let it suffice, that by Gods grace we enioy the effects thereof. For this light is of the treasure of God (saith ESDRAS.) And those . l. 2. c. 6. 40. which inhabite the Heauens, doe onely know the essence thereof. Nihil ignotum in coelo, ni∣hil notum in terra: Nothing vnknowne in Heauen, nothing perfectly knowne on earth. Res ver ae sunt in mundo inuisibili, in mundo visibili vmbr ae rerum: Things themselues are . in the , in the world visible, but their shadowes; Surely, if this light be not spirituall, yet it approcheth neerest vnto spirituality; and if it haue any corporality, then of all other the most subtile and pure; for howsoeuer, it is of all things seene, the most beautifull, and of the swiftest motion, of all other the most necessary and bene∣ficiall. For it ministreth to men, and other creatures, all celestiall influences; it dissi∣pateth those sad thoughts and sorrowes, which the darkenesse both begetteth and maintaineth; it discouereth vnto vs the glorious workes of God, and carrieth vp with an Angelicall swiftnesse, our eyes vnto Heauen, that by the sight thereof, our mindes being informed of his visible maruailes, may continually trauaile to sur∣mount these perceiued Heauens, and to finde out their omnipotent cause and Crea∣tour. Cognitio non quiescit in rebus ; Our knowledge doth not quiet it selfe in things Ficin. created. Et ipsa lux facit, vt caetera mundi membra dignasint laudibus, cùm suam bonita∣tem & decorem omnibus communicet; It is the light, (saith S. AMBROSE) that maketh the other part of the world so worthy of praise, seeing that it selfe communicateth its good∣nesse and beauty vnto all: of which Ouid out of Orpheus: Ille ego sum, quilongum metior annum, Ouid. Met. l. 1. Omnia qui video, per quem videt omnia mundus, oculus. The world discernes it selfe, while I the world behold, By me the longest yeeres, and other times are told, I the worlds eye. Lastly, if we may behold in any creature, any one sparke of that eternall fire, or a∣ny farre-off-dawning of Gods glorious brightnesse, the same in the beauty, motion, and vertue of this light may be perceiued. Therefore was God called lux ipsa, and the light, by Hermes named lux sancta, and Christ our Sauiour said to bee that Light, Iob. 1. 9. & 14. which lighteneth euery man that commeth into the world. Yet in respect of Gods incom∣prehensible 46. sublimitie, and puritie, this is also true, that God is neither a minde, nor a Spirit of the nature of other Spirits; nor a light, such as can be discerned. Deus pro∣fectò non mens est, at verò vt sit mens causa est, nec spiritus, sed causa qua spiritus extat; nec lumen, sed causa qua lumen existit. God (saith HERMES in POEMANDRO) certainely is not a minde, but the cause that the minde hath his being; nor spirit, but the cause by which euery spirit is; nor light, but the cause by which the light exisieth. So then the Masse and Chaos being first created, void, darke, and imformed, was by the operatiue Spirit of God, pierced and quickened, and the Waters hauing now receiued Spirit & motion, resolued their thinner parts into Aire, which God illight∣ned: Gen. 1. . the Earth also by being contiguat, and mixt with waters (participating the same diuine vertue) brought foorth the budde of the herbe that seedeth seede, &c. and for a meane and organ, by which this operatiue vertue might bee continued, God ap∣pointed the light to be , and gaue it also motion and heat, which heat caused a continuance of those seuerall species, which the Earth (being made fruitfull by the Spirit) produced, and with motion begate the time and times succeeding. §. VIII. Of the Firmament, and of the waters aboue the Firmament: and whether there bee any cristalline Heauen, or any Primum mobile. AFter that the Spirit of God had moued vpon the waters, and light was created, God said, Let there bee a Firmament in the middest of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters: that is, those waters which by rarifaction and euaporation were ascended, and those of the Earth and Sea. But these waters separate aboue this extension, which the Latine Translation cal∣leth firmamentum, for expansum (for so , Pagninus, and Iunius turne it) are not the cristalline Heauens, created in the imaginations of men; which opinion Basi∣lius Magnus calleth a childish supposition, making in the same place many learned ar∣guments against this fancie. For the waters aboue the Firmament, are the waters in the Aire aboue vs, where the same is more solid and condense, which God separated from the nether waters by a Firmament, that is, by an extended distance and vast space: the wordes Raquia, which Montanus writeth Rakiagh, and Shamaijm, being in∣differently taken for the Heauen & for Aire, and more properly for the Aire & ather, then for the Heauens, as the best Haebricians vnderstand them, quo suprema actenuia Mont. nat. fol. 152. ab infimis crassis diducta, interfecta{que} distarent, for that whereby the supreme and thinne bodies were placed in distance, being seuered and cut off from low and grosse matters: and the waters aboue the Firmament, exprest in the word Maijm, are in that tongue taken properly for the waters aboue the Aire, or in the vppermost Region of the same. And that the word Heauen is vsed for the Aire, the Scriptures euery-where wit∣nesse, as in the blessings of Ioseph, and in the 104. Psalme. Psal. 104. 12. By these springs shall the Gen. 49. 25. fowle of the Heauen dwell; and Gen. 19. 24. Cap. 27. 28. vpon Sodome and it rained brimstone and fire out of the Heauen; and in Isaacs blessing to IACOB, God giue thee therefore of the dew of Heauen; and in the 11. But the land whither you goe to possesse it, is a land, Deut. 11. 11. that drinketh water of the raine of Heauen; and in IOB, Who hath ingendred the frosts of Iob. 38. 29. Heauen; and in S. MATTHEVV, Behold the Fowles of Heauen, for they sowe not. . 6. 26. So as in all the Scriptures of the old Testament throughout, is the word Heauen ve∣ry often vsed for aire, and taken also hyperbolically for any great heighth, as, Let vs Gen. 11. 4. build vs a Tower, whose toppe may reach to Heauen, &c. And in this very place Basil a∣uoucheth, that this appellation of Heauen for the Firmament, is but by way of simi∣litude: his owne wordes be these; Et vocauit Deus firmamentum calum. appellatio alij quidem propriè accommodatur, huic autem nunc ad similitudinem; And God called the firmament Heauen: This appellation (saith Basil) is properly applyed to another (that is, to the Starry Heauen) but to this, (that is, to the Firmament diuiding the wa∣ters) it is imposed by similitude: and if there were no other proofe, that by the Fir∣mament was meant the Aire, and not the Heauen, the wordes of MOSES in the eighth Verse, conferred with the same word Firmament in the twentieth Verse, makes it manifest: for in the eighth Verse it is written, that God called the Firmament, which diuided waters from waters, Heauen; and in the 20. Verse hee calleth the Firmament of Heauen, Aire, in these words: And let the foule vpon the earth in the open firmament of Heauen: and what vse there should bee of this ycie, or cristalline, or waterie Heauen, I conceiue not, except it be to moderate and temper the heat, which the Primum mobile would otherwise gather and increase: though in very truth, in stead of this helpe, it would adde an vnmeasurable greatnesse of circle, whereby the swiftnesse of that first Moueable would exceede all possibilitie of be∣leefe. tenetur adimpossibilia; but no man ought to be held to impossibilities; and faith it selfe (which surmounteth the heighth of all humane reason) hath for a forci∣ble Conducter, the Word of Truth, which also may be called lumen omnis & intellectus; the light of all reason and vnderstanding. Now that this supposed first Moue∣able, turneth it selfe so many hundred thousand miles in an instant (seeing the Scrip∣tures teach it not) let those that can beleeue mens imaginations, apprehend it, for I can not: but of these many Heauens, let the Reader that desireth satisfaction, search Orontius, and of this waterie Heauen, Basilius Magnus in his Hexam. fol. 40. 41. &c. and Matth. Beroaldus, his second Booke, and sixt Chapter. For my selfe, I am perswa∣ded, that the waters, called, The waters aboue the Heauens, are but the cloudes and waters ingendred in the vppermost Aire. §. IX. A conclusion repeating the summe of the workes in the Creation, which are reduced to three heads: The creation of matter, The forming of it, The finishing of it. TO conclude, it may bee gathered out of the first Chapter of Genesis, that this was the order of the most wise GOD in the beginning, and when there was no other nature, or being, but Gods incomprehensible eternitie. First, hee created the matter of all things: and in the first three daies he distinguished & gaue to euery nature his proper forme; the forme of lenitie to that which ascended, to that which descended, the forme of grauitie: for he separated light from darkenesse, diuided waters from waters, and ga∣thered the waters vnder the Firmament into one place. In the last three dayes, God adorned, beautified, and replenished the world: he set in the Firmament of Heauen, the Sunne, Moone, and Starres; filled the Earth with Beasts, the Aire with Fowle, and the Sea with Fish, giuing to all that haue life, a power , thereby to continue their Species and kindes; to Creatures vegetatiue and growing, their seeds in themselues; for hee created all things, that they might haue their being: and the gene∣rations . Sal. c. 1. 14. of the world are preserued. §. X. That Nature is no Principium per se; nor forme the giuer of being: and of our ignorance, how second causes should haue any proportion with their effects. AND for this working power, which wee call Nature, the beginning of motion and rest, according to Aristotle, the same is nothing else, but the strength and facultie, which God hath infused into euery creature, ha∣uing no other selfe-abilitie, then a Clocke, after it is wound vp by a mans hand, hath. These therefore that attribute vnto this , any first or sole power, haue therein no other vnderstanding, then such a one hath, who looking into the Sterne of a Ship, and finding it guided by the Helme and Rudder, doth ascribe some absolute vertue to the piece of wood, without all consideration of the hand, that guides it, or of the iudgement, which also directeth and commandeth that hand; forgetting in this and in all else, that by the vertue of the first act, all A∣gents worke whatsoeuer they worke: Virtute primi actus agunt agentia omnia quicquid agunt: for as the minde of man seeth by the Organ of the eye, heareth by the eares, and maketh choice by the will: and therefore we attribute sight to the eye, and hea∣ring to the eares, &c. and yet it is the minde only, that giueth abilitie, life, and mo∣tion to all these his instruments and Organs; so God worketh by Angels, by the Sunne, by the Starres, by Nature, or infused properties, and by men, as by seuerall organs, seueral effects; all second causes whatsoeuer being but instruments, conduits, and pipes, which carrie and disperse what they haue receiued from the head and fountaine of the Vniuersall. For as it is Gods infinite power, and euery-where-pre∣sence (compassing, embracing, and piercing all things) that giueth to the Sunne power to draw vp vapours, to vapours to bee made cloudes, cloudes to containe raine, and raine to fall: so all second and instrumentall causes, together with Nature it selfe, without that operatiue facultie which God gaue them, would become alto∣gether silent, vertuelesse, and dead: of which excellently ORPHEVS; Per te vires∣cunt Natura enim re∣mota prouiden∣tia & potestate diuina, prorsus nibil est. Lact. de fals. Sapientia, l. 3. cap. 28. omnia, All things by thee spring forth in youthfull greene. I enforce not these things, thereby to annihilate those variable vertues, which God hath giuen to his creatures, animate and inanimate, to heauenly and earthly bodies, &c. for all his workes in their vertues prayse him: but of the manner how God worketh in them, or they in or with each other, which the Heathen Philosophers, and those that follow them, haue taken on them to teach: I say, there is not any one among them, nor any one among vs, that could euer yet conceiue it, or expresse it, euer enrich his own vn∣derstanding with any certaine truth, or euer edifie others (not foolish by selfe-flatte∣rie) therein. For (sayth Lactantius, speaking of the wisedome of the Philosophers) si facultas inueniendae veritatis huic studio subiaceret, aliquandò esset innenta; cùm verò tot temporibus, tot ingenijs in eius inquisitione contritis, non sit comprehensa, apparet nul∣lam ibiesse sapientiam; If in this studie (sayth hee) were meanes to find out the truth, it had ere this beene found out: but seeing it is not yet comprehended, after that so much time, Cyprian. de men∣te, lib. 3. and so many wits haue beene worne out in the inquiry of it, it appeareth, that there is no wise∣dome there to be had. Nam si de vnare praecisa scientia haberetur, omnium rerum scientia necessariò haberetur: If the precise knowledge of any one thing were to bee had, it should ne∣cessarily follow, that the knowledge of all things were to bee had. And as the Philosophers were ignorant in Nature, and the wayes of her working: so were they more curious, then knowing, in their first matter and Physicall forme. For if their first matter had any being, it were not then the first matter: for, as it is the first matter, it hath on∣ly a power of being, which it altogether leaueth, when it doth subsist. And seeing it is neyther a substance pefect, nor a substance inchoate, or in the way of perfection, how any other substance should thence take concrescence, it hath not beene neyther are these formes (sayth a learned Authour) anything, si ex ea exprimantur potentia, quae nihil est. Againe, how this first matter should bee subiectum formarum, and passiue, which is vnderstood to precede the forme, it is hard to conceiue: for to make forme which is the cause, to bee subsequent to the thing caused (to wit, to the first matter) is contrary to all reason, diuine and humane: only it may be said, that o∣riginally there is no other difference betweene matter & forme, then betweene heat and fire, of which the one cannot subsist without the other, but in a kind of rationall consideration. Leauing therefore these Riddles to their Louers, who by certaine scholasticall distinctions wrest and the truth of all things, and by which Ari∣stotle hath laboured to prooue a false eternitie of the World, I thinke it farre safer to affirme with Saint AVGVSTINE, That all species and kinds are from God, from whom, whatsoeuer is naturall proceedeth, of what kind or estimation soeuer, from whence are the seeds of all formes, and the formes of all seeds and their motions; A quo est omnis species, à quo est quicquid naturaliter est, cuiuscun{que} generis est, aestimationis est, à quo sunt semina formarum, formae seminum, motus seminum atg formarum. And thus much Auerrois is forced to confesse. For all formes (sayth he) are in primo motore; which is also the opinion of Aristotle in the twelfth of his Metaph. and of Albertus vpon 12. Metaph. Dionysius. §. XI. Of Fate; and that the Starres haue great influence: and that their operations may diuersly be preuented or furthered. AND, as of Nature, such is the dispute and contention concerning Fate or Destinie, of which the opinions of those learned men that haue writ∣ten thereof, may be safely receiued, had they not thereunto annexed and fastened an ineuitable necessitie, and made it more generall, and vniuer∣sally powerfull then it is, by giuing it Dominion ouer the mind of man, and ouer his will; of which Ouid and Iuuenal. Ratio fatum vincere nulla valet. . sat. 7. Seruis regna dabunt, captiuis Fata triumphos. 'Gainst Fate no counsell can preuaile. Kingdomes to Slaues, by Destinie, To Captiues triumphs giuen be. An errour of the Chaldaeans, and after them of the Stoicks, the Pharisees, Priscil∣lianists, Basil. Esa. 4. Aug. de haeres. 70. c. 35. the Bardisanists, and others, as Basil, Augustine, and Thomas haue obserued: but, that Fate is an obedience of second causes to the first, was well conceiued of Hermes, and Apuleius the Platonist. Plotinus out of the Astronomers calleth it a dis∣position Tho. cont. Gent. 3. cap. 83. from the acts of celestial Orbes, vnchangeably working in inferiour bodies, Ficin. in 12. de leg. the same being also true enough, in respect of all those things, which a rationall mind Cic. de fat. doth not order nor direct. Ptolomie, Seneca, Democritus, Epicurus, Chrysippus, Empedo∣cles, and the Stoicks, some of them more largely, others more strictly, ascribe to Fate a binding and ineuitable necessitie; and that it is the same which is spoken and deter∣mined by God ( quod de vnoquog nostrûm fatus est Deus ) and the definite lot of all li∣uing. And certainly it cannot be doubted, but the Starres are instruments of farre greater vse, then to giue an obscure light, and for men to gaze on after Sun-set: it be∣ing manifest, that the diuersitie of seasons, the Winters, and Summers, more hot and cold, are not so vncertained by the Sunne and Moone alone, who alway keepe one and the same course, but that the Starres haue also their working therein. And if we cannot denie, but that God hath giuen vertues to Springs, and Foun∣taines, to cold earth, to plants and stones, Minerals, and to the excrementall parts of the basest liuing creatures, why should wee rob the beautifull Starres of their wor∣king powers? for seeing they are many in number and of eminent beauty and magni∣tude, we may not thinke, that in the treasury of his wisedome who is infinite, there can bee wanting (euen for euery Starre) a peculiar vertue and operation; as euery herbe, plant, fruit, and flower, adorning the face of the Earth hath the like. For as these were not created to beautifie the earth alone, and to couer and shadow her du∣stie face, but otherwise for the vse of man and beast, to feed them and cure them: so were not those vncountable glorious bodies set in the Firmament, to no other end, then to adorne it, but for instruments and organs of his diuine prouidence, so far as it hath pleased his iust will to determine. vpon this place of Genesis, Let there Gen. 1. 15. belight in the Firmament, &c. affirmeth that the Starres are not causes (meaning per∣chance binding causes) but are as open Bookes, wherein are contained and set downe all things whatsoeuer to come; but not to be read by the eyes of humane wisedome: which latter part I beleeue well, and this saying of Syracides withall: That there are Eccl. 43. c. . hidyet greater things then these bee, and wee haue seene but a few of his workes. And though, for the capacitie of men, we know somewhat, yet in the true and vttermost vertues of herbes and plants, which our selues sow and set, and which grow vnder our feet, we are in effect ignorant; much more in the powers and working of cele∣stiall bodies: for hardly (sayth SALOMON) can we discerne the things that are vpon the Wisd. 9. 16. earth, and with great labour find we out those things that are before vs: who can then inue∣stigate the things that are in Heauen? Multum est de rebus coelestibus aliquid cognoscere: Aristotle. It is much to know a little of heauenly things. But in this question of Fate, the middle course is to be followed, that as with the Heathen we doe not bind God to his crea∣tures, in this supposed necessitie of destinie, so on the contrary we doe not rob those beautifull creatures of their powers and offices. For had any of these second causes despoyled God of his prerogatiue, or had God himselfe constrained the minde and will of man to impious acts by any celestiall inforcements, then sure the impious ex∣cuse of some were iustifiable; of whom Saint AVGVSTINE: Impiâ peruersitate in ma∣lis Aug. 20. super lit. fact is rectissimè reprehenden dis ingerunt accusandum auctorum syderum, quam commissorem scelerum. Where wee reprehend them of euill deeds, they againe with wicked peruersenesse vrge, that rather the Authour and Creatour of the Starres, then the doer of the is to be accused. But that the Stars and other celestiall bodies incline the will by mediation of the sensitiue appetite, which is also stirred by the constitution and complexion, it cannot be doubted. Corpora coelestia (sayth DAMASCENE) in nobis habitus, com∣plexiones, 5. & dispositiones, The heauenly bodies (sayth he) make in vs habits, complexions, and dispositions: for the bodie (though Galen inforce it further) hath vndoubtedly a Gal. l. mor. an seq. temp. kind of drawing after it the affections of the minde, especially bodies strong in hu∣mour, and mindes weake in vertues: for those of cholericke complexion are subiect to anger, and the furious effects thereof; by which they suffer themselues to be trans∣ported, where the minde hath not reason to remember, that passions ought to be her Vassals, not her Masters. And that they wholly direct the reasonlesse minde I am resolued: For all those which were created mortall, as birds beasts, and the like, are left to their naturall appetites, ouer all which, celestiall bodies (as instruments and Executioners of Gods prouidence) haue absolute dominion. What we should iudge of men, who little differ from beasts, I cannot tell: for as he that contendeth against those inforcements, may easily master or resist them: so whosoeuer shall neglect the remedies by vertue and pietie prepared, putteth himselfe altogether vnder the power of his sensuall appetite; Vincitur fatum si resistas, vincit si contempseris: Fate will be o∣uercome, Quint. if thou resist it, if thou neglect, it conquereth. But that either the Starres or the Sunne haue any power ouer the minds of men immediately, it is absurd to thinke, other then as aforesaid, as the same by the bodies temper may be effected. Lumen solis ad generationem sensibilum corporum confert, & Aug. de Ciuit, Dei, lib. 5. ad vitam ipsam mouet, & nutrit, & auget, & perficit: The light of the Sunne (sayth Saint AVGVSTINE) helpeth the generation of sensible bodies, moueth them to life, and nourisheth, augmenteth, and perfecteth them: yet still as a Minister, not as a Master: Bonus quidem Hex. lib. 4. de∣term. 3. est Sol, in ministerio, non imperio; The Sunne is good to serue, not to sway (saith S. Ambrose. ) And Salnt AVGVSTINE: Deus regit inferiora corpora per superiora; God ruleth the bo∣dies below by those aboue, but he auoucheth not, that superiour bodies haue rule ouer mens minds, which are incorporeall. But howsoeuer wee are by the Starres inclined at our birth, yet there are many things both in Nature and Art, that encounter the same, and weaken their operation: and Aristotle himselfe confesseth, that the Heauens doe not alwayes worke their ef∣fects in inferiour bodies, no more then the signes of raine and wind doe alwaies come to passe. And it is diuers times seene, that paternall vertue and vice hath his coun∣ter-working to these inclinations. Est in Iuuencis patrum virtus; In the young off-spring Hor. lib: 4. Od. 4. 30. the Fathers vertue is, and so the contrary, patrum vitia: and herein also there is often found an enterchange; the Sonnes of vertuous men, by an ill constellation become inclinable to vice, and of vicious men, to vertue. Egregia est soboles, scelerato nata parente. A worthy sonne is borne of a wicked father. But there is nothing (after Gods reserued power) that so much setteth this art of influence out of square and rule, as education doth: for there are none in the world so wickedly inclined, but that a religious instruction and bringing vp may fashion a∣new, and reforme them; nor any so well disposed, whom (the reines being let loose) the continuall fellowship and familiaritie, and the examples of dissolute men may not corrupt and deforme. Vessels will euer retaine a sauour of their first liquor: it being equally difficult eyther to clense the mind once corrupted, or to extinguish the sweet sauour of vertue first receiued, when the mind was yet tender, open, and ea∣sily seasoned; but where a fauourable constellation (allowing that the Stars incline the will) and a vertuous education doe happily arriue, or the contrary in both, ther∣by it is that men are found so exceeding vertuous or vicious, Heauen and Earth (as it were) running together, and agreeing in one: for as the seedes of vertue may by the art and husbandry of Christian counsaile produce better and more beautifull fruit, then the strength of selfe-nature and kind could haue yeelded them; so the plants apt to grow wild, and to change themselues into weedes, by being set in a soyle suta∣ble, and like themselues, are made more vnsauoury and filled with poyson. It was therefore truly affirmed, Sapiens adiuuabit astrorum, agricola terrae naturam; A wise man assisteth the worke of the Starres, as the Husbandman helpeth the nature of the soile. And Ptolomie himselfe confesseth thus much, Sapiens, & omina sa∣pientis medici dominabuntur astris, A wiseman, and the ominous art of a wise Physician shall preuaile against the Starres. Lastly, wee ought all to know, that GOD created the Starres, as he did the rest of the Vniuersall, whose influences may be called his reser∣ued and vnwritten Lawes. But let vs consider how they bind: euen as the Lawes of men doe; for although the Kings and Princes of the world haue by their Lawes de∣creed, that a Thiefe and a murderer shall suffer death; and though their Ordinances are daily by Iudges and Magistrates (the Starres of Kings) executed accordingly, yet these Lawes doe not depriue Kings of their naturall or religious compassion, or bind them without prerogatiue, to such a seuere execution, as that there should bee nothing left of libertie to iudgement, power, or conscience: the Law in his owne na∣ture being no other then a deafe Tyrant. But seeing that it is otherwise, and that Princes (who ought to imitate God in all they can) doe sometimes for causes to themselues knowne, and by mediation, pardon offences both against others and themselues, it were then impious to take that power and libertie from God himselfe, which his Substitutes enioy; God being mercy, goodnesse, and charitie it selfe. O∣therwise that example of Prayer by our Sauiour taught; And let vs not bee led vnto Mat. 6. 13. temptation, but deliuer vs from euill, had beene no other but an expence of words and time; but that God (which only knoweth the operation of his owne creatures true∣ly) hath assured vs, that there is no inclination or temptation so forcible, which our humble Prayers and desires may not make frustrate, and breake asunder: for were it (as the Stoicks conceiue) that Fate or Destinie, though depending vpon eternall power, yet being once ordered and disposed, had such a connexion and immutable dependencie, that God himselfe should in a kind haue shut vp himselfe therein: How miserable then were the condition of men (sayth Saint AVGVSTINE) left altogether with∣out hope! And if this strength of the were so transfer'd, as that God had quitted vn∣to them all dominion ouer his creatures; be he Pagan or Christian that so beleeueth, the only true God of the one, and the imaginary gods of the other would thereby be despoyled of all worship, reuerence, or respect. And ceatainely, GOD which hath promised vs the reward of wel-doing, which Christ himselfe claimed at the hands of the Father, ( I haue finished the which . 18. 4. thou gauest mee to doe.) And the same God, who hath threatned vnto vs the sorrow and torment of offences, could not contrary to his mercifull nature be so vniust, as to bind vs ineuitably to the Destinies, or influences of the Starres, or subiect our soules to any imposed necessitie. But it was well sayd of Plotinus, that the Stars were significant, but not efficient, giuing them yet something then their due: and therefore as I doe not consent with those, who would make those glorious creatures of God vertuelesse: so I think that we derogate from his eternal and absolute power and prouidence, to ascribe to them the same dominion ouer our immortall soules, which they haue ouer all bodily substances, and perishable natures: for the soules of men, louing and fearing God, receiue influence from that diuine light it selfe, where∣of the Sunnes claritie, and that of the Stars is by Plato called but a shadow. Lumen est Plat. pol. . vmbra Dei, & Deus est lumen luminis; Light is the shadow of Gods brightnesse, who is the Ficin. in . 7. pol. light of light: But to end this question, because this Destinie, together with Proui∣dence, Prescience, and Predestination are often confounded, I thinke it not imperti∣nent to touch the difference in a word or two, for euery man hath not obserued it, though all learned men haue. §. XII. Of Prescience. PRescience, or fore-knowledge (which the Greekes call Prognosis, the Latines , or praescientia ) considered in order and nature (if we may speake of God after the manner of men) goeth before Proui∣dence: for God fore-knew all things, before hee had created them, or before they had being to be cared for; and Prescience is no other then an infallible fore-knowledge. For whatsoeuer our selues fore-know, except the same be to succeede accordingly, it cannot be true that we fore-know it. But this Presci∣ence of God (as it is Prescience onely) is not the cause of any thing futurely succee∣ding: neither doth Gods fore-knowledge impose any necessity, or binde. For in that we fore-know that the Sunne will rise, and set; that all men borne in the world shall die againe; that after Winter, the Spring shall come; after the Spring Summer and Haruest, and that according to the seuerall seedes that we sow, we shall reape seuerall sorts of graine, yet is not our fore-knowledge the cause of this, or any of these: nei∣ther doth the knowledge in vs binde or constraine the Sunne to rise and set, or men to die; for the causes (as men perswade themselues) are otherwise manifest and knowne to all. The eye of man (saith BOEYIVS) beholdeth those things subiect to sense, as they are; the eye seeth that such a beast is a borese, it seeth men, trees, and houses, &c. but our seeing of them (as they are) is not the cause of their so being, for such they bee in their owne natures. And againe out of the same Authour; Diuina prouidentia rebus gene∣rand de con∣sol. is non imponit , quià si omnia euenirent ex necessitate, praemia bonorum, & poena malorum periret; Diuine prouidence (sayth he) imposeth no necessitie vpon things that are to exist, for if all came to passe of necessitie, there should neyther be reward of good, nor pu∣nishment of euill. §. XIII. Of Prouidence: NOw Prouidence (which the Greekes call Pronoia) is an intellectuall knowledge, both fore-seeing, caring for, and ordering all things, and doth not onely behold all past, all present, and all to come, but is the cause of their so being, which Prescience (simply taken) is not: and therefore Prouidence by the Philosophers (saith Saint Augustine) is de∣uided into Memory, Knowledge, and Care: Memory of the past, Knowledge of the present, and Care of the future; and we our selues account such a man for prouident, as, remembring things past, and obseruing things present, can by iudgement, and comparing the one with the other, prouide for the future, and times succeeding. That such a thing there is as Prouidence, the Scriptures euery-where teach vs, Moses in many places, the Prophets in their Predictions: Christ himselfe and his Apostles assure vs hereof; and, besides the Scriptures, Hermes, Orpheus, Euripides, Pythagoras, Plato, Plotinus, and (in effect) all men acknowledge the Prouidence of God: yea, the Turkes themselues are so therein, as they refuse not to accompany and visit each other, in the most , nor shun any perill whatsoeuer, though death therein doe manifestly it selfe. The places of Scripture proouing , are so many, both in generall and particular, as I shall need to repeat a few of them in this place. Sing vnto God (sayth DAVID) which couereth the Heauens with cloudes, and prepareth raine for the earth, Psal. 147. . and maketh the grasse to grow vpon the Mountaines, which giueth to beasts their food, and 9. feedeth the young Rauen that cryes: all these wait vpon thee, that thou maiest giue them Psal. 104. 27. food in due season. And thou shalt drinke of the Riuer Cheareth (sayth God to ELIAH) . 15. and I haue commanded the Rauens to feed thee there. Behold, the Fowles of the Ayre, they 1. Reg. 17. 4. sow not, nor reape, and yet your heauenly Father feedeth them: againe, are not two Sparrowes Mat. 6. 26. sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father: yea Luke 12. 6. 7. all the haires of your head are : And Saint PETER, Cast all your care on him, for 1. . . 7. he careth for you; And his iudgements are written (sayth DAVID.) Psal. 36. 6. God therefore, who is euery-where present, who filleth the Heauens and the Earth, . 23. 24. whose eyes are vpon the righteous, and his countenance against them that doe euill, was therefore by Orpheus called, oculus infinitus, an infinite eye, beholding all things, and cannot therefore be esteemed as an idle looker on, as if he had transferred his power to any other: for it is contrary to his owne Word: Gloriam meam alterinondabo: I . 42. 8. will not giue my glory to another. No man commandeth in the Kings presence, but by the Kings direction; but God is euery-where present, and King of Kings. The example of Gods vniuersall Prouidence is seene in his creatures. The Father proui∣deth for his children: beasts and birds and all liuings for their young ones. If Proui∣dence be found in second Fathers, much more in the first and Vniuersall: and if there be a naturall louing care in men, and beasts, much more in God, who hath formed this nature, and whose Diuine loue was the beginning, and is the bond of the Vni∣uersall: Amor diuinus rerum omnium est principium, & vinculum vniuer si (saith PLATO.) Amor Dei est nodus perpetuus, , partium{que} cius immobile sustentaculum, ac vniuersae machinae fundamentum; The loue of God is the perpetuall knot, and linke or chayne of the world, and the immoueable piller of euery part thereof, and the Basis and foun∣dation of the vniuersall. God therefore who could only be the cause of all, can onely . ep. 1. c. 4. v. God is loue. prouide for all, and sustayne all; so as to absolute power; to euery-where presence; to perfect goodnesse; to pure and diuine loue; this attribute and transcendent of Prouidence is only proper and belonging. §. XIIII. Of Predestination. NOw for Predestination; we can difference it no otherwise, from Pro∣uidence and Prescience, then in this, that Prescience only fore-seeth: Prouidence fore-seeth and careth for, and hath respect to al creatures, euen from the brightest Angels of heauen, to the vnworthiest wormes Rom. . & 9. of the earth, and Predestination (as it is vsed specially by Diuines) is only of men, and yet not of all to men belonging, but of their saluation properly, in the common vse of Diuines, or perdition, as some haue vsed it. Yet Peter Lombard, Lomb. l. 1. dist. 39 Thom. part. 1. dist. 23. Bern. in Probl. de p. d. Thomas, Theologus, and others, take the word Predestination more strictly, and for a preparation to felicitie: diuers of the Fathers take it more largely some∣times: among whom S. Augustine speaking of two Cities, and two Societies, vseth these wordes, Quarum est vna, quae praedestinata est in aeternum regnare cum Deo, altera ae∣ternum Aug. l. 15. c. 1. de Ciuit. Dei. supplicium subire cum Diabolo; Whereof one is it, which is predestinated to raigne for euer with God, but the other is to vndergoe euer lasting torment with the Deuill: for ac∣cording to NONIVS MARCELLVS, destinare est praeparare; and of the same opinion Cal. in cap. 9. Rom. v. 11. Bez. in magn. an∣not. in cap. 9. ad Rom. are many Protestant writers, as Caluin, Beza, Buchanus, Danaeus, and such like: and as for the manifold questions hereof arising, I leaue them to the Diuines; and why it hath pleased God to create some vessels of honor, and some of dishonor, I will answere with Gregorie, who saith, Qui in fact is Dei rationem non videt, infirmitatem Danaeus, l. 3. de Salut. suam considerans, cur non videat, rationem videt; He that seeth no reason in the actions of Greg. Magn. Iob 9. God, by consideration of his owne infirmitie perceiueth the reason of his blindnesse. And a∣gaine Aug. ad Polin. ep. 59. with S. AVGVSTINE, Occulta esse causa potest, iniusta esse non potest; Hidden the cause of his Predestination may be, vniust it cannot be. §. XV. Of Fortune: and of the reason of some things that seeme to be by fortune, and against Reason and Prouidence. LAstly, seeing Destinie or Necessitie is subsequent to Gods prouidence, and seeing that the Starres haue no other dominion, then is before spo∣ken, and that Nature is nothing, but as Plato calleth it, Dei artem, vel ar∣tificiosum Dei Organum; The art, or artificiall Organ of God: and CVSANVS, Diuini praecepti instrumentum; The instrument of the diuine precept: we may then with better reason reiect that kinde of Idolatrie, or God of fooles, called Fortune or Chance: a Goddesse, the most reuerenced, and the most reuiled of all o∣ther, but not ancient; for Homer maketh her the Daughter of Oceanus, as Pausanias witnesseth in his Messeniacks. The Greekes call her , signifying a relatiue being, or betiding, so as before Homers time this great Lady was scarce heard of; and He∣siodus, who hath taught the birth and beginning of all these counterfait gods, hath not a word of Fortune: yet afterward shee grew so great and omnipotent, as from Sen. ep. 91. Kings and Kingdomes, to Beggers and Cottages, she ordered all things, resisting the wisdome of the wisest, by making the Possessor thereof miserable: valuing the folly of the most foolish by making their successe prosperous, insomuch as the actions of men were said to be but the sports of Fortune, and the variable accidents happening in mens liues, but her pastimes: of which PALLADIVS, Vita hominum ludus fortunae Aur . de Sen. ep. 74 in the & often changes of his Fortune, is said to haue vsed to cry out vpon Fortune, applying to her a Verse of Aeschylus, Tu me extulisti, eadem me is (sentio) perditum. est; The life of man is the play of Fortune: and because it often falleth out, that enter∣prises guided by ill counsels haue equall successe to those by the best iudgement con∣ducted, therefore had Fortune the same externall figure with Sapience: whereof Athenaeus: Longissimè à Sapientia Fors dissidet, Sed multa perficit tamen simillima. From Wisedome Fortune differs farre, And yet in workes most like they are. But I will forbeare to be curious in that, which (as it is commonly vnderstood) is nothing else but a power imaginarie, to which the successe of humane actions and endeuours were for their varietie ascribed; for when a manifest cause could not be giuen, then was it attributed to Fortune, as if there were no cause of those things, of which most men are ignorant, contrary to this true ground of PLATO: Nihilest or∣tum sub Sole, cuius causa legitima non praecesserit; Nothing euer came to passe vnder the Sunne, of which there was not a iust preceding cause. But Aquinas hath herein answe∣red in one distinction, whatsoeuer may be obiected; for many things there are (saith he) which happen, besides the intention of the Inferior, but not besides the intention of the Superior; Praeter intentionem inferioris, sed non praeter intentionem superioris, (to Te facimus For∣tun a Deam, , locamus. wit) the ordinance of God; and therefore (saith MELANCHTON) Quod Poetae for∣tunam, nos Deum appellamus; Whom the Poets call Fortune, we know to be God, and that this is true, the Scripture in many places teacheth vs, as in the law of Murder. He Sat. 10. 366. Exod. 21. 12, 13. that smiteth a man, and he die, shall die the death, and if a man hath not laid waite, but God hath offered him into his hands, then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall . Now, where the Scripture hath these wordes, God hath offered him into his hands, we say, if Vers. 5. he hurt him by Chance: and in Deuteronomie the nineteenth, where the slipping of an Axe from the helue, whereby another is slaine, was the worke of God himselfe, we in our phrase attribute this accident to Chance or Fortune: and in the Prouerbs the sixteenth, The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord: so Vers. 33. as that which seemeth most casuall and subiect to Fortune, is yet disposed by the or∣dinance of God, as all things else; and hereof the wiser sort, and the best learned of the Philosophers were not ignorant, as Cicero witnesseth for them, gathering the opi∣nion of Aristotle and his Sectators, with those of Plato, and the Academikes to this effect, That the same power which they called aximam mundi; The soule of the world, was no other then that incomprehensible wisdome, which we expresse by the name of God, gouerning euery being aswell in heauen as in earth; to which wisedome and power they sometime gaue the title of Necessitie or Fate, because it bindeth by inc∣uitable Cic. ac. quaest. l. 1. ordinance: sometime, the stile of Fortune, because of many effects there ap∣peare vnto vs no certaine . To this effect speaketh S. Augustine in his questions vpon Genesis the first Booke: the same hath Seneca in his fourth of Benefits; which was also the doctrine of the Stoicks, of which Sect he was: For whatsoeuer (saith he) Senec. l. 4. c. 7. thou callest God, be it Nature, Fate, or Fortune, all are but one and the same, differenced by diuers termes, according as he vseth, and exerciseth his power diuersly. But it may be obiected, that if Fortune and Chance were not sometimes the causes of good and euill in men, but an idle voice, whereby we expresse successe, how comes it then, that so many worthy and wise men depend vpon so many vnworthy and emptie-headed fooles; that riches and honor are giuen to externall men, and without kernell: and so many learned, vertuous, and valiant men weare out their liues in poore and deiected estates. In a word there is no other inferior, or apparent cause, beside the partialitie of mans affection, but the fashioning and not fashioning of our selues according to the nature of the time wherein we liue, for whosoeuer is most able, and best sufficient to discerne, and hath withall an honest and open heart and louing truth, if Princes, or those that gouerne, endure no other discourse then their owne flatteries, then I say such an one, whose vertue and courage forbiddeth him to be base and a dissembler, shall euermore hang vnder the wheele, which kind of deseruing well and receiuing ill, we alwayes falsly charge Fortune withall. For whosoeuer shall tell any great Man or Magistrate, that he is not iust, the Generall of an Armie, that he is not valiant, and great Ladies that they are not faire, shall neuer be made a Counseller, a Captayne, or a Courtier. Neither is it sufficient to be wise with a wise Prince, valiant with a valiant, and iust with him that is iust, for such a one hath no estate in his prosperitie; but he must also change with the successor, if he be of contrary qualities, saile with the tyde of the time, and alter forme and condi∣tion, as the Estate or the Estates Master changeth: Otherwise how were it possible, that the most base men, and separate from all imitable qualities, could so often at∣tayne to honor and riches, but by such an obseruant slauish course? These men ha∣uing nothing else to value themselues by, but a counterfait kinde of wondring at o∣ther men, and by making them beleeue that all their vices are vertues, and all their dustie actions cristalline, haue yet in all ages prospered equally with the most ver∣tuous, if not exceeded them. For according to MENANDER, Omnis insipiens ar∣rogantia & plausibus capitur; Euery foole is wonne with his owne pride, and others flattering applause: so as whosoeuer will liue altogether out of himselfe, and studie other mens humours, and obserue them, shall neuer be vnfortunate; and on the contrary, that man which prizeth truth and vertue (except the season wherein he liueth be of all these, and of all sorts of goodnesse fruitfull) shall neuer prosper by the possession or profession thereof. It is also a token of a worldly wise man, not to warre or contend in vaine against the nature of times wherein he liueth: for such a one is often the au∣thour of his owne miserie, but best it were to follow the aduice, which the Pope gaue the Bishops of that age, out of Ouid, while the Arian Heresie raged: Dùm furor in cursu est, currenti furori. Ouid. rem. am. lib. 1. While furie gallops on the way, Let no man furies gallop stay. And if Cicero (then whom that world begat not a man of more reputed iudge∣ment) had followed the counsaile of his brother QVINTVS, Potuisset (saith PE∣TRARCH) in lectulo suo mori, potuisset integro cadauere sepeliri; He might then haue dyed the death of nature, and beene with an vntorne and vndisseuered body buryed; for as Petrarch in the same place noteth: Quid stultius quàm desperantem (praesertim de effe∣ctu) litibus perpetuis implicari; What more foolish then for him that despaires, especially of the effect, to be entangled with endlesse contentions? Whosoeuer therefore will set before him MACHIAVELS two markes to shoote at (to wit) riches, and glorie, must set on and take off a back of yron to a weake woodden Bow, that it may fit both the strong and the feeble: for as he, that first deuised to adde sayles to rowing vessells, did either so proportion them, as being fastened aloft, and towards the head of his Mast, he might abide all windes and stormes, or else he sometime or other perished by his owne in∣uention: so that man which prizeth vertue for it selfe, & cannot endure to hoise and strike his sailes, as the diuers natures of calmes & stormes require, must cut his sailes, and his cloth, of meane length and breadth, and content himselfe with a slow and sure nauigation, (to wit) a meane and free estate. But of this dispute of Fortune, and the rest, or of whatsoeuer Lords or Gods, imaginarie powers, or causes, the wit (or rather foolishnesse) of man hath found out: let vs resolue with S. Paul, who hath taught vs, that there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and 1. Cor. c. 8. v. 6. one Lord, Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him; there are diuersities of o∣perations, Cap. 12. vers. 6. but God is the same which worketh all in all. CHAP. II. Of mans estate in his first Creation, and of Gods rest. §. I. Of the Image of God, according to which man was first created. THE creation of all other creatures being finished, the heauens adorned, and the earth replenished, GOD said, Let vs make man in our owne Image, according to Gen. 1. 26. our likenesse. Man is the last and most admirable of Gods workes to vs knowne, ingens miraculum homo, Man is the grea∣test Trism. Ascl. 2. & de volunt. Dei. Plat. leg. l. 1. wonder (saith PLATO out of MERCVRIVS:) Na∣turae ardentissimae artificium, The artificiall worke of the most ardent or fire-like nature (as saith Zoroaster ) though the same be meant, not for any excellencie externall, but in respect of his internal forme, both in the nature, qualities, and other attributes thereof: in nature, because it hath an essence immor∣tall, and spirituall; in qualities, because the same was by God created holy and righ∣teous in truth; in other attributes, because Man was of the world, and of the creatures therein. Sanctius his capacius altae Sanctum, quia pars potior im∣mortalis, ani∣mal, quia in mortali. Deerat adhuc: & quod in caetera posset, Natus homo est. More holy then the rest, and vnderstanding more In locum Ouid. Met. l. 1. 76. A liuing creature wants, to rule all made before, So man began to be. Of this Image and similitude of God, there is much dispute among the Fathers, Schoole-men, and late Writers: Some of the Fathers conceiue, that man was made after the Image of God, in respect chiefly of Empire & Dominion, as S. Chrysostome, Ambrose, and some others: which Saint Ambrose denyeth to the woman in these wordes, Vt Deus vnus, ab eo fier et homo vnus, & quomodò ex Deo vno omnia, ità ex vno homine omne genus esset super faciem totius terrae: Vnus igitur vnum fecit, qui vnitatis eius haberei imaginem; That as God is one, one man might be made by him, and that in what manner all things are of one God, likewise of one man the whole kinde should be vpon the face of the whole earth: Therefore he being one made one, that should haue the Image of his vnitie. But whereas it is gathered out of the following wordes of the same Verse, that man was after the image of God in respect of rule and power, it is written Dominamini in the plurall number, and let them rule ouer the fish in the Sea, &c. and therefore cannot the woman be excluded. Others conceiue, that man is said to be after the image of God in respect of his immortall soule only, because as God is inuisible, so the soule of man is inuisible, as God is immortall and incorporall, so is the soule of man immortall and incorporall; and as there is but one God which go∣uerneth the world, so but one soule which gouerneth the body of man; and as God is wholly in euery part of the world, so is the soule of man wholly in euery part of the body: Anima est tota in toto, & totain qualibet parte; The soule is wholly in the whole bo∣dy, and wholly in euery part thereof, according to Aristotle; though Chalcidius, and o∣ther learned men denie that doctrine; which that it is otherwise then potentially true, all the Aristotelians in the world shall neuer proue. These and the like argu∣ments doe the make (saith Tostatus ) and these resemblances, betweene the infi∣nite God, and the finite Man. The Schoole-men resemble the Minde or Soule of Man to God, in this respect especially; because that as in the Minde there are three distinct powers, or faculties, (to wit) Memorie, Vnderstanding, and Will, and yet all these, being of reall diffe∣rences, are but one minde: so in God there are three distinct persons, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, and yet but one God. They also make the Image and Si∣militude diuers; and againe, they distinguish betweene imaginem Dei, and ad ima∣ginem Dei, and spinne into small threds, with subtile distinctions, many times the plainenesse, and sinceritie of the Scriptures: their wits being like that strong water, that eateth through and dissolueth the purest gold. Victorinus also maketh the image of God to be substantiall, but not the similitude: sed in substantia nomen qualitatis de∣claratiuum; A word-declaring qualitie in the substance. Out of which wordes, and that which followeth, it is infer'd, that as the image and similitude doe greatly differ: so the sinnefull soule doth not therefore leaue to be the image of God; but it hath not his similitude, except it be holy and righteous. S. Augustine also against Adimantus the Manichee affirmeth, that by sinne, the perfection of this image is lost in man, and in his Retractations maintayneth the same opinion, and also affirmeth that the Simi∣litude is more largely taken, then the Image. But howsoeuer the Schoole-men and others distinguish, or whatsoeuer the Fa∣thers conceiue, sure I am that S. Paul maketh the same sense of the image, which Victorinus doth of the similitude, who saith: As we haue borne the image of the eartbly, 1. Cor. 15. 49. so shall we beare the image of the heauenly; and it cannot be gathered out of the Scrip∣tures, that the wordes image and similitude were vsed but in one sense, and in this place the better to expresse each other; whatsoeuer Lombard hath said to the contra∣ry. For God knowes, what a multitude of meanings the wit of man imagineth to himselfe in the Scriptures, which neither Moses, the Prophets, or Apostles, euer con∣ceiued. Now as S. Paul vseth the word (image) for both: so S. Iames vseth the word (similitude) for both in these wordes: Therewith blesse we God euen the Father, and Iam. 3. 9. therewith curse we Men, which are made after the similitude of God: Howsoeuer there∣fore S. Augustine seemeth, out of a kinde of elegancy in writing, to make some diffe∣rence, as where he writeth, Confitemur imaginem aeternitate, similitudinem in mori∣bus Vt supra. inueniri; We confesse that this image is found in eternitie, but his similitude in man∣ners, that is, in the spirituall dispositions and qualities of the minde, yet thus he else∣where speaketh plainely: Quasi verò possit esse imago aliqua in qua similitudo non sit: si Aug. vt sup. exim omninò similis non est, procùldubio nèc imago est; As if (saith he) there could be any image, where the similitude is not: no, out of doubt, where there is no likenesse, there is no image. The very wordes of the Text make this most manifest, as, Let vs make man in our image, according to our likenesse: which is, Let vs make man in our image, that he may be like vs; and in the next Verse following, God himselfe maketh it plaine, for there he vseth the word (image) only, as thus: God created the man in his image, in the image of God created he him. And to take away all dispute or ambiguitie, in the first Verse of the fift Chapter, the word (similitude) is vsed againe by it selfe, as, In the day that God created ADAM, in the likenesse of God made he him. And this simi∣litude S. Paul Colos. the third, calleth the image. Put on (saith he) the new man, which . 10. is renewed in knowledge after the image of him, that created him. And in Siracides it is written, He made them according to his image. Now if we may beleeue S. Paul before Peter Lombard and other Schoole-men, then it is as manifest as wordes can make it, that the image and similitude is but the same, for S. Paul vseth both the words direct∣ly in one sense. For they turned the glorie of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the Rom. 1. 23. image of a corruptible man. Zanchius laboureth to proue, that man was formed after the image of God, both in body and minde: Nulla pars in homine quae non fuerit imaginis particeps, No Zanch de op. Dei l. 3. c. 1. part in a man (saith he) which was not participating Gods image: for God said, Let vs make man according to our owne image. But the soule alone is not man, but the Hypostasis or whole man compounded of body and soule. The body of man (saith he) is the I∣mage of the world, and called therefore Microcosmus; but the Idaea and exemplar of the world was first in God, so that man, according to his body must needs be the image of God. Against which opinion of this learned man, his owne obiection seemeth to me sufficient, where he alleageth, that it may be said, that Moses spake by the figure Synecdoche, as when a man is called a mortall man, yet is not the whole man mortall, but the body only: so when God said, Let vs make man after our image, he meant the soule of man, and not the body of earth and dust: Maledictus qui deitatem ad ho∣minis lineamenta refert (saith S. AVGVSTINE,) Cursed is he that referreth the Deitie of God to the lineaments of mans body. Deus enim non est humanae formae particeps, neque In Gen. corpus humanum diuinae (saith PHILO,) God is not partaker of humane forme, nor hu∣mane body of the forme diuine: The Hebrew word for image is Tselem, which signifieth a shaddow or obscure resemblance: In imagine pertransit home; Man passeth away in a shaddow: Let vs then know and consider, that God, who is eternall and infinite, hath not any bodily shape or composition, for it is both against his Nature & his Word; an error of the Anthropomorphitae, against the very essence and Maiestie of God. Surely Cicero, who was but a Heathen, had yet a more diuine vnderstanding then these grosse Heretikes: Ad similitudinem Dei propius accedebat humana virtus, quàm fi∣gura; The vertue which is in man (saith he) came neerer the similitude of God, then the figure. For God is a spirituall substance, inuisible, and most simple; God is a iust God: God is Mercifull: God is Charitie it selfe, and (in a word) Goodnesse it selfe, and none else simply good. And thus much it hath pleased God himselfe to teach vs, and to make vs know of himselfe. What then can be the shadow of such a substance, the image of such a nature, or wherin can man be said to resemble his vnexcogitable power and perfectnesse? certainely, not in dominion alone: for the Deuill is said to Eph 6. 12. 10. 18. 36. be the Prince of this world, and the Kingdome of Christ was not thereof, who was the true and perfect image of his Father; neither, because man hath an immortall soule, and therein the faculties of Memorie, Vnderstanding, and Will, for the Deuils are also immortall, and participate those faculties, being called Daemones, because Plat. in . scientes of Knowledge and subtility; neither because we are reasonable creatures, by which we are distinguished from beasts: for who haue rebelled against God? who haue made Gods of the vilest beasts, of Serpents, of Cats, of Owles, yea, euen of shamefull parts, of lusts and pleasures, but reasonable men? Yet doe I not condemne the opinion of S. Chrysostome and Ambrose, as touching dominion, but that, in respect Osorius de Iust. lib. . thereof, man was in some sort after the image of God, if we take Dominion, such as it ought to be, that is, accompanyed with Iustice and Pietie: for God did not onely make man a Ruler and Gouernor ouer the Fishes of the Sea, the Fowles of Heauen (or of the aire) and ouer the Beasts of the Field; but God gaue vnto man a dominion ouer men, be appointed Kings to gouerne them, and Iudges, to iudge them in equi∣tie. Neither doe I exclude Reason, as it is the abilitie of Vnderstanding. For I doe not conceiue, that Irenaeus did therefore call man, the image of God, because he was anim al rationale only; but that he vnderstood it better, with SYBILLA: Imago mea est , rectam rationem habens: Man, that is endued with right reason, is said to resemble God, (that is) by right reason to know and confesse God his Creatour, and the same God to serue, loue, and obey: and therefore said Saint Augustine (who herein came neerer the Truth) Fecit Deus hominem ad imaginem & similitudinem suam in mente God made man, in respect of the intellect, after his owne Image and similitude; and REY∣NERIVS; Homo, quòd habet mentem, factus est ad imaginem Dei, Man was made after the Reyn. de ment. Image of God, in minde, or in that he had a minde. §. II. Of the intellectuall mind of man, in which there is much of the Image of God: and that this Image is much deformed by sinne. BVT Mens is not taken here for animaphysica, according to Aristotle, which is forma, vel natura hominis: The forme or nature of man; but this facultie or gift of God, called Mens, is taken for prima vis animi, the principall strength of the minde, or soule, cuius actus est perpetua veritatis contemplatio; whose act, exercise, or office, is the perpetuall contemplation of truth; and therefore it is also called intellectus diuinus, intellectus contemplatiue, & . anima contemplatiua, A diuine vnderstanding, and an intellect or minde contemplatiue. Est autem mens nostra (saith CVSANVS) vis comprehendendi, & totum virtuale ex-omnibus De . Idiota. l. 3. comprehendendi virtutibus compositum: Our intellectuall minde (saith hee) is a power of comprehending, euen the whole, that is in this kind powerfull, compounded of all the powers of comprehension: vnto which Mercurius attributeth so much (if his meaning accom∣pany his words) that he esteemeth it to be the very essence of God (which was also the errour of the Manichees and others) and no otherwise separate from God (sayth hee) then the light from the Sunne: for this Mens or vnderstanding (sayth MERCV∣RIVS) est in hominibus: Is God in men, or rather (and which I take to be his mea∣ning) Sen. Ep. 65. f. & 31. f. is the image of God in man. For as the Sunne is not of the same essence or na∣ture with the diuine light, but a body illightned, and an illumination created; so is this Mens or vnderstanding in men, not of the essence of Gods infinite vnderstanding, but a power and facultie of our soules the purest; or the lumen animae rationalis, by the true and eternall light illightned. And this Mens others call animam animae, The soule of the soule, or with S. Augustine, the eye of the soule, or receptacle of Sapience and diuine knowledge, quae amorem sapientiae tanquàm ducem scquitur, Which followeth after the loue of sapience as her guide (saith Philo ) betweene which and reason, betweene which and the minde, called anima, betweene which and that power which the La∣tines call animus, there is this difference. Reason is that facultie by which wee iudge and discourse; Anima, by which we liue. Hereof it is said, Anima corpus animat, id est, viuificat; anima, or the soule is that which doth animate the body, that is, giueth it life: for death is the separation of body and soule; and the same strength (sayth Philo ) which God the great Director hath in the World, the same hath this Anima, or mind, or soule in man. Animus, is that, by which wee will and make election; and to this Basil agreeth, which calleth this Mens, or diuine vnderstanding, perspicacem animae par∣tem, the perceiuing part of the minde, or the light by which the Soule discerneth: dor∣mientium mens, non anima, sopitur, & in furiosis mens extinguitur, anima manet, In men that sleep it is this (mens) or vnderstanding, and not the minde or soule, which resteth, during which time it is but habituall in wise men, and in mad men this (mens) is extinguished, and not the Soule: for mad men doe liue, though distract. Therefore this word being often vsed for the Soule giuing life, is attributed abu∣siuely to mad men, when wee say that they are of a distract minde, in stead of a bro∣ken vnderstanding, which word (mind) we vse also for opinion, as, I am of this mind, or that minde: and sometimes for mens conditions or vertues, as, hee is of an honest minde, or, a man of a iust minde: sometimes for affection, as I doe this for my mindes sake; and Aristotle sometimes vseth this word ( Mens ) for the phantasie, which is the strength of the imagination: sometimes for the knowledge of principles, which we haue without discourse: oftentimes for Spirits, Angels and Intelligences: but as it is vsed in the proper signification, including both the vnderstanding agent & possible, it is described to be a pure, simple, substantiall act, not depending vpon matter, but hauing relation to that, which is intelligible, as to his first obiect: or more at large thus; a part or particle of the Soule, whereby it doth vnderstand, not depending vpon matter, nor needing any organ, free from passion comming from without, and apt to bee disseuered, as, eternall from that which is mortall. Hereof excellently MERCVRIVS: Anima est imago mentis, mens imago Dei. Deus menti praeest, animae, anima corpori; The Soule (meaning that which giueth life) is the Image of this vnder∣standing, or Mens, and this (Mens) or vnderstanding is the Image of God. God is Presi∣dent or Ruler ouer this vnderstanding, this vnderstanding ouer the Soule, and this Soule o∣uer the bodie. This diuision and distinction out of the Platonikes and Peripatetikes, I Lib. 9. cap. 5 leaue to the Reader to iudge of. That, Mens humana hath no need of any organ, Marsilius Ficinus in his ninth Booke of the Soules immortalitie laboureth to proue. . de . Dei. . 3. lib. 1. cap. 2. Zanchius doth not differ from Ficinus in words, for (sayth hee) ad facultatem intelli∣gentem exercendam non eget Mens organo, tanquàm medio, per quod intelligat, quanquàm eget obiecto in quod intueatur, & ex quo intellectionem concipiat: hoc autem obiectum sunt phantasmata, seùrerum à sensibus perceptarum simulachra ad phantasiam prolata, To exer∣cise the facultie of vnderstanding, the mind of man (sayth hee) needeth no instrument, as a meane, by which it may vnderstand: but it needeth an obiect, whereon to looke, and whence to conceiue the act of vnderstanding. This obiect are the phantasmes, or the resemblances of things receiued from the sense, and carried to the phantasie: But in effect his conclusion seemeth to carry a contrarie sense, when he maketh the Phantasie, in representing the obiect to the vnderstanding, to be a corporall Organum; neither can it be vnderstood to be an Organum of any thing; but of the vnderstanding. And he addeth that the re∣semblance of things in mans imagination, are to his vnderstanding and minde, as colours are to the sight: whence it so followeth, that the imagination or phantasie it selfe is to the facultie of vnderstanding, as the eye is to the facultie of seeing, and as this is an Organum: so that. Of this question, How the Mind in all her actions maketh vse of the body, and hath communion with the body, I referre the Reader to a most Pag. 185. & se∣quent. graue and learned Discourse in the last Reply of Master Doctor Bilson, late Bishop of Winchester, vnto Henry Iacob. Howsoeuer the Truth be determined, wee mnst con∣clude, that it is neither in respect of reason alone, by which wee discourse, nor in re∣spect of the minde it selfe, by which we liue, nor in respect of our soules simply, by which we are immortall, that we are made after the Image of God. But most safely may wee resemble our selues to God, in mente, and in respect of that pure facultie which is neuer separate from the contemplation and loue of God. Yet this is not all. For Saint Bernard maketh a true difference betweene the nature and faculties of the Ad imaginem Dei il∣lum, id est, sapi∣entiae, , com∣potem, qui intuitus Creato∣rem suum, at{que} imita∣ri, pro{que} ingenij, pro{que} , sibi ratione . Exana. Minde or Soule, and betweene the infusion of qualities, endowments and gifts of grace, wherewith it is adorned and enriched, which, being added to the nature, es∣sence, and faculties, maketh it altogether to be after the Image of God, whose words are these: Non proptereà imago Dei est, quia sui meminit Mens, se{que} intelligit & diligit (which was also the opinion of Saint AVGVSTINE) sed quia potest meminisse, intellige∣reac diligere eum à quo facta est, (that is) The minde (or Mens ) was not therefore the Image of God, because it remembreth, vnderstandeth, and loueth it selfe, but because it can re∣member, vnderstand, and loue God, who created it. And, that this Image may bee defor∣med and made vnprofitable, heare BASIL: Homo ad imaginem & similitudinem Dei factus est, peccatum verò imaginis pulchritudinem deformauit: & inutilem reddidit, dum animam corruptis concupiscentiae affectibus immersit: Man was made after the Image and similitude of GOD, but Sinne hath deformed the beautie of this Image, and made it vnprofitable by drawing our minds into corrupt concupiscence. It is not therefore (as aforesaid) by reason of Immortalitie, nor in Reason, nor in Dominion, nor in any one of these by it selfe, nor in all these ioyned, by any of which, or by all which wee resemble, or may be called the shadow of God, though by reason and vnderstanding, with the other faculties of the Soule, we are made ca∣pable of this print; but chiefly, in respect of the habit of Originall righteousnesse, most perfectly infused by God into the mind and Soule of man in his first Creation. For it is not by nature, nor by her liberalitie, that wee were printed with the of Gods Image (though Reason may be said to be of her gift, which ioyned to the soule is a part of the Essentiall constitution of our proper Species ) but from the bountifull grace of the Lord of all goodnesse, who breathed life into Earth, and contriued within the Truncke of Dust and Clay, the inimitable habilitie of his owne Iustice, Pietie, and Righteousnesse. So long therefore (for that resemblance which Dominion hath) doe those that are powerfull retaine the Image of God, as acording to his Commandements they exercise the Office or Magistracy to which they are called, and sincerely walke in the wayes of God, which in the Scriptures is called, walking with God; and all other men Gen. 5. 22. so long retaine this Image, as they feare, loue, and serue God truely, (that is) for the loue of God alone, and do not bruise and deface his Seale by the waight of manifold and voluntary offences, and obstinate sinnes. For the vniust minde cannot bee after the Image of God, seeing God is Iustice it selfe; The bloud-thirstie hath it not; for God is Charitie, and mercie it selfe: Falshood, cunning practice, and ambition, are properties of Sathan; and therefore cannot dwell in one soule, together with GOD; and to bee short, there is no likelihood betweene pure light and blacke darkenesse, 2. Cor. 6. . betweene beautie and deformitie, or betweene righteousnesse and reprobation. And though Nature, according to common vnderstanding, haue made vs capable by the power of reason, and apt enough to receiue this Image of Gods goodnesse, which the sensuall soules of beasts cannot perceiue; yet were that aptitude naturall more inclinable to follow and imbrace the false and durelesse pleasures of this Stage-play World, then to become the shadow of God by walking after him, had not the ex∣ceeding workmanship of Gods wisedome, and the liberalitie of his mercy, formed eyes to our soules, as to our bodies, which, piercing through the impuritie of our flesh, behold the Highest Heauens, and thence bring Knowledge and Obiect to the Mind and Soule, to contemplate the euer-during glory, and termelesseioy, prepared for those, which retaine the Image and similitude of their Creatour, preseruing vn∣defiled and vnrent the garment of the new man, which, after the Image of GOD, is created in Righteousnesse, and true Holinesse, as saith Saint Paul. Now, whereas it is 2. Cor. 3. 9. S. Ambrose. thought by some of the Fathers, as by Saint Augustine, with whom Saint Ambrose ioyneth, that, by sinne, the perfection of the Image is lost, and not the Image it selfe; both opinions by this distinction may be well reconciled (to wit) that the Image of God, in man, may be taken two wayes; for eyther it is considered, according to na∣turall gifts, and consisteth therein: namely to haue a reasonable and vnderstanding nature, &c. and in this sense, the Image of God is more lost by sinne, then the very reasonable or vnderstanding nature, &c. is lost: (or sinne doth not abolish and take away these naturall gifts) or, the Image of God is considered, according to superna∣turall gifts, namely, of Diuine grace, and heauenly glory, which is indeed the perfe∣ction and accomplishment of the naturall Image; and this manner of similitude and Image of God, is wholly blotted out and destroyed by sinne. §. III. Of our base and fraile bodies: and that the care thereof should yeeld to the immortall Soule. THE externall man God formed out of the dust of the Earth, or accor∣ding to the signification of the word, Adam of Adamath, of red Earth, or, ex limo terrae, out of the slime of the Earth, or a mixed matter of Earth and Water. Non ex qualibet humo, sed ex ghaphar adamath (idest) ex Arias Mont. de . f. 156. pinguissima & mollissima: Not that God made an Image or Statue of Clay, but out of Clay, Earth or dust God formed and made flesh, bloud, and bone, with all parts of man. That Man was formed of Earth and Dust, did Abraham acknowledge, when in humble feare he called vnto God, to saue Sodome: Let not my Lord now be angry, if I Gen. 18. 27. speake, I, that am but dust and ashes: Andin these houses of Clay, whose foundation is in Iob. 4. v. 27. the dust, doe our soules inhabite, according to Iob, and though our owne eyes doe euery∣where behold the sudden and resistlesse assaults of Death, and Nature assureth vs by neuer-failing experience, and Reason by infallible demonstration, that our times vpon the Earth haue neither certaintie nor durabilitie, that our Bodies are but the Anduiles of paine and diseases, and our Minds the Hiues of vnnumbred cares, sor∣rowes, and passions: and that (when we are most glorified) wee are but those pain∣ted posts, against which Enuie and Fortune direct their Darts; yet such is the true vn∣happinesse of our condition, and the darke ignorance, which couereth the eyes of our vnderstanding, that wee only prize, pamper, and exalt this Vassall and Slaue of Death, and forget altogether (or only remember at our cast-away leisure) the impri∣soned immortall Soule, which can neyther dye with the Reprobate, nor perish with the mortall parts of vertuous men: seeing Gods Iustice in the one, and his goodnesse in the other is exercised for euermore, as the euer-liuing subiects of his reward and punishment. But when is it that we examine this great accompt? neuer while wee haue one vanitie left vs to spend: we plead for Titles, till our breath faile vs; digge for Riches, while our strength enableth vs; exercise malice, while wee can reuenge; and then, when Time hath beaten from vs both youth, pleasure, and health, and that nature it selfe hateth the house of old age, we remember with Iob, that wee must goe the Iob. 10. 21. 17. 13. way from whence we shall not returne, and that our bed is made ready for vs in the darke; And then I say, looking ouer-late into the bottome of our conscience (which Pleasure and Ambition had locked vp from vs all our liues, we behold therein the feareful Images of our actions past, and withall, this terrible inscription: That God will bring euerie Eccl. 12. 14. worke into iudgement, that man hath done vnder the Sunne. But what examples haue euer moued vs? what perswasions reformeds vs? or what threatnings made vs afraid? we behold other mens Tragedies plaid before vs, wee heare what is promised and threatned: but the worlds bright glorie hath put out the eyes of our minds; and these betraying lights, (with which we only see) doe neither looke vp towards termelesse ioyes, nor downe towards endlesse sorrowes, till wee neither know, nor can looke for any thing else, at the worlds hands. Of which ex∣cellently Marius Victor. Nil hostes, nil dira fames, nil deni{que} morbi Egerunt, fuimus, qui nunc , ijs{que} periclis Tentati, nihilo meliores reddimur vnquam, Sub vitijs nullo culparum fine manentes. Diseases, famine, enemies, in vs no change haue wrought, What erst we were, we are; still in the same snare caught: No time can our corrupted manners mend, In Vice we dwell, in Sinne that hath no end. But let vs not flatter our immortall soules herein: for to neglect God all our liues, and know that we neglect him, to offend God voluntarily, and know that we offend him, casting our hopes on the Peace, which we trust to make at parting, is no other then a rebellious presumption, and (that which is the worst of all) euen a contemp∣tuous laughing to scorne, and deriding of God, his Lawes and Precepts. Frustrà sperant, qui sic de misericordia Dei sibi blandiuntur; They hope in vaine, sayth BERNARD, Bern. in Ps. Qui habitat. which in this sort flatter themselues with Gods mercie. §. IIII. Of the Spirit of life, which God breathed into man, in his Creation. IN this frame and carcasse God breathed the breath of life; and the man was a liuing soule: (that is) God gaue to a Body of earth and of cor∣ruptible matter, a Soule spirituall and incorruptible; not that GOD had any such bodily instruments as men vse, but God breathed the Spirit of life and immortalitie into man, as he breatheth his grace daily into such as loue and feare him. The Spirit of God (saith ELIHV in IOB) hath made Iob. 33. 4. me, and the breath of the Almightie hath giuen me life: In qua sententia (saith RABANVS) vitanda est paupertas sensus carnalis, nè forte putemus Deum, vel manibus corporeis de li∣mo formasse corpus hominis, vel faucibus aut labijs suis inspirâsse in faciem formati, vt viue∣re possit, & spiraculum vitae habere: Nam & Propheta cùm ait, Manus tuae fecerunt me, &c. Tropica hac locutione magis quàm propria, (idest) iuxta consuetudinem, qua solent homiues operari, loquutus est: In which sentence (saith he) the beggerlinesse of carnall sense is to bee auoided, lest perhaps we should thinke, eyther that God with bodily hands made mans body of slime, or breathed with iawes or lips vpon his face (bèing formed) that hee might liue, and haue the spirit of life: for the Prophet also when he saith; Thy hands haue made me, spake this Tropically, rather then properly (that is) according to the custome which men vse in wor∣king. Quantum est periculi hijs, qui Scriptur as sensu corporeo legunt? In what danger are they that read the Scriptures in a carnall sense? By this breath was infused into man both life and soule; and therefore this (Soule) the Philosophers call Animam, quae corpus, & animat, Which doth animate, & giue life to the body. The inspiration of the Almigh∣ty giueth vnder standing, saith Iob; and this spirit, which God breathed into man, which is the reasonable soule of man, returneth againe to God that gaue it, as the body retur∣neth vnto the Earth, out of which it was taken, according to Ecclesiastes: And dust shall returne to the Earth, out of which it was taken, and the spirit shall returne to God that gaue Eccles. 12. 7. it. Neither is this word (spirit) vsually otherwise taken in the Scriptures, then for the soule; as when Stephen cryed vnto God: Domine, suscipe spiritum meum; Lord Iesus, Acts 7. 59. receiue my spirit: and in Saint IOHN, And Iesus bowed his head, and gaue vp the Ghost, Ioh. 19. 30. or spirit, (which was) that his life and soule left his body dead. And that the immor∣tall soule of man differeth from the soules of beasts, the manner of the creation ma∣keth it manifest: for it is written, Let the waters bring forth in aboundance euery creeping Gen. 1. 20. thing, and let the Earth bring forth the liuing thing, according to his kind, the beast of the 24. Earth, &c. But of Man it is written, Let vs make man in our owne Image, &c. and fur∣ther, 26. that the Lord breathed in his face the breath of life. Wherefore, as from the Wa∣ter Gen. 2. 7. and Earth were those creatures brought forth, and thence receiued life: so shall they againe be dissolued into the same first matter, whence they were taken: but the life of breath euerlasting, which God breathed into man, shall according to Eccle∣siastes, Eccl. 12. 7. returne againe to God that gaue it, §. V. That man is (as it were) a little World: with a digression touching our mortalitie. MAN, thus compounded and formed by God, was an abstract or modell, or briefe Storie of the Vniuersall: in whom God concluded the Crea∣tion, and worke of the World, and whom he made the last and most ex∣cellent of his Creatures, being internally endued with a diuine vnder∣standing, by which he might contemplate and serue his Creatour, after whose Image hee was formed, and endued with the powers and faculties of reason and other abilities, that thereby also he might gouerne and rule the World, and all other Gods creatures therein. And whereas GOD created three sorts of liuing na∣tures, (to wit) Angelicall, Rationall, and Brutall; giuing to Angels an intellectuall, and to Beasts a sensuall nature, hee vouchsafed vnto Man, both the intellectuall of Angels, the sensitiue of Beasts, and the proper rationall belonging vnto man; and therefore (saith GREGORY NAZIANZENE:) Homo est vtrius{que} naturae vinculum, Man is the bond and chaine which tyeth together both natures: and because in the little frame of Arist. Phys. lib. 8. cap. 2. 1. 17. f. mans body there is a representation of the Vniuersall, and (by allusion) a kind of par∣ticipation of all the parts thereof, therefore was man called Microcosmos, or the little Greg. Nazianz. Epist. World. Deus igitur hominem factum, velut alterum quendam mundum, in breui magnum, at{que} exiguo totum, interris statuit, God therefore placed in the Earth the man whom bee had crea. ura, & & terra. made, as it were another World, the great and large World in the small and little World: for out of the Earth and Dust was formed the flesh of Man, and therefore heauie and Aug. l. qu. 83. 4. 67. retr. l. 1. c. 2. lumpish; the bones of his body wee may compare to the hard Rockes and Stones, and therefore strong and durable; of which Ouid: Inde genus durum sumus, experiens{que} laborum, Ouid Met. l. 1. Et documenta damus, qua simus origine nati: From thence our kind hard-hearted is, enduring paine and care, Approuing, that our bodies of a stonie nature are. His bloud, which disperseth it selfe by the branches of veines through all the bo∣die, may be resembled to those waters, which are carried by brookes and riuers ouer all the Earth; his breath to the Aire, his naturall heate to the inclosed warmth, which the Earth hath in it selfe, which stirred vp by the heate of the Sunne, assisteth Nature in the speedier procreation of those varieties, which the Earth bringeth forth; Our radicall moisture, Oile, or Balsamum (whereon the naturall heat feedeth and is main∣tained) is resembled to the fat and fertilitie of the Earth; the haires of mans bodie, which adornes or ouer-shadowes it, to the grasse, which couereth the vpper face and skin of the Earth; our generatiue power, to Nature, which produceth all things; our determinations, to the light, wandring and vnstable clouds, carried euery where with vncertaine winds; our eies, to the light of the Sun and Moone, and the beauty of our youth, to the flowers of the Spring, which, either in a very short time, or with the Suns heat dry vp, and wither away, or the fierce puffes of wind blow them from the stalkes; the thoughts of our mind, to the motion of Angels; and our pure vnderstan∣ding (formerly called Mens, and that which alwaies looketh vpwards) to those intel∣lectuall natures, which are alwaies present with God; and lastly, our immortall soules while they are righteous) are by God himselfe beautified with the title of his owne Image and similitude: And although, in respect of God, there is no man iust, or good, or righteous: for in Angelis deprehensa est stultitia, Behold, hee found folly in his Angels, Iob. 4. 18. (saith Iob ) yet with such a kind of difference, as there is betweene the substance, and the shadow, there may bee found a goodnesse in man: which God being pleased to accept, hath therefore called man, the Image and similitude of his own righteousnes. In this also is the little World of man compared, and made more like the Vniuersall (man being the measure of all things; Homo est mensura omnium rerum, saith Aristotle Arist. 10. Me∣taph. c. 1. f. and Pythagoras ) that the foure Complexions resemble the foure Elements, and the seuen Ages of man the seuen Planets: Whereof our Infancie is compared to the Moone, in which wee seeme onely to liue and grow, as Plants; the second Age Mercurie, wherein we are taught and instructed; our third Age to Venus, the dayes of , desire, and vanitie; the fourth to the Sunne, the strong, flourishing, and beauti∣full age of mans life; the fifth to Mars, in which we seeke honor and victorie, and in which our thoughts trauaile to ambitious ends; the sixth Age is ascribed to Iupiter, in which we begin to take accompt of our times, iudge of our felues, and grow to the perfection of our vnderstanding; the last and seuenth to Saturne, wherein our dayes are sad and ouer-cast, and in which we finde by deare and lamentable experience, and by the losse which can neuer be repayred, that of all our vaine passions and affe∣ctions past, the sorrow only abideth: Our attendants are sicknesses, and variable in∣firmities; and by how much the more we are accompanied with plentie, by so much the more greedily is our end desired, whom when Time hath made vnsociable to others, we become a burthen to our selues: being of no other vse, then to hold the riches we haue, from our Successors. In this time it is, when (as aforesaid) we, for the most part, and neuer before, prepare for our eternall habitation, which we passe on vnto, with many sighes, grones, and sad thoughts, and in the end, by the worke∣manship of death, finish the sorrowfull businesse of a wretched life, towards which we alwayes trauaile both sleeping and waking: neither haue those beloued compa∣nions of honor and riches any power at all, to hold vs any one day, by the promises of glorious entertainments; but by what crooked path soeuer we walke, the same leadeth on directly to the house of death: whose dores lye open at all houres, and to all persons. For this tyde of mans life, after it once turneth and declineth, euer run∣neth with a perpetuall Ebbe and falling Streame, but neuer floweth againe: our Leafe once fallen, springeth no more, neither doth the Sunne or the Summer adorne vs againe, with the garments of new Leaues and Flowers. Redditur arboribus florens , Ergo non homini, quod fuit ante, redit. To which I giue this sense, The plants and trees made poore and old By Winter enuious, The Spring-time bounteous Couers againe, from shame and cold: But neuer Man repayr'd againe His youth and beautie lost, Though arte, and care, and cost, Doe promise Natures helpe in vaine. And of which CATVLLVS, EPIGRAM. 53. Soles occidere & redire possunt: Nobis cùm semel occidit breuis lux, Nox est vna dormienda. The Sunne may set and rise: But we contrariwise Sleepe after our short light One euerlasting night. For if there were any bayting place, or rest, in the course or race of mans life, then, according to the doctrine of the Academickes, the same might also perpetually maintayned; but as there is a continuance of motion in naturall liuing things, and as the sap and iuyce, wherein the life of Plants is preserued, doth euermore ascend or descend: so is it with the life of man, which is alwayes either encreasing towards ripenesse and perfection, or declining and decreasing towards rottennesse and dis∣solution. §. VI. Of the free power, which man had in his first creation, to dispose of himselfe. THese be the miseries which our first Parents brought on all mankinde, vnto whom God in his creation gaue a free and vnconstrayned will, and on whom he bestowed the liberall choice of all things, with one only prohibition, to trie his gratitude and obedience. God set before him, a mortall and immortall Life, a Nature celestiall and terrene, and (indeed) God gaue man to himselfe, to be his owne guide, his owne workeman, and his owne painter, that he might frame or describe vnto himselfe what he pleased, and make election of his owne forme. God made man in the beginning (saith SIRACIDES) Eccles. 15. 14. and left him in the hands of his owne counsaile. Such was the liberalitie of God, and mans felicitie: whereas beasts, and all other creatures reasonlesse brought with them into the world (saith Lucilius ) and that euen when they first fell from the bodies of their Dammes, the nature, which they could not change; and the supernall Spirits or Angels were from the beginning, or soone after, of that condition, in which they re∣maine in perpetuall eternitie. But (as aforesaid) God gaue vnto man all kinde of seedes and grafts of life (to wit) the vegetatiue life of Plants, the sensuall of Beasts, the rationall of Man, and the intellectuall of Angels, wherof which he tooke pleasure to plant and cultiue, the same should futurely grow in him, and bring forth fruit, agreeable to his owne choice and plantation. This freedome of the firstman Adam, and our first Father, was aenigmatically described by Asclepius Atheniensis (saith Mirandula ) in the person and fable of Proteus, who was said, as often as he pleased, to change his shape. To the same end were all those celebrated Metamor∣phoses among the Pythagorians, and ancient Poets, wherein it was fayned, that men were transformed into diuers shapes of beasts, thereby to shew the change of mens conditions, from Reason to Brutalitie, from Vertue to Vice, from Meeknesse to Cru∣eltie, and from Iustice to Oppression. For by the liuely image of other creatures did those Ancients represent the variable passions, and affections of mortall men; as by Serpents, were signified Deceiuers; by Lyons, Oppressors, and cruell men; by Swine, Men giuen ouer to lust and sensualitie; by Wolues, rauening and greedie Men; which also S. Matthew resembleth to false prophets, Which come to you in Matth. 7. 15. sheepes clothing, but inwardly they are rauening Wolues, by the images of stones and stocks, foolish and ignorant men, by Vipers, vngratefull men: of which S. IOHN Matth. 3. 7. BAPTIST, O yee generation of Vipers, &c. §. VII. Of Gods ceasing to create any more: and of the cause thereof, because the Vniuersall created was exceeding good. IN this worke of Man, God finished the creation; not that God laboured as a man, and therefore rested: for God commanded, and it was finish∣ed, Cui voluisse est fecisse; With whom, to will is to make, saith Beda. Nei∣ther did God so rest, that he left the world made, and the creatures therein to themselues: for my Father worketh to this day (saith Christ ) and I worke; but Iohn 5. 17. God rested (that is) he created no new species or kindes of creatures, but (as afore∣said) gaue vnto man a power generatiue, and so to the rest of liuing creatures, and to Plants and Flowers their seedes in themselues; and commanded man to multiply Gen. 1. 28. 22. 24. and fill the earth; and the Earth and Sea to bring forth creatures according to their seuerall kindes: all which being finished, God saw that his workes were good; not that he fore-knew not, and comprehended not the beginning and end before they were; for God made euery Plant of the field before it was in the Earth, but he gaue to all things which he had created the name of good, thereby to teach men, that from so good a God there was nothing made, but that which was perfect good, and from whose simple puritie and from so excellent a cause, there could proceede no impureor imperfect effect. For man hauing a free will and liberall choyce, pur∣chased by disobedience his owne death and mortalitie, and for the crueltie of mans heart, was the earth afterward cursed, and all creatures of the first age destroied: but the righteous man Noah, and his familie, with those creatures which the Arke con∣tayned, reserued by God to replenish the earth. CHAP. III. Of the place of Paradise. §. I. That the seate of Paradise is greatly mistaken: and that it is no maruaile that men should erre. CONCERNING the first habitation of man we reade, that the Lord God planted a Garden, Eastward, in Eden, and there he put the man whom he made, GEN. 2. 6. Of this seate and place of Paradise, all ages haue held dispute; and the opinions and iudgements haue been in effect, as diuers, among those that haue written vp∣on this part of Genesis, as vpon any one place therein, seeming most obscure: some there are, that haue con∣ceiued the being of the terrestriall Paradise, without all regard of the worlds Geographie, and without any respect of East and West, or any consideration of the place where Moses wrote, and from whence he directed (by the quarters of the hea∣uens) the way how to finde out and iudge, in what Region of the world this garden was by God planted, wherein he was exceeding respectiue and precise. Others, by being themselues ignorant in the Hebrew, followed the first interpretation, or tru∣sting to their owne iudgements, vnderstood one place for another; and one error is so fruitfull, as it begetteth a thousand Children, if the licentiousnesse thereof be not timely restrayned. And thirdly, those Writers which gaue themselues to follow and imitate others, were in all things so obseruant Sectators of those Masters, whom they admired and beleeued in, as they thought it safer to condemne their owne vn∣derstanding, then to examine theirs. For (saith Vadianus in his Epistle of Paradise ) Magnos errores (magnorum virorum auctoritate persuasi) transmittimus; We passe ouer many grosse errors, by the authoritie of great men led and perswaded. And it is true, that many of the Fathers were farre wide from the vnderstanding of this place. I speake it not, that I my selfe dare presume to censure them, for I reuerence both their learning and their pietie, and yet not bound to follow them any further, then they are guided by truth: for they were men; Et humanum est errare. And to the end that no man should be proude of himselfe, God hath distributed vnto men such a proportion of knowledge, as the wisest may behold in themselues their owne weak∣nesse: Nulli vnquam dedit omnid Deus; God neuer gaue the knowledge of all things to any 2. Cor. 12. . one. S. Paul confest that he knew not, whether he were taken vp into the third hea∣uen in the flesh, or out of the flesh; and Christ himselfe acknowledgeth thus much, Matt. 24. 36. that neither Men, nor Angels knew of the latter day; and therefore, seeing know∣ledge is infinite, it is God (according to S. Iude ) who is only wise. Sapientia vbt ? Jude Ep. v. 27. Job 28. 12. (saith IOB) but where is wisedome found? and where is the place of vnderstan∣ding? 13. man knoweth not the price thereof, for it is not found in the Land of the liuing. And 4. 18. therefore seeing God found folly in his Angels, mens iudgements (which inhabite in houses of clay) cannot be without their mistakings: and so the Fathers, and other learned men excusable in particulars, especially in those whereupon our saluation dependeth not. §. II. A recitall of strange opinions, touching Paradise. NOw as touching Paradise, first it is to be enquired, whether there were a Paradise, or no? or whether Moses description were altogether mysti∣call, and allegoricall? as Origen, Philo, Fran. Georgius, with others haue affirmed, and that vnder the names of those foure Riuers, Pison, Gehon, Hidekel, and Perath. The tree of life, and the tree of Knowledge, there were deliuered vnto vs other mysteries and significations; as, that by the foure Riuers were meant the foure Cardinall vertues, Iustice, Temperance, Fortitude, and Prudence, . sem. 2. l. 1. 143. or (by other) Oyle, Wine, Milke, and Honny. This Allegoricall vnderstanding of Paradise by Origen diuulged, was againe by Franciscus Georgius receiued (saith Sixtus Senensis ) whose friuolous imaginations Sixtus himselfe doth fully and learnedly an∣swere, in the 34. Annotation of his fift Booke, fol. 338. the last Edition. S. Ambrose also leaned wholly to the Allegoricall construction, and set Paradise in Amb. de Parad. the third heauen, and in the vertues of the minde, & in nostro principali, which is, as I conceiue it in mente, or in our soules: to the particulars whereof he alludeth in this sort. By the place or garden of Paradise, was meant the soule or minde; by Adam, Mens, or Vnderstanding; by Eue, the Sense; by the Serpent, Delectation; by the Tree of good and euill, Sapience; and by the rest of the Trees, the vertues of the minde, or in the minde planted, or from thence springing. Notwithstanding all which, vpon the first of the Corinthians, cap. 6. he in direct wordes alloweth both of a celestiall and terrestriall Paradise; the one, into which S. Paul was rapt; the other, into which Adam was put by God. Aug. Chrysamensis was of opinion, that a Paradise had beene, but that there was not now any marke thereof on the earth: the same being not onely defaced, but withall the places now not so much as existing. To which Luther seemeth to adhere. The Manichees also vnderstood, that by Paradise was meant the whole Earth; to which opinion Vadianus inclineth, as I conceiue his wordes in two seuerall places. First, vpon this: Fill the earth, GEN. 10. Of which he giueth this iudgement. Hoc ipso etiam quod dixit, Replete terram, dominamini vniuersis animantibus, subijcite terram, docet, totam terram extantem, & omnigenis (vt tum er at) fructibus consitam, sedem & hortum illud AD ae, & posteritatis futurae fuisse; These wordes (saith he) in which God said, Bring forth fruit and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and rule ouer e∣uery creature, doe cleerely shew, that the Vniuersall earth set or filled with all sorts of fruits (as then it was) was the garden and seate of ADAM, and of his future posteritie. And afterward he acknowledgeth the place, out of the Acts the 17. Apostolus ex vno san∣guine Vers. 26. omne genus humanum adeò factum docet, vt habitarent super vniuersam facicm ter∣rae: tota igitur terra Paradisus ille er at; The Apostle (saith he) teacheth, that God hath made of one bloud all mankinde, to dwell ouer all the face of the earth: and theresore all the earth (saith he) was that Paradise. Which coniectures I will answere in order. Goropius Becanus differeth not much from this opinion, but yet he acknowledgeth that Adam was first planted by God in one certaine place, and peculiar Garden; which place Goropius findeth neere the Riuer of Acesines, in the confines of India. Tertullian, Bonauenture, and Durandus, make Paradise vnder the , and Postellus, quite contrarie, vnder the North pole: the Chaldaeans also for the most and all their Sectators, followed the opinion of Origen, or rather Origen theirs, would either make Paradise a figure, or Sacrament only, or else would haue it out of this sensible world or raysed into some high and remote Region of the Aire. Strabus, and Rabanus, were both sicke of this vanitie, with Origen, and Philo: so was our venerable Beda, and Pet. Comestor, and Moses Barcephas the Syrian, translated by . Masius. But as Hopkins sayes of Philo Iudaeus, that he wondred, Quo malo genio affla∣tus; By what euill Angell he was blowne vp into this error: so can I not but greatly mar∣uaile at these learned men, who so grosly and blindly wandred; seeing Moses, and after him the Prophets, doe so plainely describe this place, by the Region, in which it was planted, by the Kingdomes and Prouinces bordering it, by the Riuers which watered it, and by the points of the Compasse vpon which it lay, in respect of Iu∣daea, or Canaan. Nouiomagus also, vpon Beda, De naturarerum, beleeueth that all the Earth was ta∣ken for Paradise, and not any one place. For the whole Earth (saith he) hath the same beautie adscribed to Paradise. He addeth, that the Ocean was that Fountayne, from whence the foure Riuers, Pison, Gehon, Tigris, and Euphrates, had their begin∣ning: for he could not thinke it possible, that these Riuers of Ganges, Nilus, Tigris, and Euphrates, (whereof the one ranne through India, the other through Aegypt, and the other two through Mesopotamia and Armenia ) could rise out of one Foun∣tayne, were it not out of the Fountayne of the Ocean. §. III. That there was a true locall Paradise Eastward, in the Countrie of Eden. TO the first therefore, that such a place there was vpon the earth, the words of Moses make it manifest, where it is written, And the Lord God Gen. cap. 2. planted a garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had made. And howsoeuer the vulgar translation, called Hieromes trans∣lation, hath conuerted this place thus, Plantauer at Dominus Deus Para∣disum voluptatis à principio; The Lord God planted a Paradise of pleasure from the begin∣ning; putting the word ( pleasure ) for Eden, and (from the beginning) for Eastward: It is manifest, that in this place Eden is the proper name of a Region. For what sense hath this translation (saith our Hopkins, in his Treatise of Paradise ) that he planted a garden in pleasure, or that a Riuer went out of pleasure to water the garden? But the seuentie Interpreters call it Paradisum Edenis, the Paradise of Eden, and so doth the Chaldaean Paraphrast truely take it for the proper name of a place, and for a Noune appellatiue; which Region in respect of the fertilitie of the soile, of the many beau∣tifull Riuers, and goodly Woods, & that the trees (as in the Indies ) doe alwaies keepe their leaues, was called Eden, which signifieth in the Hebrew, pleasantnesse or delica∣cie, as the Spaniards call the Countrie, opposite to the Isle of Cuba, Florida: and this is the mistaking, which may end the dispute, as touching the double sense of the word, that as Florida was a Countrie, so called for the flourishing beautie thereof, so was Eden a Region called pleasure, or delicacie, for the pleasure, or delicacie: and as Flo∣rida signifieth flourishing: so Eden signifieth pleasure, and yet both are the proper names of Countries; for Eden being the proper name of a Region (called Pleasure in the Hebrew ) and Paradise being the choice seate of all that Region, Paradise was truely the Garden of Eden, and truely the Garden of Pleasure. Now, for Eastward, to translate it, from the beginning, it is also contrarie to the translation of the Seuentie; to the ancient Greeke Fathers, as Basil, Chrysostome, Theo∣doret, Gregorie; and to the Rabbines, as Ramban, Rabbi Salomon, R. Abraham, and Chimchi; and of the Latines, Seuerinus, Damascenus, &c. who plainely take Eden for the proper name of a Region, and set the word ( Eastward ) for ab initio: for Damas∣cens owne wordes are these, Paradisus est locus Dei manibus in Eden ad Orientem mira∣biliter consitus; Paradise is a place, maruailously planted by the hands of God, in Eden, to∣ward the East. And after all these Fathers, Guilhelmus Parisiensis, a great learned man, and Sixtus Senensis, of later times, doe both vnderstand these words of Eden, and of the East, contrarie to the vulgar translation; Parisiensis, as indifferent to both, and Sixtus Se∣nensis, directly against the vulgar: of which these are their owne wordes: After this I will beginne to speake of Paradise terrestriall, which God planted from the beginning, or Eastward, &c. Posthaec incipiam loqui de Paradiso terrestri, quem plant âsse Deum ab initio vel ad Orientem, &c. And then ; MOSES enim prodit, Paradisum à Deo consitum in regione terrae Orientalis, quae dicitur Heden: Heden autem esse proprium nomcn apparet ex quarto capite Gen. vbi legimus CHAM habitâsse ad Orientalem plagam Heden; For MOSES (saith he) doth shew most cleerely, that Paradise was planted of God in a Region of the East Countrie, which is called Heden: but that Heden is a proper name, it appeareth by the fourth Chapter of Genesis, where we reade, that CHAM dwelt on the Vers. 16. East border of Heden. PERERIVS endeuoureth to qualifie this translation: for this particle (saith he) ab initio, is referred to all the time of the creation, and not to the Iohn 8. 44. very first day; alleaging this place of Christ, that although the Deuill was said to be a man-slayer from the beginning, yet that was meant but after the sixth day. But surely, as I thinke (referring my selfe to better iudgement) the Deuill was from the instant of his fall a man-slayer in disposition, though he had not whereon to practise till mans creation. And for conclusion, S. Hierome (if that be his translation) adui∣seth himselfe better in the end of the third Chapter of Genesis, conuerting the word Gen. 3. 24. (Eden) by (ante) and not (à principio) as, God did set a Cherubin before the Garden of Eden; Collocauit Deus ante Paradisum is Cherubin; and Pererius himselfe ac∣knowledgeth, that this is the true sense of this place, precisely taken, according to the Hebrew. Posuit à parte Orientali horti Heden, Cherubin; He set on the East-side of the Garden of Heden, Cherubin. BECANVS affirmeth, that the Hebrew word (Be) sig∣nifieth (with) aswell as (in) and so the Text beareth this sense; That God planted a Garden with pleasure (that is to say) full of pleasure. But Becanus followeth this construction, only to the end, to finde Paradise vpon the Riuer of Acesines: for there he hath heard of the Indian Fig-tree in great abundance, which he supposeth to be the tree of knowledge of good, and euill, and would therefore draw Paradise to the Fig-tree: which conceit of his I will answere hereafter. Now, because Paradise was seated by Moses toward the East, thence came the cu∣stome of praying toward the East, and not by imitation of the Chaldaeans: and there∣fore all our Churches are built East and West, as to the point where the Sunne riseth in March, which is directly ouer Paradise (saith Damascenus: ) affirming, that we al∣wayes pray towards the East, as looking towards Paradise, whence we were cast out; and yet the Temple of Salomon had their Priests and Sacrifices, which turned them∣selues in their seruice and diuine ceremonies, alwayes toward the West, thereby to auoid the superstition of the Aegyptians and Chaldaeans. But because East and West are but in respect of places; (for although Paradise were East from , yet it was West from Persiae ) and the seruing of God is euery where in the world, the matter is not great which way we turne our faces, so our hearts stand right, other than this, that we who dwell West from Paradise, and pray turning our selues towards the East, may remember thereby to beseech God, that as by Adams fall we haue lost the Paradise on Earth: so by Christs death and passion we may be made partakers of the Paradise celestiall, and the Kingdome of Heauen. To conclude, I conceiue, that there was no other mysterie in adding the word (East) to Eden by Moses, then to shew, that the Region of Eden, in which Paradise was, lay Eastward from Iudaea and Canaan: for the Scriptures alwayes called the people of those Nations, the Sonnes of the East, which inhabited Arabia, Mesopotamia, , and Persia: of which Ouid: Eurus ad Auroram, Nabataea{que} regna recessit, Persida{que} & radijsiuga subdita matutinis. The East wind with Aurora hath abiding Among th' Arabian, and the Persian Hils, Whom Phoebus first salutes at his vp-rising. And if it be obiected, that Hieremie the Prophet threatning the destruction of Hierusalem, doth often make mention of Northerne Nations, it is to bee noted, that the North is there named, in respect of those Nations that followed Nabuchodonosor, and of whom the greatest part of his Armie was compounded; not that it selfe stood North from Hierusalem, though inclining from the East toward the North. Now to the difference of this Translation, Peter Comestor giueth best satisfaction: for he vseth the word, From the beginning, that is, from the first part of the World, (à principio) id est (sayth hee) à prima orbis parte, and afterward hee affirmeth, that (à principio, and ad Orientem) haue the same signification; From the beginning and East∣ward is all one, à principio idem est quod ad Orientem. But to returne to the proofe of this place, and that this Story of Mankind was not Allegoricall, it followeth in the Text of the second Chapter and ninth Verse in these words: For out of the ground made the Lord God to grow euery Tree pleasant to the sight, and good for meate, &c. so as first it appeared that God created Adam elsewhere, as in the World at large, and then, put him into the Garden: and the end why, is exprest: that hee might dresse it and keepe it; Paradise being a Garden or Orchard filled with Verse 18. Plants, and Trees, of the most excellent kinds, pleasant to behold, and (withall) good for meate: which proueth that Paradise was a terrestriall Garden, garnished with Fruits, delighting both the eye and taste. And to make it more plaine, and to take a∣way all opinion of Allegoricall construction, hee affirmeth that it was watered and beautified with a Riuer; expressing also the Region, out of which this Riuer sprang, Verse 10. which he calleth Heden; and that Heden is also a Countrie neere vnto Charan in Me∣sopotamia, Ezech. c. 27. 23. Ezechiel witnesseth. But to all these Cabalists, which draw the Truth and Story of the Scriptures into Allegories, Epiphanius answereth in these wordes: Si Paradisus non est sensibilis, non est etiam fons, sinon est fons, non est flumen, sinon est flumen, non sunt quatuor principia, non Pison, non Gehon, non Tigris, nec , non est ficus, non folia, non comedit EVA de arbore, non est ADAM, non sunt homines, sed veritas iam fabula est, & omnia ad Allego∣rias reuocantur: If Paradise be not sensible, then there was no fountaine, and then no Ri∣uer, if no Riuer, then no such soure heads or branches, and then not any such Riuer as Pison, or Gehon, Tigris, or Euphrates, no such Fig-tree, or fruit, or leaues, EVE then did not eat of the fruit, neither was there any ADAM, or any man, the truth was but a Fable, and all things estee∣med are called backe into Allegories. Words to the same effect hath Saint Hierome vpon DANIEL: Contice scant eorum deliramenta, qui vmbr as & imagines in veritate sequentes, ipsam conantur euertere veritatem, vt Paradisum & flumina, & arbores patent Allegoriae Legibus se debere subruere, Let the dotages of them bee silent, who following shadowes and Images in the Truth, endeuour to subuert the Truth it selfe, and thinke that they ought to bring Paradise, and the Riuers and the Trees vnder the rules of Allegorie. Furthermore, by the continuation and order of the Storie is the place made more manifest. For God gaue Adam free libertie to eate of euery Tree of the Garden, (the Tree of knowledge excepted) which Trees Moses in the ninth verse saith that they were good to eate; meaning the fruit which they bare. Besides, God left all beasts to Adam to be named, which he had formerly made; and these beasts were neither in the third Heauen, nor neere the Circle of the Moone, nor beasts in imagination: for if all these things were Enygmaticall or Mysticall, the same might also bee said of the creation of all things. And Ezechiel speaking of the glory of the Assyrian Kings vseth this speech: All the Trees of Eden, which were in the Garden of God, enuied him, which Ezech. 31. 9. proueth both Eden, and Paradise therein seated to bee terrestriall: for the Prophers made no imaginary comparisons. But Moses wrote plainly, and in a simple stile, fit for the capacities of ignorant men, and he was more large and precise in the description of Paradise, then in any other place of Scripture; of purpose to take away all scruple from the incredulitie of future ages, whom he knew (out of the gift of Prophecie) to be apt to fabulous inuentions, and that if he had not described both the Region and the Riuers, and how it stood from Canaan, many of the vnbeleeing Israelites, and o∣thers after them, would haue misconstrued this Storie of Mankind. And is it likely, there would haue beene so often mention made of Paradise in the Scriptures, if the same had beene an Vtopia? For we find that the Valley, wherein Sodome and Gomorrha stood, (sometimes called Pentapolis, of the fiue principall Cities therein) was be∣fore the destruction (which their vnnaturall sinne purchased) compared to the Para∣dise Gen. 13. 10. of the Lord, and like to the Land of Aegypt toward Zoar; In like manner was Israel resembled to the Paradise of God, before the Babylonians wasted it: which pro∣ueth plainly, that Paradise it selfe exceeded in beautie and fertilitie, and that these places had but a resemblance thereof: being compared to a seat and soyle of farre exceeding excellencie. Besides, whence had Homer his inuention of Alcinous Gardens, as Iustin Martyr noteth, but out of Moses his description of Paradise? Gen. 2. and whence are their prayses of the Elisian fields, but out of the Storie of Paradise? to which also apper∣taine those Verses of the Golden Age in Ouid: Ver erat aeternum, placidi{que} tepentibus aur is Ouid. . l. 1 Mulcebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores. The ioyfull Spring did euer last, And Zephyrus did breed Without the helpe of seed Sweet flowres by his gentle blast. And it is manifest, that Orphus, Linus, Pyndarus, Hesiodus, and Homer, and after him, Ouid, one out of another, and all these together with Pythagor as and Plato, and their Sectatours, did greatly enrich their inuentions, by venting the stolne Treasures of Diuine Letters, altered by prophane additions, and disguised by poeticall con∣uersions, as if they had beene conceiued out of their owne speculations and con∣templations. But besides all these testimonies, if we find what Region Heden or Eden was; if we proue the Riuer that ranne out of it, and that the same afterwards was diuided into foure branches; together with the Kingdomes of Hauila and Cush, and that all these are Eastward from Canaan, or the Desarts of the Amorites, where Moses wrote, I then conceiue, that there is no man that will doubt, but that such a place there was. And yet I doe not exclude the Allegoricall sense of the Scripture; for aswell in this there were many figures of Christ, as in all the old Testament throughout: the Sto∣rie being directly true notwithstanding. And to this purpose (saith Saint Augustine) Tres sunt de Paradiso generales sententiae: est eorum, qui tantummodò corporaliter Pa∣radisum intelligi volunt: alia eorum, qui spiritualiter tantùm (id est) Ecclesiam: tertia eo∣rum, qui vtro{que} modo Paradisum accipiunt, (that is) There are three opinions of Paradise: the one of those men, which will haue it altogether corporall: a second of those which conceiue it altogether spirituall, and to be a figure of the Church: the third of those, which take it in both senses; which third opinion Saint Augustine approueth, and of which Suidas gi∣ueth Aug. de Ciuit. this allowable iudgement: Quemadmodum homo sensibilis, & intelligibilis simul Dei. l. 13. c. 21. Suidas in verbo Paradisus. conditus erat: sic & nemus, sensibile simul & intelligibile, & duplici specie est praeditum, (that is) As man was created at one time both sensible and intelligible: so was this holy Groue or Garden to be taken both wayes, and endued with a double forme. §. IIII. Why it should bee needfull to intreate diligently of the place of Paradise. BVT it may be obiected, that it is needlesse, and a kind of curiositie to enquire so diligently after this place of Paradise, and that the know∣ledge thereof is of little or no vse. To which I answere, that there is nothing written in the Scriptures, but for our instruction; and if the truth of the Storie be necessary, then by the place proued, the same is also made more apparent. For if we should conceiue that Paradise were not on the Earth, but lifted vp as high as the Moone; or that it were beyond all the Ocean, and in no part of the knowne World, from whence Adam was sayd to wade through the Sea, and thence to haue come into Iudaea, (out of doubt) there would be few men in the World, that would giue any credit vnto it. For what could seeme more ridicu∣lous then the report of such a place? and besides, what maketh this feare of Paradise so much disputed and doubted of, but the conceit that Pishon should bee Ganges, which watereth the East India, and , Nilus, which enricheth Aegypt, and these two Riuers so far distant, as (except all the World were Paradise ) these streames can no way be comprized therein? Secondly, if the birth and workes, and death of our Sauiour, were said to haue beene in some such Countrey, of which no man euer tell, and that his Miracles had beene performed in the Ayre, or no place certainly knowne: I assure my selfe, that the Christian Religion would haue taken but a slender roote in the minds of men; for times and places are approued witnesses of worldly actions. Thirdly, if we should relye, or giue place to the iudgements of some Writers vpon this place of Genesis (though otherwise for their doctrine in general, they are worthy of honour and reuerence) I say that there is no fable among the Graecians or Aegyp∣tians more ridiculous: for who would beleeue that there were a piece of the World so set by it selfe and separated, as to hang in the vnder the Circle of the Moone? or who so doltish to conceiue, that from thence the foure Riuers of Ganges, Nilus, Euphrates, and Tigris, should fall downe, and runne vnder all the Ocean, and rise vp againe in this our habitable World, and in those places where they are now found? Which lest any man thinke, that I enforce or straine to the worst, these are Peter Co∣mestors owne words. Est autem locus amoenissimus, longo terrae & maris tractu à nostra habitabili Zona secretus, adeò eleuatus, vt vs{que} ad Lunarem globum atting at, &c. (that is) It is a most pleasant place, seuered from our habitable Zone by a long tract of Land and Sea, eleuated so, that it reacheth to the Globe of the Moone. And Moses Barcephas vpon this place writeth in this manner: Deinde hoc quo{que} re∣sponsum Bare. conuerted by Masius. volumus, Paradisum muliò sublimiore positum esse regione, at{que} haec nostra extet terra, co{que} fieri, vt illinc per praecipitium delabantur fluuij tanto cum impetis, quantum ver∣bis exprimere non possis; eo{que} impetu impulsi praessi{que} sub Oceani vada rapiuntur, vnderur∣sus prosiliant ebulliant{que} in hoc à nobis culto orbe: which haue this sense: Furthermore (sayth he) we giue this for an answere, that Paradise is set in a Region farre raysed aboue this part which wee inhabite; whereby it comes to passe, that from thence these Riuers fall downe with such a headlong violence, as words cannot expresse; and with that force so impul∣sed and prest, they are carried vnder the deepe Ocean, and doe againe arise and boyle vp in this our habitable World: and to this he addeth the opinion of Ephram, which is this. Ephram dicit Paradisum ambire terram, at{que} vltra Oceanum it a positum esse, vt totum terra∣rum orbem ab omni circumdet regione, non aliter at{que} Lunae orbis Lunam cingit, (which is) That Paradise doth compasse or embrace the whole Earth, and is so set beyond the Ocean Sea, as it enuironeth the whole Orbe of the Earth on euery side, as the Orbe of the Moone doth embrace the Moone. To the end therefore that these ridiculous expositions and opinions doe not bring question vnto Truth it selfe, or make the same subiect to doubts or disputes, it is necessarie to discouer the true place of Paradise, which God in his wisdome appointed in the very Nauel of this our World, and (as Melanchton saies) in parte terr meliore, in the best part thereof, that from thence, as from a Centre; the Vniuersall might be filled with people and planted; and by knowing this place, wee shall the better iudge of the beginning of Nations, and of the Worlds inhabitation: for neere vnto this did the Sonnes of Noah also disperse themselues after the Floud, into all other remote Regions and Countries. And if it be a generous desire in men, to know from whence their owne forefathers haue come, and out of what Regions and Nations, it cannot be displeasing to vnderstaud the place of our first Ancester, from whence all the streames and branches of Mankind haue followed and beene deduced. If then it doe appeare by the former, that such a place there was as Para∣dise, and that the knowledge of this place cannot be vnprofitable, it followeth in or∣der to examine the seuerall opinions before remembred, by the Truth it selfe; and to see how they agree with the sense of the Scripture, and with common reason, and afterward to prooue directly, and to delineate the Region in which God first plan∣ted this delightfull Garden. §. V. That the Floud hath not vtterly' defaced the markes of Paradise, nor caused Hils in the Earth. AND first, whereas it is supposed by Aug. Chysamensis, that the Floud hath altered, deformed, or rather annihilated this place, in such sort, as no man can find any marke or memory thereof: (of which opinion there were others also, ascribing to the Floud the cause of those high Mountaines, which are found on all the Earth ouer, with many other strange effects) for my owne opinion, I thinke neither the one nor the other to bee true. For although I cannot denie, but that the face of Paradise was after the Floud withered, and growne old, in respect of the first beautie: (for both the ages of men, and the nature of all things Time hath changed) yet if there had beene no signe of any such place, or if the soile and seate had not remained, then would not Moses, who wrote of Paradise about 850. yeeres after the Floud, haue described it so particularly, and the Prophets long after Moses would not haue made so often mention thereof. And though the very Garden it selfe were not then to bee found, but that the Floud, and other accidents of time made it one common field and pasture with the Land of Eden, yet the place is still the same, and the Riuers still remaine the same Riuers. By two of which (neuer doubted of) to wit, Tigris, and Euphrates, wee are sure to find in what longitude Paradise lay; and learning out one of these Riuers, which afterward doth diuide it selfe into foure branches, wee are sure that the partition is at the very border of the Garden it selfe. For it is written, that out of Eden went a Riuer to wa∣ter Gen. . 10. the Garden, and from thence it was diuided and became into foure heads: Now whether the word in the Latine Translation (lnde) from thence, be referred to Eden it selfe, or to Paradise, yet the diuision and branching of those Riuers must bee in the North or South side of the very Garden (if the Riuers runne as they doc, North and South) and therefore these Riuers yet remaining, and Eden manifestly knowne, there could be no such defacing by the Floud, as is supposed. Furthermore, as there is no likelihood, that the place could be so altered as future ages know it not, so is there no probability, that eyther these Riuers were turned out of their courses, or new Riuers created by the Floud which were not, or that the Floud (as aforesaid) by a violent motion, when it began to decrease, was the cause of high Hils, or deepe Vallies. For what descent of waters could there bee in a Sphericall and round bodie, wherein there is nor high nor low? seeing that all violent force of waters is eyther by the strength of winde, by descent from a higher to a lower, or by the ebbe or floud of the Sea. But that there was any winde (whereby the Seas are most enraged) it ap∣peareth not, rather the contrary is probable: for it is written, Therefore God made a Gen. 8. 1. winde to passe vpon the Earth, and the waters ceased. So as it appeareth not, that, vntill the waters sanke, there was any winde at all, but that God afterward, out of his goodnesse, caused the winde to blow, to dry vp the abundant slime and mudde of the Earth, and make the Land more firme, and to cleanse the Ayre of thicke vapours and vnholesome mists; and this we know by experience, that all downe-right raines doe euermore disseuer the violence of outragious winds, and beat downe, and leuell the swelling and mountainous billow of the Sea: for any cbbes and flouds there could be none, when the waters were equall and of one heighth ouer all the face of the Earth, and when there were no Indraughts, Bayes, or Gulfes to receiue a Floud, or any descent, or violent falling of waters in the round forme of the Earth and wa∣ters, as aforesaid: and therefore it seemeth most agreeable to reason, that the waters rather stood in a quiet calme, then that they moued with any raging or ouer-bearing violence. And for a more direct proofe that the Floud made no such destroying al∣teration, Ioseph. auoweth that one of those pillars erected by Seth, the third from A∣dam, was to bee seene in his dayes, which Pillars were set vp aboue 1426. yeeres be∣fore the floud, counting Seth to be an hundred yeeres old at the erection of them, and Ioseph. himselfe, to haue liued some 40. or 50. yeeres after Christ: of whom although there be no cause to beleeue all that he wrote, yet that, which hee auouched of his owne time, cannot (without great derogation) be called in question. And therefore it may be possible, that some foundation or ruine thereof might then be seene. Now that such Pillars were raysed by Seth, all Antiquitie hath auowed. It is also written in Berosus (to whom although I giue little credit, yet I cannot condeme him in all) that the Citie of Enoch built by Cain, about the Mountaines of Libanus, was not defaced by length of time: yea the ruines thereof Annius (who commented vpon that inuented Fragment) saith, were to be seene in his dayes, who liued in the Raigne of Ferdinand and Isabella of Castile; and if these his words bee not true, then was hee exceeding impudent. For, speaking of this Citie of Enoch, he concludeth in this sort: Cuius maxima & ingentis molis fundamenta visuntur, & vocatur ab incolis regionis, Ci∣uitas Cain, vt nostri mercatores, & peregrini referunt; The foundation of which huge Masse is now to be seene, and the place is called by the people of that Region, the Citie of Cain, as both our strangers and Merchants report. It is also auowed by Pomponius Mela, (to whom I giue more credit in these things) that the Citie of Ioppa was built before the Floud, ouer which Cepha was King: whose name with his Brother Phineus, toge∣ther with the grounds and principles of their Religion, was found grauen vpon cer∣taine Altars of stone; and it is not vnpossible, that the ruines of this other Citie, called Enoch by Annius, might be seene, though founded in the first Age: but it could not be of the first Citie of the World, built by Cain, the place, rather then the time, Gen. 4. 17. denying it. And to prooue directly, that the floud was not the cause of Mountaines, but that there were Mountains from the Creation, it is written, that the waters of the floud ouer∣flowed by fifteene Cubits the highest Mountaines. And Masius Damascenus speaking of the Floud, writeth in this manner. Et supra Minyadam excelsus mons in Armenia (qui Baris appellatur) in quo confugientes multos sermo est diluuij tempore liberatos, And vpon Minyada there is an high Mountaine, in Armenia (called Baris) vnto which (as it is said) that many fled in the time of the Deluge, and that they saued themselues thereon. Now al∣though it is contrary to Gods Word, that any more were saued then eight persons (which Masius doth not auouch, but by report) yet it is a testimonie, that such Moun∣taines were before the Floud, which were afterwards, and euer since, knowne by the same names; and on which Mountaines it is generally receiued that the Arke rested: but vntruely, as I shall prooue heereafter. And againe it appeareth, that the Mount Sion (though by another name) was knowne before the Floud: on which the Thalmudists report, that many Giants saued themselues also; but (as Annius saith) without all authoritie, eyther Diuine or Humane. Lastly, it appeareth that the Floud did not so turne vpside-downe the face of the Earth, as thereby it was made past knowledge, after the waters were decreased, by this that, when NOAH sent out the Doue the second time, she returned with an Oliue leafe in Gen 8. 11. her mouth, which shee had pluckt, and which (vntill the Trees were discouered) shee found not: for otherwise shee might haue found them floting on the water; a mani∣fest proofe, that the Trees were not torne vp by the rootes, nor swamme vpon the waters, for it is written: folium Oliuae, raptum or decerptum, a leafe pluckt, (which is) to take from a Tree, or to teare off. By this it is apparent, (there being nothing writ∣ten to the contrarie) that the Floud made no such alteration, as was supposed, but that the place of Paradise might be seene to succeeding Ages, especially vnto Moses, by whom it pleased God to teach the truth of the Worlds Creation, and vnto the Prophets which succedeed him: both which I take for my warrant, and to guide me in this Discouerie. §. VI. That Paradise was not the whole Earth, as some haue thought: making the Ocean to bee the fountaine of those foure Riuers. THIS conceit of Aug. Chysamensis being answered, who only giueth his opinion for reason, I will in a few words examine that of the Manichies, of Nouioniagus, Vadianus, Goropius Becanus, and all those that vnder∣stood, that by Paradise was meant the whole Earth. But in this I shall not trouble the Reader with many words, because by those places of Scripture formerly remembred, this Vniuersalitie will appeare altogether impro∣per. Gen. 1. 28. The places which Vadianus alleageth, Bring forth fruit and multiply, fill the Earth and subdue it, rule ouer euery Creature, &c. with this of the Acts, and hath made of one Acts 17. 26. bloud all Mankind, to dwell on all the face of the Earth, doe no way proue such a generali∣tie: for the World was made for man, of which he was Lord and Gouernour, and all things therin were ordained of God for his vse: Now although all men were of one and the same fountaine of bloud originally; and Adams Posteritie inhabited in pro∣cesse of time ouer all the face of the Earth; yet it disproueth in nothing the particular Garden, assigned to Adam, to dresse and cultiue, in which he liued in so blessed an e∣state before his transgression. For if there had beene no other choice, but that Adam had bin left to the Vniuersall; Moses would not then haue sayd, Eastward in Eden, see∣ing Gen. 2. 8. the World hath nor East nor West, but respectiuely. And to what end had the Angell of God beene set to keepe the East-side, and entrance into Paradise after A∣dams 3. 24. expulsion, if the Vniuersall had beene Paradise? for then must Adam haue beene chased also out of the World. For if All the Earth were Paradise, that place can re∣ceiue no better construction then this, That Adam was driuen out of the World into the World, and out of Paradise into Paradise, except we should beleeue with Metro∣dorus, that there were infinite Worlds. Which to ; hee thinkes all one, as to af∣firme, That in so large a field, as the vniuersall, there should grow but one thistle. NOVIO∣MAGVS vpon Beda, seemeth to be led by this, that it was vnpossible for those three Riuers, Ganges, Nilus, and Euphrates (which water three portions of the World so farre distant) to rise out of one Fountayne, except the Ocean be taken for the Well, and the World for the Garden. And it is true, that those foure Riuers, being so vnderstood, there could be no con∣iecture more probable; but it shall plainely appeare, that Pison was falsly taken for Ganges, and Gehon falsly for Nilus, although Ganges be a Riuer by Hauilah in India, and Nilus runne through Aethiopia. The Seuentie write Chus for Aethiopia, and there∣by the errors of the Manichees, and the mistakings of Nouiomagus, Goropius, and Va∣dianus, with others, are made manifest. Yet was their coniecture farre more probable, then that of Ephram, Cyrillus, and Athanasius: That Paradise was seated farre beyond the Ocean Sea, and that Adam waded through it, and at last came toward the Coun∣trie, in which he was created, and was buryed at Mount Caluary, in Hierusalem. And certainely, though all those of the first Age were of great stature, and so continued many yeeres after the floud, yet Adams shin-bones must haue contayned a thousand fadome, and much more, if he had foorded the Ocean; but this opinion is so ridi∣culous, as it needes no argument to disproue it. §. VII. Of their opinion, which make Paradise as high as the Moone: and of others, which make it higher than the middle Region of the ayre. THirdly, whereas Beda saith, and as the Schoole-men affirme, Paradise to be a place, altogether remoued from the knowledge of men ( locus à cognitione hominum remotissimus) and Barcephas conceiued, that Para∣dise was farre in the East, but mounted aboue the Ocean, and all the Earth, and neere the Orbe of the Moone (which opinion, though the Schoole-men charge Beda withall, yet Pererius layes it off from Beda vpon Strabus, and his Master Rabanus: ) and wheras Rupertus in his Geographie of Paradise, doth not much differ from the rest, but findes it seated next or neerest heauen; It may seeme, that all these borrowed this doctrine out of Plato, and Plato out of Socrates; but nei∣ther of them (as I conceiue) well vnderstood: who (vndoubtedly) tooke this place for heauen it selfe, into which the soules of the blessed were carryed after death. True it is, that these Philosophers durst not for feare of the Areopagites (in this Diog. . in Sco. and many other diuine apprehensions) set downe what they beleeued in plaine termes, especially Plato: though Socrates in the end suffered death, for acknowledge∣ing one onely powerfull God; and therefore did the Deuill himselfe doe him that right, as by an Oracle, to pronounce him the wisest man. Iustine Martyr affirmeth, Iustin. Mart. adm. ad Gent. Aug. that Plato had read the Scriptures; and S. Augustine gaue this iudgement of him, as his opinion, that (few things changed) he might be counted a Christian. And it see∣meth to me, that both Tertullian and Eusebius conceiue, that Socrates, by that place aforesaid, meant the celestiall Paradise, and not this of Eden. Solinus, I grant, repor∣teth, that there is a place exceeding delightfull and healthfull, vpon the top of Mount Atho (called ) which being aboue all clouds of rayne, or other in∣conuenience, the people (by reason of their many yeeres) are called Macrobioi (that is) Long-liued. A further argument is vsed, for proofe of the heighth of this place, because therein was Enoch preserued from the violence of the floud: appro∣ued by Isidore, and Peter Lombard; in which place also Tertullian conceiued, that the blessed soules were preserued till the last iudgement; which Irenaeus, and Iustine Martyr also beleeued. But this opinion was of all Catholike Diuines reproued, and in the Florentine Councell damned; of which S. Augustine more modestly gaue this iudgement. Sicut certum est ENOCH & ELIAM nunc viuere: ita vbi nunc sunt, an in Paradiso an alibi, incertum est; (that is) As it is certayne that ENOCH and ELIAS doe now liue: so where they now liue, in Paradise or elsewhere, it is vncertayne. But Barce∣phas giues a third cause, though of all other the weakest. For (saith he) it was neces∣sarie that Paradise should be set at such a distance and heighth, because the foure Ri∣uers (had they not fallen so precipitate) could not haue had sufficient force to haue thrust themselues vnder the great Ocean, and afterwards haue forced their passage through the earth, and haue risen againe in the farre distant Regions of India, Ae∣gypt, and Armenia. These strange fancies and dreames haue beene answered by diuers learned men long since, and lately by Hopkins and Pererius writing vpon this subiect; of whose arguments I will repeate these few: for to vse long discourse against those things, which are both against Scripture and Reason, might rightly be iudged a vanitie in the Answerer, not much inferior to that of the Inuenter. It is first therefore alleaged, that such a place cannot be commodious to liue in: for being set so neere the Moone, it had beene too neere the Sunne, and other hea∣uenly bodies. Secondly, because it must haue beene too ioynct a Neighbour to the Element of fire. Thirdly, because the aire in that Region is so violently moued, and carryed about with such swiftnesse, as nothing in that place can consist or haue abi∣ding. Fourthly, because the place betweene the Earth and the Moone (according to Ptolemie and Alfraganus ) is seuenteene times the Diameter of the Earth, which makes by a grosse account about one hundred and twentie thousand miles. Hereup∣on it must follow, that Paradise, being raised to this heighth, must haue the compasse of the whole earth for a Basis & foundation. But had it been so raised, it could hardly be hidden from the knowledge, or eyes of men: seeing it would depriue vs of the Sunnes light, all the fore-part of the day, being seated in the East, as they suppose. Now, to fortifie the former opinions, Tostatus addeth this, that those people which dwell neere those falls of waters, are deafe from their infancie, like those which dwell neere the Catadupae, or ouer-falls of Nilus. But this I hold as fayned. For I haue seene Cicero Somn. Scip. in the Indies, far greater water-falls, than those of Nilus, and yet the people dwelling neere them, are not deafe at all. Tostatus (the better to strengthen himselfe) citeth Basil and Ambrose together: to which PERERIVS, Sed ego hac apud BASILIVM & AM∣BROSIVM in eorum scriptis, quae nunc extant, nusquam me legere memini; But I doe not remember (saith he) that I euer read those things, either in BASIL or AMBROSE. But for the bodies of Enoch and Elias, God hath disposed of them according to his wisdome. Their taking vp might be into the celestiall Paradise, for ought we know. For although flesh and bloud, subiect to corruption, cannot inherit the Kingdome of heauen, and the seede must rot in the ground before it grow, yet we shall not all die (saith S. PAVL) but all shall be changed: which change, in Enoch and Elias, was ea∣sie 1. Cor. 15. 36. 51. 1. Pet. 3. 20. to him that is Almightie. But for the rest, the Scriptures are manifest, that by the floud all perished on the earth, sauing eight persons, and therefore in the terrestriall Paradise they could not be. For Tostatus his owne opinion, who soared not altogether so high as the rest, but beleeued that Paradise was raysed aboue the middle Region of the aire, and twentie cubits aboue all Mountaines, that the floud did not therefore reach it: (which Scotus and other later Schoole-men also beleeued; for, say they, there were no sinners in Paradise, and therefore no cause to ouer-whelme it:) this is also contrarie to the ex∣presse letter of the Scripture: which directly, and without admitting of any distincti∣on teacheth vs, that the waters ouer-flowed all the mountaynes vnder heauen. And were it Gen. 7. 19. otherwise, then might we aswell giue credit to Masius Damascenus, and the Thalmu∣dists, who affirme, that there were of the Giants that saued themselues on the Moun∣tayne Baris, and on Sion. But to helpe this, Scotus, being (as the rest of the Schoole∣men are) full of distinctions, saith; That the waters stood at Paradise, as they did in the Red Sea, and at Iordan; and as the floud was not naturall, so was Paradise saued Exod. 14. 21. by miracle. And Thomas Aquinas qualifieth this high conceit with this supposition, That it was not beleeued, that Paradise was so seated, as Beda and others seeme to af∣firme in wordes, but by Hyperbole and comparatiuely, for the delicacie and beautie so resembled. But this I dare auow of all those Schoole-men, that though they were exceeding wittie, yet they better teach all their Followers to shift, then to resolue, by their distinctions. Wherefore not to stay long in answering this opinion of Tosta∣tus, I confesse that it is written, that the Mountaynes of Olympus, Atho, and Atlas, o∣uer-reach and surmount all windes and clouds, and that (notwithstanding) there is found on the heads of the Hills both springs and fruits; and the Pagan Priests, sacri∣ficing on these Mountaine tops, do not find the ashes (remaining of their sacrifices) blowne thence, nor thence washt off by raines, when they returne: yet experience hath resolued vs, that these reports are fabulous, and Plinie himselfe (who was not sparing in the report of wonders) auoweth the contrarie. But were it granted, yet the heighth of these Mountaynes is far vnder the supposed place of Paradise; and on these selfe Hills the ayre is so thinne (saith S. Augustine, whom herein I mistrust) that it is not sufficient to beare vp the body of a bird, hauing therein no feeling of her wings, or any sensible resistance of ayre to mount her selfe by. §. VIII. Of their opinion that seaete Paradise vnder the Aequinoctiall: and of the pleasant habitation vnder those Climates. THose which come neerer vnto reason, finde Paradise vnder the Aequino∣ctiall line, as Tertullian, Bonauenture, and Durandus: iudging, that there∣vnder might be found most pleasure, and the greatest fertilitie of soile: but against it Thomas Aquinas obiecteth the distemperate heate, which he supposeth to be in all places so directly vnder the Sunne; but this is (non causa pro causa) for although Paradise could not be vnder the line, because Eden is farre from it, in which Paradise was; and because there is no part of Euphrates, Tigris, or Ganges vnder it, ( Ganges being one of the foure Riuers, as they suppose) yet this conceit of distemper, (being but an old opinion) is found to be very vntrue, though for the coniecture not to be condemned, considering the age when those Fathers wrote, grounded chiefly on this: that whereas it appeared, that euery Countrie, as it lay by degrees neerer the Tropick, and so toward the Aequinoctiall, did so much the more exceede in heate; It was therefore a reasonable coniecture, that those Coun∣tries which were situated directly vnder it, were of a distemper vninhabitable: but it seemeth that Tertullian conceiued better, and so did , for they both thought them habitable enough; and though (perchance) in those dayes it might be thought a fantasticall opinion (as all are which goe against the vulgar) yet we now finde, that if there be any place vpon the earth of that nature, beautie, and delight, that Paradise had, the same must be found within that supposed vninhabitable burnt Zone, or within the Tropicks, and neerest to the line it selfe. For hereof experience hath in∣formed Reason, and Time hath made those things apparent, which were hidden and could not by any contemplation be discouered. Indeede it hath so pleased God to prouide for all liuing creatures, wherewith he hath filled the world, that such incon∣ueniences which we contemplate a-farre off, are found by tryall and the witnesse of mens trauailes, to be so qualified, as there is no portion of the earth made in vaine, or as a fruitlesse lump to fashion out the rest. For, God himselfe (saith ISAY) that formed Isay 45. 18. the earth and made it, he that prepared it, he created it not in vaine, he formed it to be inha∣bited. Now we finde that these hottest Regions of the world, seated vnder the Ae∣quinoctiall line, or neere it, are so refreshed with a daily gale of Easternely winde (which the Spaniards call the Brize, that doth euermore blow strongest in the heare of the day, as the downe-right beames of the Sunne cannot so much master it, that there is any inconuenience or distemperate heate found thereby. Secondly, the nights are so cold, fresh, and equall, by reason of the entire interposition of the earth, as (for those places which my selfe haue seene, neere the Line and vnder it) I know no other part of the world of better, or equall temper: Onely there are some tracts, which by accident of high Mountaynes are barr'd from this aire and fresh wind, and some few sandie parts without trees, which are not therefore so well inhabited as the rest; and such difference of soiles we finde also in all other parts of the World. But (for the greatest part) those Regions haue so many goodly Riuers, Fountaynes and little Brookes, abundance of high Cedars, and other stately trees casting shade, so many sorts of delicate fruits, euer bearing, and at all times beautified with blos∣some and fruit, both greene and ripe, as it may of all other parts be best compared to the Paradise of Eden: the boughes and branches are neuer vnclothed and left naked, their sap creepeth not vnder ground into the roote, fearing the iniurie of the frost: neither doth Pomona at any times despise her withered husband Vertumnus, in his winter quarters and old age. Therefore are these Countries called Terrae vitiosae; Vicious Countries: for Nature being liberall to all without labour, necessitie imposing no industrie or trauell, idlenesse bringeth forth no other fruits then vaine thoughts, and licentious pleasures. So that to conclude this part, Tertullian and those of his opinion were not deceiued in the nature of the place: but Aquinas, who misliked this opinion, and followed a worse. And (to say the truth) all the Schoole-men were grosse in this particular. §. IX. Of the change of the names of places: and that besides that Eden in Coe∣lesyria, there is a Countrey in Babylon, once of this name, as is proued out of ESA. 37. and EZECH. 27. THese opinions answered, and the Region of Eden not found in any of those imaginarie worlds, nor vnder Torrida Zona; it followeth that now we discouer and finde out the seate thereof, for in it was Paradise by God planted. The difficultie of which search resteth chiefly in this, That as all Nations haue often changed names with their Ma∣sters; so are most of these places, by Moses remembred, forgotten by those names of all Historians and Geographers, as well ancient as moderne. Besides, we finde that the Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes and Persians ( Cyrus only and few other excepted) sought to extinguish the Hebrewes. The Graecians hated both their Nation and their Religion; and the Romanes despised once to remember them in any of their stories. And as those three Monarchies succeeded each other: so did they transforme the names of all those principall Places & Cities in the East: and after them, the Turke hath sought (what he could) to extinguish in all things, the ancient memorie of those people; which he hath subiected and inthralled. Now besides those notable markes, Euphrates & Tigris, the better to find the way, which leadeth to the Countrie of Eden, we are to take for guides these two conside∣rations (to wit) That it lay Eastward from Canaan & Iudaeae; and that it was of all o∣ther the most beautiful and fertile. First then in respect of situation, the next Country to Iudaea Eastward was Arabia Petraea; but in this Region was Moses himselfe when he wrote: and the next vnto it Eastward also was Arabia the Desart, both which in re∣spect of the infertilitie could not be Eden, neither haue any of the Arabians any such Riuers, as are exprest to run out of it: So as it followeth of necessitie, that Eden must be Eastward, and beyond both Arabia Petraea, and Deserta. But because Eden is by Moses named by it selfe, and by the fertilitie, and the Riuers only described, we must seeke it in other Scriptures, and where it is by the additions of the neighbour Na∣tions better described. In the Prophet Isay I finde it coupled and accompanyed Isai. 37. v. 12. with other adjacent Countries, in these wordes, spoken in the person of Senacherib by RABSAKEH: Haue the gods of the Nations deliuered them, which my Fathers haue destroyed, as GOSAN, and HARAN, and RESEPH, and the children of EDEN, which were at Telassar? and in Ezechiel, where he prophecieth against the Tyrians: They of Cap. 27. vers. 23. Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the Merchants of Sheba, Asbur, and Chilmad, were thy Merchants, &c. But to auoid confusion, we must vnderstand that there were two Edens, one of which the Prophet Amos remembreth, where he diuideth Syria into three Prouin∣ces, whereof, the first he maketh Syria Damascene, or Decapolitan: the second part is Cap. 1. vers. 1. that Valley called Auenis, otherwise Conuallis, or the Tract of Chamath, where Assy∣ria is ioyned to Arabia the Desart, and where Ptolemie placeth the Citie of Aueria: and the third is knowne by the name of Domus Edenis, or Coelesyria, otherwise Vallis Strabo. , or the hollow Valley, because the Mountaynes of Libanus and Antilibanus, take all the length of it on both sides, and border it: for Coele in Greeke is Caua in Latine. But this is not that Eden, which we seeke: neither doth this Prouince lye East from Ca∣naan, but North, and so ioyneth vnto it, as it could not be vnknowne to the He∣brewes. Yet, because there is a little Citie therein called Paradise, the Iewes beleeued this Coelesyria to be the same which Moses describeth. For the same cause doth Hop∣kins in his Treatise of Paradise reprehend Beroaldus, in that he confoundeth this E∣den, with the other Eden of Paradise: though to giue Beroaldus his right, I conceiue that he led the way to Hopkins, and to all other later Writers, sauing, That he fay∣led in distinguishing these two Regions, both called Eden: and that he altogether misvnderstood two of the foure Riuers (to wit) Pison and Gehon, as shall appeare hereafter. Now to finde out Eden, which (as Moses teacheth vs) lay Eastward from the Desarts, where he wrote, after he had passed the Red Sea; wee must consider where those other Countries are found, which the Prophet Isay and Ezechiel ioyneth with it. For (saith ESAIAH) Gosan, Haran, and Reseph, and the children of Eden, which were at Telàssar. Also Ezechiel ioyneth Haran with Eden, who, together with Ezecb. 27. v. 23. those of Sheba, Ashur, and Chilmad, were the Merchants that traded with the Citie of Tyre, which was then (saith EZECHIEL) the Mart of the people for many Isles. And it hath euer beene the custome, that the Persians conueyed their merchandise to Babylon, and to those Cities vpon Euphrates, and Tigris, and from thence transpor∣ted them into Syria, now Soria, and to the Port of the Mediterrane Sea: as in ancient times to the Citie of Tyre, afterward to Tripoly, and now to Aleppo, from whence they imbarque them at the Port of Alexandretta, in the Bay of Issicus, now Laiazzo. Ezechiel in the description of the magnificence of Tyre, and of the exceeding trade that it had with all the Nations of the East, as the onely Mart-towne of that part of the world, reciteth both the people, with whom they had commerce, and also what commodities euery Countrie yeelded: and hauing counted the seuerall People and Countries, he addeth the particular trade, which each of them exercised: They were Vers. 24. thy Merchants (saith the Prophet) in all sorts of things, in rayments of blue silke, and of broidered workes, fine linnen, corrall and pearle: and afterwards speaking of the Mer∣chants of Sheba and Raamah, and what kindes they traded, he hath these wordes: The Merchants of Sheba and Raamah were thy Merchants, they occupied in thy Fayres, with the chiefe of all Spices, and with all precious stones and gold. Now these be indeed the riches which Persia and Arabia Foelix yeeld: and because Sheba and Raama are those parts of Arabia, which border the Sea, called the Persian Gulfe, therefore did those Nations both vent such Spice, sweet Gummes, and Pearles, as their owne Countries yeelded, and (withall) hauing trade with their Neighbours of India, had from them also all sorts of spices, and plentie of gold. The better to conuey these commodities to that great Mart of Tyre, the Shebans or Arabians entred by the mouth of Tigris, and from the Citie of Terredon (built or enlarged by Nabuchodonozor, now called Balsara ) thence sent vp all these rich merchandises by boate to Babylon, from whence by the body of Euphrates, as farre as it bended Westward, and afterward by a branch there∣of, which reacheth within three dayes iourney of Aleppo, and then ouer Land they past to Tyre, as they did afterward to Tripoly (formerly Hieropolis) and thence to Alexandretta, as aforesaid. Now the Merchants of Canneh, which Ezechiel ioyneth with Eden, inhabited farre vp the Riuer, and receiued this trade from Arabia & India, besides those proper commodities which themselues had, and which they receiued out of Persia, which bordered them. S. Hierome vnderstandeth by Canneh, Selencia, which is seated vpon Euphrates, where it breaketh into foure heads, and which tooke that name from Seleucus, who made thereof a magnificent Citie. Hierosolymitanus thinkes it to be Ctesiphon, but Ctesiphon is seated downe low vpon Tigris, and Canneh cannot be on that side, I meane on the East-side of Tigris, for then were it out of the Valley of Shinar. Plinic placeth the Schenite vpon Euphrates, where the same begin∣neth Plin. l. 6. c. 26. to be foordable, which is toward the border of Syria, after it leaueth to be the bound of Arabia the Defart, & where the Riuer of Euphrates reflecteth from the De∣sart of Palmirena: for these people of Canneh (afterward Schenitae ) inhabited both borders of Euphrates, ftretching themselues from their owne Citie of Canneh in Shi∣nar Westward along the banks of Euphrates, as farre as the Citie of Thapsacus, where Ptolemie appointed the Foords of Euphrates: which also agreeth with the description of the Schenitae by Strabo, whose wordes are these: Mercatoribus ex Syria Seleuciam Strabo l. 16. & Babyloniam euntibus iter est per Schenitas; The Merchants which trauaile from Syria to Seleucia and Babylon, take their way by the Schenitas. Therefore those which take Can∣neh for Charran, doe much mistake it. For Charran, to which Abraham came from Vr Gen. 11. 31. in Chaldaea (called by God) standeth also in Mesopotamia, not vpon Euphrates it selfe, but vpon the Riuer of Chaboras, which falleth into Euphrates: and the Merchants of Charran are distinctly named with those of Canneh in Ezechiel (as) they of Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the Merchants of Sheba, Ashur, and Chilmad were thy Merchants. Wherefore Charran which is sometime called Charre, and Haran, and Aran, is but the same Charran of Mesopotamia; and when it is written Aran, then it is taken for the Region of Mesopotamia: or Aran , the Greeke word ( Mesopotamia ) impor∣ting, a Countrie betweene Riuers: for Mesos in Greeke, is Medius in Latine, and Po∣tamos, ; and when it is written Haran or Aran, it is then taken for the Citie it selfe, to which Abraham came from Vr (as aforesaid.) For Strabo in the description of Arabia, giueth that Tract of Land from the borders of Coelesyria, to the edge of Mesopotamia, to the Schenitae, who also inhabited on both sides of Euphrates, and were in after-ages accounted of these Arabians which inhabite Batanea, and the North part of the Desarts, stretching themselues toward the vnhabited Solitude of Palmi∣rena, which lyeth betweene Syria, and Arabia the Desart So as these of Canneh lay in the very high-way from Babylon to Tyre, and were Neighbours (indifferent) to Char∣ran and to Eden: and therefore they are by the Prophet Ezechiel coupled together, They of Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, &c. But S. Hierome made a good interpretation of Canneh, or Chalne, by Seleucia: for Seleucia was anciently called Chalanne (witnesse Appian; ) and so Rabanus Maurus calleth it in his Commentaries vpon Genesis; the name by time and mixture of languages being changed from Chalne or Canneh, to Chalanne: of which name there are two other Cities, standing in Triangle with Se∣leucia, and almost the next vnto it, (as) Thelbe-canne, and Mann canne, the one a little to the West of Seleucia, and the other opposite vnto it, where these Riuers of Tigris and Euphrates are readie to ioyne. Therefore, which of these the ancient Canne was, (being all three within the bound of the Valley Shinar ) it is vncertayne: but it is a note aswell of the importance of the place, as of the certayne thereof, that so many other Cities did retayne a part of the name in so many ages after. Neither is it vnlikely, that these additions of and Mann to the word Canne, were but to make difference betweene the East and the West, or the greater and the lesse Canne, or betweene Canne the old, and the new: which additions to distinguish Cities by, are ordinarie in all the Regions of the world. Now of the other Citie ioyned with Eden, as Haran or Charran, S. Hierome on the Iudges speaketh thereof in these wordes: Cum{que} reuerterentur, peruenerunt ad Iud. 1. Charran, quae est in medio itinere contra Niniuen, vndecimo die; When they retur∣ned, they came to Charran, (which is the mid-way against Niniue) the eleuenth day. This Citie is by the Martyr Stephen named Charran (speaking to the high Priest:) Yee Men, Brethren, and Fathers, harken: The God of glorie appeared to our Father ABRA∣HAM, Act. 7. 1. while he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran. But the seate of this Citie is not doubted of: for it is not only remembred in many Scriptures, but, with∣all, exceeding famous for the death and ouerthrow of Crassus the Romane, who for his vnsatiable greedinesse was called Gurges auaritiae; The of auarice. Whereof Lucan: Assyrias Latio maculauit sanguine Carras, Lucan, l. 1. 105. With Roman bloud th'Assyrian Carre he defil'd. But this Citie Canne or Chalne is made manifest by Moses himselfe, where it is written of NIMROD: And the beginning of his Kingdome was Babel, and , and Gen. 10. 10. Acad, and Chalne, in the Land of Sinaar, or Shinar: where Moses sheweth the first com∣position position of the Babylonian Empire, and what Cities and People were subiect vnto Nimrod, all which lay in the said Valley of Shinar or neere it; and this Valley of Shinar is that Tract, afterwards called Babylonia and Chaldaea, into which also Eden stretcheth it selfe. Chaldaea, Babylonia, Sinaar, idem sunt (saith COMESTOR.) Three names of one Countrie: which Region of Babylonia tooke name of the Babel; and the Towre, of the confusion of tongues. And that Shinar was Babylonia, it is proued in the eleuenth Chapter of Genesis, in these wordes: And as they went from the Vers. 2. East, they found a Playne in the Land of Shinar, and there they abode: in which Playne Ba∣byton was built (as aforesaid.) Now Shinar being Babylonia, and Canneh, in the first beginning of Nimrods great∣nesse, and before he had subdued any strange, or farre-off Nations, being part his Dominion, and also named by Moses to be in Shinar, it proueth, that Canneh ioy∣neth to Babylonia; which also Ezechiel coupleth with Eden, and (further) affirmeth, that those of Eden were also the Merchants, which traded with the Tyrians: and Esay in the threats of Senacherib against Hierusalem (with other Nations that Senacherib vaunted that his Fathers had destroyed) nameth the children of Eden which were at Telassar. But before I conclude where Eden it selfe lyeth, it is necessarie to describe those other Countries, which Ezechiel ioyneth therewith in the places before re∣membred, as, those of Sheba and Raamah. It is written in Genesis the tenth: Moreouer Vers. 7. the sonnes of HAM were CVSH, &c. And the sons of CVSH were SEBA, and HAVILAH, and SABTAH. & RAAMAH, &c. And the sons of RAAMAH were SHEBA, &c. and anon after, CVSH begat NIMROD: so as Sheba was the grand child of Cush, and Nimrod the sonne of Cush, whose elder brother was Sebah: though some there are that conceiue to the contrarie, that Nimrod was the elderin valour and vnderstanding, though not in time and precedence of birth; who inhabited that part of Shinar, where Babel was built, afterwards Babylonia. His brother Raamah or Regma tooke that part adioyning to Shinar, toward the Sea side and Persian Gulfe (called afterward Raama and Sheba, by the Father and his Sonnes, which possessed it.) For (saith EZECHIEL) the Mer∣chants of and Sheba were thy Merchants, they occupyed in thy Faire's with the chiefe of all spices, and all precious stones, and gold. So as Sheba was that Tract of Countrie, which parteth Arabia Deserta from Arabia Foelix, and which ioyneth to the Sea where Tigris and Euphrates fall out, and render themselues to the Ocean. This part, and the confining Countrie Strabo calleth Catabaria, where the best Myrrhe and Frankin∣cense Strabo, l. 16. is gathered; which people haue an interchange or trade with Elana, lying on the East side of the Persian Gulfe. By this it appeareth who were the Shebeans, spo∣ken of by Ezechiel, and said to haue beene the Merchants of Tyre, for gold, spices, and precious stones: of which they had not onely plentie of their owne, but were also fur∣nished from that part of India (called Elana, according to Strabo ) for exchange of their Aromatiques, and other proper commodities. For as Strabo reporteth out of E∣RATOSTHENES: In Persicae initto Insula est, in qua multi & pretiosi vniones gig∣nantur: in alijs vero, clari & lapilli. ERATOSTHENES (saith STRRBO) affirmeth, that in the beginning of the Persian Gulfe, there is an Island, in which there are many precious pearlès bred: and in other, very cleare and shining stones. Now, the diffe∣rence betweene Sheba, the sonne of Raamah, and Seba, the sonne of Cush, is in this, That Seba is written with the Hebrew ( Samech; ) and Sheba with ( Schin: ) but what∣soeuer the difference may be in the Hebrew Orthographie, their Countries and ha∣bitations are diuers. For Sheba is that part which bordereth the Persian Sea; and Sa∣ba (whence the Queene of Saba) neighboured the red Sea; and so that place of the 72. Psalme, expounded, Reges Arabum & Saba, hath in the Hebrew this sense: Reges Shebae & Sabae. The Shebans, Ezechiel nameth together with the Edenites, because they inhabited vpon the Out-let of the same riuer, vpon which the Edenites were seated: and so those of Sheba, towards the Sea-coast, and vpon it, past vp the Countrie, by Tigris and Eu∣phrates, being ioined in one maine streame, and so through the Region of Eden, which Tigris boundeth, thereby the better to conuey their merchandise toward Tyre. And as the Cities of Charran, and Canneh, border Eden on the West and Northwest: so doth Sheba on the South, and Chilmad on the North-east. Chilmad being a Region of the higher Media, as appeareth in the Chaldaean Paraphrast, which Countrie by the Geographers is called Coromitena, ( L ) placed by exchange for ( R: ) which change the Hebrewes also often vse. Thus much of those Countries which border Eden, and who altogether traded with the Tyrians: of which, the chiefe were the Edenites, inhabiting Telassar: for these Senacharib vaunted, that his Fathers had destroyed; and this place of Telassar lay most conuenient, both to receiue the Trade from Sheba and Arabia, and also to conuey it ouer into Syria, and to Tyrus. Now to make these things the more plaine, we must remember, that before the death of Senacharib, many parts of the Babyloni∣an Empire fell from his obedience, and after his death these Monarchies were vtterly disioyned. For it appeareth both in Esai the 37. and in the second of Kings, by the threates of Rabsache, the while the Armie of Assyria lay before Hierusalem, that the Cities of Gosan, Haran, Reseph, and the Edenites at Telassar, had resisted the Assyrians, though by them (in a sort) mastered and recouered. Haue the gods of the Nations deliuered Esa. 37. v. 12. them, whom my Fathers haue destroyed, as Gosan, and Haran, Reseph, and the children of Eden, which were at Telassar? But it appeared manifestly after Senacharibs death, that these Nations formerly contending, were then freed from the others subiection: for Esar-Haddon held Assyria, and Merodach Baladan, Babylonia. And after that the Ar∣mie of Senacharib, commanded by Rabsache, which lay before Hierusalem ( Ezechias 2. Kings 19. 35. then raigning) while Senacharib was in Egypt, was by the Angell of God destroyed: the King of Babel sent to Ezechias, both to congratulate the recouerie of his health, 20. 12. Esa. 39. 1. and his victorie obtained ouer the Assyrians. After which ouerthrow, Senacharib Esa. 37. 38. himselfe was slaine by his owne sonnes in the Temple of his Idoles, Esar-Haddon suc∣ceeding him in Assyria. To the Babylonian Ambassadours sent by Merodach, Ezechias Esa. 39. 1. shewed all his treasures, aswell proper as consecrate, which inuited the Kings of Ba∣bylon afterward to vndertake their conquest and subuersion. So as, the suspition of encreasing betweene Babylon and Assyria, the Edenités which inhabited the borders of Shinar towards the North, and towards Assyria, were imployed to beare off the incursions of the Assyrians; and their Garrison-place was at Telassar: and the very word ( Telassar ) saith Iunius, signifying as much, as a Bulwarke against the Assy∣rians. This place Hierosolymitanus takes for Resem, others for Seleucia: but this Te∣lassar is the same, which Am. Marcellinus in the Historie of Iulian (whom he follow∣ed in the enterprize of Persia ) calleth Thilutha in stead of Telassar, who describeth the exceeding strength thereof in his 24. Booke: It is seated in an Island of Eupbrates vp∣on a steepe and vnassaultable Rocke, in so much as the Emperour Iulian durst not attempt it; and therefore it was a conuenient place for a Garrison against the Assyri∣ans, being also a passage out of Mesopotamia into Babylonia, and in which the Edenites of the Countrey adioyning were lodged to defend the same. This place Ptolomie cal∣leth . Tab. 4. Teridata, hauing Reseph (which he calleth Resepha ) on the left hand, and Canneh, (which he calleth Thelbe-canne ) on the right hand, not far from whence is also found the Citie of Mann-canne vpon Tigris, and all these seated together, as Esay and Eze∣chiel haue sorted them. But the vnderstanding of these places is the more difficult, because Assyria (which the Chaldaeans call Atturia ) and Mesopotamia, were so often confounded: the one taken for the other by interchange of Dominion. Assyria & Mesopotamia in Babyloniae nomen transier unt (saith NIGER,) Assyria and Mesopota∣mia Cosmog. . tooke the name of Babylonia. Lastly, it appeareth by those adiacent Regions by the Prophets named, in what part of the world Eden is seated, as, by Charran or Ha∣ran in Mesopotamia: also by Canneh and Reseph, according to the opinion of Vatablus, who in these wordes translateth this place: Plantauer at autem IEHOVAH Deus hor∣tum in Eden, ab Oriente, The Lord God planted a garden in Eden, Eastward: that is (saith he in his Annotations.) Iusser at nasci arbores in Eden, Regione Orientali, in finibus Ara∣biae & Mesopotamiae, He commanded trees to grow in Eden, an Easterne Region in the bor∣ders of Arabia and Mesopotamia. §. X. Of diuers other testimonies of the land of Eden; and that this is the Eden of Paradise. ANd for a more particular pointing out of this Eden, it seemes by the two Epistles of the Nestorian Christians, that inhabite Mesopotamia, which Epistles in the yeere 1552. they sent to the Pope about the confirming of their Patriarch, and Andraeas Masius hath published them, translated out of Syriac into Latine. By these Epistles (I say) it seemes we may haue some farther light for the proofe of that, which we haue said about the Region of Eden in those parts. For in them both there is mention of the Island of Eden in the Riuer Tigris, or at least, Tigris in both these Epistles is called the Riuer of Eden. This Island, as Masius in his Praeface to these Epistles saith, is commonly called Gozoria (as it were, the Island, by an eminencie) It hath (saith he) tenne miles in circuit, and was sometimes walled round about, which name of the Island Eden may (doubtlesse) re∣maine to this day; though in the rest of the Region so called this name be swallow∣ed vp, with the fame of those flourishing Kingdomes of Mesopotamia, Assyria, Babylo∣nia, and Chaldaea. This Island of Eden hath vp the Riuer, and not farre beyond it, the Citie of Hasan-Cepha, otherwise Fortis Petra: below it, it hath Mosal or Mosel, from which (as in that which followeth it shall appeare out of Masius ) it is not aboue twelue miles distant. Neither is it to trouble vs, that Mosal or Mosel by Marius Ni∣ger is remembred among the Cities higher vp Tigris, in these wordes. Iuxta autem Vt Tigrim, Ciuitates sunt Dorbeta prope Taurum montem, quae nunc Mosel dicitur; magna sa∣nè, &c. (that is) By Tigris are these Cities, Dorbeta neere vnto mount Taurus (which is now called Mosel) which is a great one, &c. This opinion of Niger, displacing Mosel, and making it to be Dorbeta (I say) needes not here to trouble vs: seeing for this mat∣ter, the testimonie of Masius informed by the Christians that dwelt there (the Seat of whose Patriarch it is) ought to be of credit, auowing that this Mosal (or Mozal ) is in the confines of Mesopotamia and Assyria, seated vpon Tigris, and in the neighbour∣hood of Niniue; and that it is the famous Seleucia Parthorum. The Nestorian Chri∣stians in their former Epistle, call it Attur in these words: Ex omnibus Ciuitatibus & pagis quae sunt circum Ciuitatem Mozal (hoc est) Attur in vicinia Niniues; Of all the Ci∣ties and townes which are about the Citie of Mozal (that is) Attur in the neighbourhood of Niniue. As also Niger acknowledgeth Ctesiphon, a Citie thereabout to be called As∣sur (which is the same as Attur, after the Dialect of those Nations, which change Sh into T. ) Neither is it much that he should mistake Ctesiphon (which is not farre off Se∣leucia ) for Seleucia, to be Assur. By this then wee may come somewhat neere the end of our purpose. For the of Eden, which lyeth in the brest of Tigris, is but twelue miles from Mosal, and that ancient Citie, which Ptolomie and Tacitus call Ninus, and the Scriptures Nineue, Philostratus, and Simeon Sethi, Mosula, and Iohn Lean Mo∣sal, others Mosse, (though it bee not the same with Mosal ) is set but a little higher vpon the same riuer of Tigris, neere Mosal: so that wee are like to finde this Ile of Eden here-about. For the same Andraeas Masius, which placeth it aboue Mosal, makes it to be belowe Hasan chepha, which is vpon the same riuer of Tigris. The onely difficultie is this, that some perhaps may thinke, that the words of the Nestorians in both their Epistles, speake not of any Ile in Tigris, called the Ile of Eden, but of an Ile in Tigris, a riuer of Eden. But this sense of their words in my opinion see∣meth the more vnprobable. And yet if this were the meaning heere, we haue a testi∣monie from the learned of those parts, that not onely Euphrates, but also Tigris was a riuer of Eden, and that the name of Eden in those parts is not yet quite worne out, though the Region hath beene subiect to the same change, that all other kingdomes of the world haue beene, and hath by conquest, and corruption of other languages, receiued new and differing names. For the South part of Eden, which stretcheth ouer Euphrates, was after the floud called Shinar, and then of the tower of Babel, Babylo∣nia; and the North part of Eden is that Tract of Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Armenia, which embraceth both the banks of Tigris, betweene Mount Taurus, and . And of this Region of Eden. that ancient AETHICVS maketh mention, (not that latter AETHICVS, disciple of CALLINICVS, otherwise by PLVTARCH and ATHENAEVS called ISTRI, who liued in Aegypt in the reigne of PHILADEI∣PHVS, but another of a farre higher and remotetime) the same being made Latine out of Greeke by S. HIEROME. And though by corruption of the ancient copie it bee written in AETHICVS, Adonis for Edenis; yet Adonis being a riuer of Phoeni∣cia, cannot be vnderstood to bee the Region named by AETHICVS. For AETHI∣CVS makes it a Countrie, and not a riuer, and ioyneth it with Mesopotamia and Ae∣thiopia, calling the land of CHVS Aethiopia, after the Vulgar, and Septuagint. And lastly, the Riuer which watereth the Regions (sayth AETHICVS) falleth into the Gulfe of Persia: which Riuer hee calleth Armodius, for Tigris; Tigris being but a name imposed for the swiftnesse thereof. And out of Armenia both Tigris and Eu∣phrates haue their originall: for out of Eden came a riuer, or riuers, to water the Gar∣den, both which Riuers (to wit) Tigris and Euphrates, come out of Armenia, and both of them trauerse Mesopotamia, Regions first of all knowne by the name of E∣den for their beautie and fertilitie. And it is very probable, that Eden contained also some part of Armenia, and the excellent fertilitie thereof in diuers places, is not vn∣worthie the name of Eden. For in some part thereof (sayth STRABO) the leaues are alwayes greene, and therefore therein a perpetuall Spring. Also STEPHANVS de vrbibus mentioneth the Citie of Adana vpon Euphrates: and the name of Eden was in vse in Amos time, though he speake not of Eden in the East, but of Eden in Coe∣lesyria. But to the end I may not burden the Readers patience with too long a dis∣course, it may suffice to know, that Euphrates and Tigris (once ioyned together, and afterward separate) are two of those foure heads, into which these Riuers which are said to water the Garden of Paradise, were diuided: whose courses being knowne, Eden, (out of which they are said to come) cannot be vnknowne. Now that Hidde∣kel and Perath were Tigris and Euphrates, it is agreed by all: for the Seuentie and all others conuert Perath by Euphrates: & Hiddekel Tigrim omnes exponunt: and all men vnderstand Hiddekel by Tigris (sayth VATABLE.) And because that which I haue sayd of the Ile of Eden, shall not bee subiect to the censure of selfe-inuention, I haue heere-vnder set downe the words out of the two generall Epistles of the Nestorians, as Masius (ad verbum) hath conuerted them into Latine. The occasion of those Let∣ters and Supplications to the Pope were, that the Nestorian Christians which inhabit Mesopotamia, Assyria, Persia, and Babylonia, and haue to this day (at least in Queene Ma∣ries time they had) fifteene Churches in one Citie, called Parthorum, or Mo∣sel vpon the Riuer of Tigris, hauing no sufficient authoritie to choose themselues a Patriarch (which cannot be done without foure or three Metropolitane Bishops at least) sent to the Bishop of Rome in the yeere of Christ 1552. (as aforesaid) a Peti∣tion to obtaine allowance vnto such an election as themselues had made: hauing three hundred yeere before that vpon the like defect, sent one Marius thither to bee confirmed; and in this negotiation they made knowne to the Bishop of Rome the state of the Christian Church in those parts: for vpon the death of their Patriarch (who of a couetous desire to enrich himselfe had forborne to institute Metropolitane Bishops, when the places fell void) they all assembled themselues together to consult of the Church-gouernment. And because all the Patriarchs for 100. yeeres had beene of one house and family to the preiudice of the Church, and that there yet remai∣ned one Bishop of the same Stocke and Kindred, who aspired to the same dignitie, which his Predecessours had held, the rest of the Professours refused to allow him. Vpon which occasion, and for the choice of a Gouernour more sufficient, the Tea∣chers in all the Churches assembled themselues. The words of the generall Epistle to the Pope are these, about the middle of the said Epistle: Verùm nos non acceptaui∣mus ne{que} proclamauimus ipsum, sed subitò conuenimus ex omnibus locis Orientalibus, & ex omnibus Ciuitatibus & Pagis quae sunt circum Ciuitatem Mosel (hoc est) , in vict∣nia Niniues, ex Babylonia, ex Charrha, ex Arbella, ex Insula quae est in medio Tigris, flu∣minis Eden, ex Tauris Persiae, ex Nisibi, &c. which is: But wee did neyther accept of this man, neyther pronounced him: but suddenly we assembled our of all parts of the East, and out of all the Cities and Villages which are about Mosel (or Attur) neighbouring Niniue, and out of Babylon, Carrha, Arbella, and out of the Iland which lyeth in the middle of Tigris, a Riuer of Eden, or rather, out of the Ile of Eden, which lyeth in the Riuer Ti∣gris. And in a second Epistle at the same time sent, they vse these words: Ne{que} super∣sunt apud nos Metropolitae, quorum est ordinare Catholicum, sed soli pauct Episcopi, Epis∣copus Arbelae, Episcopus Salmasti, Episcopus Adurbeigan; en è vestigio conuenimus in , quae est intra Tigrim flumen, Eden, fecimus{que} compactum inter nos, &c. (which is) Neyther are there remaining among vs any Metropolitan Bishops to whom it belongs to or∣daine a Patriarch, but onely a few Bishops, as the Bishop of Arbela, the Bishop of Salmastus, and the Bishop of Adurbeigan: but loe, we assembled speedily in the Iland Eden, which is in Ti∣gris and agreed betweene our selues, &c. Now this Iland of Eden Masius describeth with other places; which being well conceiued, the Nestorian Epistles, and the state of the Church may bee in those parts (sayth he) the better vnderstood. And after hee hath distinguished the foure sorts of Christians in those parts of the World, and in the South part of Africa, which hee calleth Nestorians, Iacobites, Maronitae, and Cophti, hee goeth on in these wordes: Mox, morte, concurrisse aiebant tumultuario in illam quam modo dixi Tigris Insulam, quae duodecim circiter passuum millibus supra Mosal posita, decem ferè millia passuum suo ambitu continet, muris vndi{que} cincta, & à paucis alijs quàm Christianis hominibus habita∣ta: which is, Now hearing of the death of the Patriarch, (as those that came to Rome reported) they ran tumultuously together into that Iland of Tigris or Eden before spoken of, which Iland is situated about 12. miles aboue Mosel, containing very neere ten miles in compasse, and euery where with a wall, inhabited by a few other men than Chri∣stians. And afterward he maketh a recapitulation of the Christian Churches; among the rest he addeth the Isle of Eden by the name of Geserta, Insula Tigris: siue Geserta. Furthermore, describing the Citie of Hosan-cepha, or Fortis Petra, he placeth it supra praedictam Tigris Insulam rupi asperae impositam; Aboue the foresaid Iland of Tigris, being seated on a steeperocke. Of this Iland of Geserta, Andrew Theuet maketh mention in his tenth booke of his generall Cosmographie in these wordes: Geserta ou Gesire est milieu de la riuiere du Tigre, & pense que c'est vne terre des plus fertiles de toutel' Asie; Ge∣serta or Gesire is in the middle of Tigris, the soule the most fertile of all Asia. By this we see that the ancient name of Eden liueth, and of that Eden, which lyeth Eastward from Arabia Petraea, and the Desart where Moses wrote, and that Eden which bordereth Charran according to Ezechiel, and that Eden which is seated ac∣cording to the assertion of the said Prophet, and ioyned with those Nations of Re∣seph, Canneh, and Charran, and the rest which traded with the Tyrians, and is found at this day in the parting of the two Regions of Assyria and Babylonia, where the Edenites in Thelassar were garrisond to resist the Assyrians, whose displantation Se∣nacherib vaunted of (as aboue written) and lastly, the same Eden, which embraceth Tigris, and looketh on Euphrates, two of the knowne Riuers of those foure, which are by all men ascribed to Paradise. §. XI. Of the difficultie in the Text, which seemeth to make the foure Riuers to rise from one streame. BVt it may be obiected, that it is written in the Text, That a Riuer went out of Eden, and not Riuers, in the Plurall, which scruple Matthew Be∣roaldus hath thus answered in his Chronologie: The Latine Transla∣tion (saith he) hath these wordes: Et fluuius egrediebatur de loco volup∣tatis ad irrigandum Paradisum, qui inde diuidebatur in quatuor capita: Quae verba melius consentient cum rei narratione, & eiusdem explicatione, si ita reddantur. Et fluuius erat egrediens ex Edene, (hoc est) procedebant ex Edene regione ad rigan∣dam pomarium, & inde diuidebatur, & in quatuor capita: which is, And a Riuer went out of the place of pleasure to water Paradise, and thence was diuided into foure heads: which wordes (saith Beroaldus ) doe better agree with the narration and explication of the place, if they be thus translated: And a Riuer was going forth of Eden (that is) Riuers went forth, and ran out of the Region of Eden to water the Orchard, and from thence it was diuided, and they became foure heads. The Tigurine differs from the Vulgar or Latine, for it conuerts it thus: Et fluuius egrediebatur de delicijs; And a Riuer went out of pleasure, in stead of Eden; and the Latine addeth the word locus, or place, Et egredieba∣tur de loco voluptatis; And a Riuer went out of the place of pleasure: and so the word (place) may rightly be referred to Eden, which was (of all other) a Region most delightfull and fertile; and so also the word ( inde ) and thence was diuided, hath reference to the Countrie of Eden, and not to the Garden it selfe. And for the word ( Riuer ) for Riuers, it is vsuall among the Hebrewes: for it is written: Let the earth bud forth the bud of the herbe, that seedeth seede, the fruitfull tree, Gen. 1. 11. &c. Here the Hebrew vseth the Singular for the Plurall, Herbe and Tree, for Herbs 3. 2. and Trees; and againe, we eate of the fruit of the tree, in stead of (trees:) And thirdly, The man and his wife hid themselues from the presence of God; In medio ligni Paradisi; In 8. the middle of the tree of the Garden, for (trees.) And of this opinion is Dauid Kimhi, and Vatablus, who vpon this place of Genesis say, that the Hebrewes doe often put the Singular for the Plurall, as illud, for vnumquod{que} illorum, and he giueth an instance in this question it selfe, as, A Riuer (for Riuers ) went out of Eden. And this answere out of diuers of the learned, may, not without good reason, be giuen to the obiection, That Moses speaketh but of one Riuer, from which the heads should diuide themselues. Howbeit I denie not, but with as good (and perhaps bet∣ter) reason, we may expound the foure heads, to be foure notable passages into sa∣mous Countries. And so we may take the word (Riuer) Verse the tenth for one Ri∣uer (to wit) Euphrates, as this name comprehendeth all the branches thereof. For this Riuer, after he is past the place, where we suppose Paradise to haue beene, diuides it selfe, and ere long yeeldeth foure notable passages into seuerall Countries, though not all the way downe streame, (for this is no where in the Text) where it is noted, that following the Riuer downward, there is conueyance into the Countries named in the Text, though part of the way to one of the Countries (to wit, to Assyria ) were vp Tigris. To this end the Text speaking of Hiddekel, as it riseth from the Riuer of Eden, doth not say it compasseth or washeth the whole Region of Assyria, (as it had vsed this phrase of Pison and Gehon ) but that it runneth toward Assyria. The first branch Pison, is Nahar-malcha, (by interpretation) Basilius, or flumen regium, which runneth into Tigris vnder Apamia, whence ariseth the name of Pasi-tigris, (as it were) Piso-ti∣gris. This leadeth to the Land of Hauila or Susiana. The second branch Gehon, is that which in Historians is Nabarsares, or Narragas, for Nahar-ragas: both which names signifie flumen deriuatum (a Riuer deriued) also , quasi Ranosus, by reason of the froggie Fennes which it maketh: this Gehon leadeth to the first seate of Chus, about the borders of Chaldaea and Arabia, and it is lost at length in the Lakes of Chaldaea. The third branch, Hiddekel, may be expounded the vpper streame of Pi∣son, or Basilius, which runneth into Hiddekel properly so called (that is, into Tigris ) aboue Seleucia, where it sheweth a passage vp Tigris into : where, because at length it is called Hiddekel, or Tigris, hauing before no knowne proper name, the Text in this place calleth it Hiddekel from the beginning. The fourth Perath or Eu∣phrates, so called per excellentiam, being the body of the Riuer Euphrates, which run∣neth through Babylon and Otris. But, be it a Riuer or Riuers, that come out of Eden, seeing that Tigris and Euphrates are noted in the Text, there can be no doubt, but that Paradise was not farre from these Riuers: for that Perath in Moses is Euphrates, there can be no question; and (indeede) as plaine it is that Hiddekel is Tigris. For Hiddekel goeth (saith Moses ) Eastwards towards Assur, as we finde. that Tigris is the Riuer of Assyria propriè dicta, whose chiefe Citie was Niniue, as in Genesis the tenth it is writ∣ten: That out of that Land (to wit) Babylonia, Nimrod went into Assur, and builded Niniue, which was the chiefe Citie of Assyria. And as for the kinde of speech here vsed in the Text, speaking of foure heads; though the heads of Riuers be (properly) their Fountaynes, yet here are they to be vnderstood, to be spoken of the beginning of their diuision from the first streame. Caput aquae (saith VLPIANVS) illud est, vnde aqua ; siex fonte nascatur fons; si ex , velex lacu prima initia, &c. If the beginning of the water be out of a Foun∣tayne, then is the Fountayne taken for the head: if out of a Lake, then the Lake; and if from a maine Riuer any branch be separate and diuided, then where that branch doth first bound it selfe with new bankes, there is that part of the Riuer, where the branch for∣saketh the mayne streame, called the head of the Riuer. §. XII. Of the strange fertilitie and happinesse of the Babylonian soile, as it is certayne that Eden was such. IT may also be demanded, whether this Region of Eden, by vs descri∣bed, be of such fertilitie and beautie, as Eden the seate of Paradise was: which if it be denyed, then must we also consider, that there was no part of the earth, that retayned that fertilitie and pleasure, that it had before the curse: neither can we ascribe the same fruitfulnesse to any part of the earth, nor the same vertue to any plant thereon growing, that they had before the floud; and therefore this Region of Eden may be now no such flourish∣ing Countrie, as it was when it was first created in his perfection. Yet this I finde written of it: First in Herodotus, who was an eye-witnesse, and speaketh of the very Herod. Clia. l. 1. place it selfe, for the Ile of Eden is but twelue miles or thereabout from Niniue, and so from Mosal. Ex Euphrate exiens in Tigrim, alterum flumen, iuxta quod Vrbs Ninus sita erat, regio, omnium quas , optima est, &c. Where Euphrates runneth out into Tigris, not farre from the place where Ninus is seated, This Region, of all that we haue seene, is most excellent; and he addeth afterward: Cereris autem fructu procreando ferax est, vtnunquàm non ferè ducentareddit, &c. (that is) It is so fruitfull in bring∣ing forth Corne, that it yeeldeth two hundred fold: The leaues of Wheate and Barley being almost foure fingers broade: As for the height of Millet and Sesame, they are euen in length like vnto trees, which although I know to be true, yet I for beare to speake hereof, well know∣ing, that those things which are reported of this fruitfulnesse, will seeme very incredible to those, which neuer were in the Countrie of Babylon. They haue commonly in all the Countrie Palme-trees growing of their owne accord, the most of them bearing fruit, out of which they make both meates, and wine, and honny, ordering them as the Fig-trees. Thus farre Herodotus. To this Palme tree so much admired in the East India, Strabo and Niger adde a fourth excellencie, which is, that it yeeldeth bread; Ex quibus panem, & mel, & vinum, & acetum conficiunt; Of which these people make bread, wine, honny, and vineger. But Antonius the Eremite findeth a commoditie, not inferior to any of those foure, which is, that from this selfe-same Tree there is drawne a kind of fine flaxe, of which people make their garments, and with which in East India they prepare the cordage for their ships; and that this is true, Athanasius in the life of Antonius the Eremite, confesseth, saying: That he receiued a garment made thereof from the Eremite himselfe, which he brought with him out of this Region. So therefore those Trees, which the East Indies so highly esteeme and so much admire (as indeede the Earth yeeldeth no plant comparable to this) those Trees (I say) are in this vpper Babylon, or Region of Eden, as common as any Trees of the field. Sunt etiam (saith STRABO) passim per omnem regionem Palmae sua spontenascentes; There are of Palmes ouer all the whole Region, grow∣ing of their owne accord. Of this place Quintus Curtius maketh this report: Euntibus a Arabiae odorum fertilitate nobilis, regio campestris interest Tigrim & Eu∣phratem, iacens tam vbere & pingui solo, vt à pastu repelli pecora dicantur, ne satiet as peri∣mat; (that is) As you trauaile on the lest hand of Arabia (famous for plentie of sweet o∣dors) there lyeth a Champaine Countrie placed betweene Tigris and Euphrates, and so fruit∣full and fat a soile, that they are said to driue their Cattell from the pasture, lest they should perish by satietie. Bis in anno segetes Babylonij secant; The Babylonians cut their Corne twice a yeere (saith Niger. ) And as Countries generally are more fruitfull to the South∣ward, then in the Northern parts: so we may iudge the excellencie of this by that re∣port which Strabo maketh of the South part of Armenia, which is the North border of Eden, or a part thereof; his wordes be these in the Latine: Tota enim haec regio fru∣gibus & arboribus abundat mansuetis, item{que} semper virentibus; This Region aboundeth with pleasant fruits, and trees, alwaies greene: which witnesseth a perpetuall Spring, not found elsewhere but in the Indies only, by reason of the Sunnes neighbourhood, the life and stirrer vp of nature in a perpetuall actiuitie. In briefe, so great is the fertilitie of the ground, that the people are constrayned twice to mow downe their Corne∣fields, and a third time to eate them vp with sheep: which husbandrie the wanting in the Valley of Mexico, for the first fortie yeeres, could not make our kind of Wheat beare seede, but it grew vp as high as the trees, and was fruitlesse. Besides, those fields are altogether without weedes (saith Plinie ) who addeth this singulari∣tie Plin. Net. hist. l. 18. c. 17. to that soile, That the second yeere the very stubble (or rather falling downe of the seedes againe) yeeldeth them a haruest of Corne without any further labour: his wordes are these: Vbertatis tantae sunt, vt sequentianno restibilis fiat seges. §. XIII. Of the Riuer Pison, and the land of Hauilah. AFter the discouerie of Eden, and the testimonies of the fertilitie there∣of, it resteth to proue that Pison and Gehon are branches of Tigris, and Euphrates. For that the knowledge and certaintie of these two Riuers should trouble so many wise men, it is strange to me, seeing necessitie it selfe ( Tigris and Euphrates being knowne) findeth them out: for Eu∣phrates or Tigris, or both be that riuer or riuers of Eden, which water Paradise, which riuer or riuers Moses witnesseth afterward, diuided into foure heads, whereof the one is called Pison, the other Gehon, &c. Could there be a stranger fancie in the world, then when we finde both these (namely) Tigris and Euphrates in Assyria and Mesopo∣tamia, to seeke the other two in India and Aegypt, making the one Ganges, and the o∣ther Nilus? Two Riuers as farre distant, as any of fame knowne or discouered in the world: the Scriptures making it so plaine, that these Riuers were diuided into foure branches, and with the Scriptures, Nature, Reason and Experience bearing witnesse. There is no errour, which hath not some slipperie and bad foundation, or some ap∣parance of probabilitie, resembling truth, which when men (who studie to be singu∣lar) finde out, (straining reason according to their fancies) they then publish to the world matter of contention and jangling: not doubting but in the variable defor∣mitie of mens mindes, to find some partakers or sectatours, the better by their helpe to nurse and cherish such weake babes, as their owne inuentions haue begotten. But this mistaking (and first for the riuer of Pison ) seemeth to haue growne out of the not-distinguishing of that Region in India, called Hauilah, from Hauilah, which adioyneth to Babylonia, afterward knowne by the name of Susiana. For Hauilah vp∣on Tigris tooke name from Hauilah the sonne of Cush; and in India, from Ha∣uilah the sonne of , the one remembred by Moses in the description of Paradise, Gen. 10. . the other where Moses setteth downe the generations of Noah, and his sonnes after the floud. For the sonnes of Cush were Seba, Hauilah, Sabtah, and Raamah, and the sonnes of Ioctan were Ophir, and Hauilah, &c. of which latter (to wit) of Ophir and 10. 29. Hauilah the sonnes of Ioctan, that Iland of Ophir, (whence Salomon had gold) and Ha∣uilah adioyning had their names. Now because Ganges is a great and a famous Riuer of the East India, and Hauilah a Countrey of the same, and is situated vpon Ganges, hence it came that Ganges was taken for Pison, which Riuer is said by Moses to . 11. the land of Hauilah. Or perhaps it was supposed that those foure Riuers, named by Moses, must of necessitie be foure of the greatest in the world; whence (supposing that Ganges was the next great and famous riuer after Tigris & Euphrates ) they chose out this Riuer to make one of the foure. And yet certainely there is another Riuer, whom in these respects they should rather haue chosen then Ganges; for the Riuer Indus on this side India, for beautie, for neernesse, & for abilitie, giueth no way place to Ganges, but exceedeth it in all. And how can any reasonable man conceiue, that Ganges can be one of the foure heads, seeing Indus commeth betweene it and Tigris? and betweene Tigris and Indus is all that large Empire of Persia, consisting of many Kingdomes. And , farther toward the East, and beyond Indus, are all those ample Dominions of Indiaintra Gangem, which lie betweene those two proud Riuers of Indus and Ganges, now called the Kingdome of Mogor. So as if Indus bee not ac∣counted for any of the foure, because it is remoued from Tigris by all the breadth of Persia, then how much lesse Ganges, which falleth into the Ocean, little lesse then fortie degrees to the Eastward of Indus? Surely whosoeuer readeth the Storie of A∣lexander, shall finde, that there is no riuer in Asia, that can exceede Indus. For Hydas∣pis was of that breadth and depth, as Alexander thereon in great Gallies transported himselfe, and the greatest part of his armie, and in sayling down that branch of Indus, found it so large and deepe, and by reason thereof so great a billow, as it endangered his whole Fleete, which was ready to bee swallowed vp therein: Hydaspis (as afore∣said) being but one of many branches of Indus, comparable to it, and as great as it, hauing besides this, the Riuers of Coas, of , Acesines, Adris, (otherwise Hirotis, Hispalis, and Zaradrus, all which make but one Indus, and by it are swallowed vp with all their children and companions, which being all incorporate and made one streame, it crosseth athwart Asia, and then at Cambaia visiteth the Ocean Sea. But because Pison, which compasseth Hauilah, as also Gehon, which watereth Cush, Gen. 2. 15. must some-where be ioyned with the rest in one body, or at least be found to proceed out of the same Countrey of Eden, out of which the other two heads doe proceede, out of doubt they cannot either the one or the other, bee Ganges, or Nilus: for Nilus riseth in the vttermost of the South, and runneth Northward into the Medi∣terran Sea; and the Riuer Ganges riseth out of the mountaine Imaus, or (as others will haue it) Caucasus, which diuides the Northerne Scythia from India, and runneth from North to South into the Indian Ocean. And as for Perath and Hiddekel (that is, Euphrates and Tigris ) the one of them is begotten in Armenia, neere Georgiana or Ibe∣ria, the other not farre off in the same Armenia, by the mountaines, so as Ganges, who onely trauaileth in her owne India, and Nilus through Aethiopia and Aegypt, neuer saw the land of Eden, or ioyned themselues in one Channell, either with themselues, or with either of the other; and therefore could not at any time from thence bee separated, or diuided into foure heads or branches, according to Moses. Therefore the Riuer Pison, which enricheth Hauilah, is the same which by ioy∣ning it selfe with Tigris, was therefore called Pisi-tigris, or Piso-tigris, of Pison and Tigris, which Riuer watereth that Hauilah, which Hauilah the sonne of Cush gaue Gen. 2. v. 12. name vnto, and not Hauilah of India, so called of Hauilah the sonne of Ioctan, who in∣habited with his brother Ophir in the East. And this Hauilah of the Cushites hath al∣so Gold, Bdellium, and the Onyx stone. This Bdellium is a tree, of the bignesse, of an Oliue, whereof Arabia hath great plenty, which yeeldeth a certaine gumme, sweete to smell to, but bitter in taste, called also Bdellium. The Hebrewes take the Load-stone for Bdellium. Beroaldus affirmeth, that Bdela in Hebrew signifieth Pearle: so doth Eugubinus; and Hierome calls it Oleaster: be it what it will, a tree bearing gumme, or Pearle: Hauilah, or Susiana hath plenty of both. Now this Coun∣trey of or Hauilah stretcheth it selfe toward the North, as farre as the Altars of Hercules, and from thence imbraceth all that Tract of land Southward, as farre as the Persian Gulfe, on the East side thereof: from which East side had the Shebans (which traded with the Citie of Tyre, according to Ezekiel ) their great plenty of gold, which Strabo also witnesseth, as was shewed before. Steuch. The Greekes had a conceit, that Pison was Danubius: the Rabbines take it for . de Par. . Aben-ezra (sayth Hopkins ) out of Rabbi Saadia translateth Pison into Nilus: But Nilus findeth the same impossibility that Ganges doth: and Danubius hath the Sea of Hellespont and all Asia the lesse, betweene it and Tigris. Now Pison, which run∣neth through Hauilah or Susiana, doth to this day retaine some signe of this name; for where it and Tigris embrace each other vnder the Citie of Apamia, there doe they agree of a ioynt and compounded name, and are called Piso-tigris. And it is strange vnto me, that from so great antiquitie there should bee found remaining any resembling sound of the first name: for Babylon it selfe, which dwelleth so neere these riuers, is by some writers knowne by the name of Bandas, as, by Postellus, by Post. Cosmog. Theuet. Cosmog. Castaldus, of Baldach: by Barius, of Bagdad; and of Boughedor, by Andrew Theuet; and yet all those that haue lately seene it, call it Bagdet. To this riuer of Pison, Ptolomie Asiae tab. 4. indeed with many others giue the name of Basilius, or Regius, and Gehon they terme Mahar-sares and , and Baarsares. So is Euphrates, neere the Spring and foun∣taine, by Strabo and Plinie called Pixirates: by Iunius, , out of the Hebrew, . 5. c. 24. (that is) The profusion, or comming forth of Euphrates: where it breaketh through the mountaine Taurus, it takes the name of Omyra. Plutarch calls it Medus and Zaran∣da: the Hebrewes Parath, (sayth Ar. Montanus: ) Pagninus, Perath: Iosephus, Phorah; Eusibius, Zozimus: Ammianus, Chalymicus: Gistilanus, and Colinutius terme it Cobar: which Ezechiel calleth Chebar; but this is but a branch of Euphrates. The Assyrians know it by the name of Armalchar, or Nahor Malcha: but now commonly it is cal∣led Frat. The same confusion of names bath Tigris, as Diglito, and Diglath, Seilax, and Sol∣lax: of the Hebrewes it was called Hiddikel: now of the inhabitants Tegil. But Mercer vpon Genesis conceiueth rightly of these riuers: for Euphrates and Tigris (sayth he) streame into foure branches, two of which keepe their ancient names, and the other two are called Pison and Gehon. The reason, why these two ri∣uers ioyned in one (below Apamia ) lose their names, and are called Pisi-tigris, and the memorie of Euphrates extinguished, is, because the best part of Euphrates running through the channell of Gehon, sinketh into the Lakes of Chaldaea, not farre from Vr, the Citie of Abraham, and fall not intirely into the Persian Sea, as Tigris accompa∣nied with Pison doth. This errour that Pison was Ganges, was first broched by Iosephus, (whose fieldes, though they be fertile, yet are they exceeding full of weedes) and other men (who take his authoritie to be sufficient in matter of description, whereupon depended no other important consequence) were not curious in the examination thereof. For Epiphantus, Augustine, and Hierome, take this for currant; whereof it followed, that as Pison was transported into the East India, to find out Hauilah: so was Gehon drawne into Africa, to compasse Aethiopta. But if Hauilah, whereof Muses speaketh in the description of Paradise, be found to be a Region, adioining to Babylon on the one side, and Cush (which is falsly interpreted Aethiopia ) fastened to it on the other side, wee shall not neede then to worke wonders (that is) to impose vpon men the transporta∣tion of riuers, from one end of the world to the other, which (among other vses) were made to transport men. Now it was in the valley of Shinar, where Cush the sonne of Ham first sate downe with his sonnes Shebah, Hauilah, Sabtah, Raamah, Nim∣rod, &c. and of Hauilah, the sonne of Cush, did that Region take name, which Pison compasseth; and the land (called Cush ) which Gehon watereth, tooke name of Cush himselfe. For as the sonnes of Ioctan, Ophir and Hauilah, seated themselues as neere together as they could in India, so did the sonnes of Cush in Shinar or Babylonia, where Nimrod built Babel: for Hauilah or Chauilah was first Chusea of Cush; then Chusa, Susa, and . From this Hauilah vnto the Desarts of Sur, did the Israelites and Amalechites pos∣sesse all the interiacent Countries: for Saul smote the Amalechites from Hauilah to 1. Sam. 15. 7. Sur: which Sur, the Chaldaean Paraphrast conuerteth Hagra, and Hagra bordereth the red Sea; but this was not meant from Sur vpon the red Sea, to Hauilah in the East India, for Saul was no such trauailer or Conquerour, and therefore Hauilah must be found neerer home, where the sonnes of Ismael inhabited, and which Countrie Saul wasted: for Amalek and the Amalechites possest that necke of Countrie, between the Persian Sea, and the red Sea; Hauilah being the extreme of the one towardes the East, and Sur of the other, towards Egypt and the West, leauing that great body of Arabia foelix towards the South, and they spred themselues with the Midianites and Edumaeans, from the East part, or backe side of the Holie Land, to the bankes of Euphrates, comprising the best parts of Arabia Petraea, and Deserta. §. XIIII. Of the Riuer Gehon and the Land of Cush: and of the ill translating of the Aethiopia for Cush, 2. CHRON. 21. 16. NOw, as Hauilah in the East India drew Pison so farre out of his way thi∣ther, so I say did Cush (being by the Seuentie translated Aethiopia) force Gehon into Africa. For Cush being taken for Aethiopia by the Greekes, whom the Latines followed, Gehon consequently was esteemed for Ni∣lus. See more of this point, c. 7. § 10. But Aethiopians are, as much, as blacke or burnt faces, whose proper Countrie is called Thebaides, lying to the Southward of all Aegypt. And although there be many other Regions of Aethiopians, and far South in Africa, yet those of The∣baides are those so often remembred in the Aegyptian stories, and out of which Na∣tion they had many times their Kings of Aegypt: all which are very neere, or else directly vnder the Equinoctiall line, which is very farre from that land inhabited by the Chusites; who are neither blacke of colour, nor in any sort neigh∣bouring Torrida Zona. But this Translation of the , doth qualifie in this manner: There are (saith he) two , the East, and the West: and this diuision he findeth in Strabo, out of Homer. Now because there is no colour to make Chush Aethiopia in Africa, Pererius will make Chush and the Land of the Chusites (which is Arabia Petraea, and a part of the Happy, with the Region of Madian) to be the East Aethiopia. Now if it be granted, that Cush and the Land of the Chusites, be that Tract from Sur to Hauilah, according to the Scriptures: Habitauit ISMAEL ab Hauilah vnto Sur, Gen 25. 18. quae respicit Aegyptum oeuntibus Assyrios; ISMAEL dwelt from Hauilah vnto Sur, that is towards Aegypt, as thou goest toward Assyria; The same sufficeth to proue that Gehon cannot be Nilus, but a Riuer which watereth Cush, and not Aethiopia. But this place of Scripture, Habitauit ISMAEL, &c. hath this sense: Ismael dwelt from , which is the way of Assyria, or the Countrie bordering Assyria; and Sur, which ly∣eth toward Aegypt, which is as much to say, as, The issues of Ismael (whereof there Vers. 16. were twelue Princes) whom God had promised to make a great people, inhabited all those Regions betweene the border of Aegypt and Assyria. And that they were (according to the word of God) so increased and multiplyed, it well appeared, when Zearah the Chusite, which others call Tharantha, brought an Armie of ten hundred 2. Chron. 14. 9. thousand against Asa King of Iuda. Which Armie came not out of Aethiopia be∣yond Aegypt; for that had beene a strange progresse for such a multitude, as ten hundred thousand, hauing so mightie a King as the King of Aegypt, betweene and Aethiopia. But these were the Chusites, Amalechites, Madianites, , and Arabians. For it is written, that after Asa (strengthened by God) had defeated this world of an Armie, he in following his victorie tooke some of the Cities of King Zearah round about, as Gerar. Now that Gerar is a Citie of the Aethiopians, it cannot be suspected: for these be the wordes of the Scripture disprouing it: And ABRA∣HAM Gen. 10. v. 11. departed thence toward the South Countrie, and dwelt betweene Cadesh and Sur, and soiourned in Gerar: Now Sur is that part, vpon which Moses and the Israelites first set Exod. 17. 8. their feete after they passed the Red Sea, where the Amalechites in Rephidim set on them, supposing that they had beene wearie, and vnable to resist. Againe, in the sto∣rie of Isaac it is written: Wherefore ISAAC went to ABIMELECH, and the vnto Gen. 26. 1. Gerar: and I am sure Abimelech and the Philistims were no Aethiopians. And lastly, Moses himselfe, where he describeth the bounds of Canaan, hath these words: Then 10. 19. the border of the Canaanites was from Sydon, as thou commest to Gerar: for Sydon was the Frontier of Canaan towards the North, and Gerar by Gazah towards the South. But indeede, howsoeuer Pererius doth with an honest excuse salue his Translation of Chus for Aethiopia, yet it appeareth plainely, that the Septuagint and Iosephus did al∣together misvnderstand this place. And first, for Homers East and West Aethiopia, they are both found elsewhere. For Plinie in his fift Booke and eighth Chapter, ci∣teth Homer for an Authour, of these two Aethiopia's. But the East Aethiopia is that which compasseth Nilus to the South of Aegypt, and is the South border thereof; now a part of the Empire of the , vnder Prester Iohn; And the West Aethiopia is that, which ioyneth it selfe with the Riuer Niger, which wee call Senega and Gam∣bra: for thereabouts are these Aethiopians called Perorsi, Daratites, with diuers other names, which Plinie numbreth. But all these are in Africa, and beyond the Desarts Plin. l. 5. c. 8. thereof, sayth Plinie out of Homer, Agrippa, and Iuba; which Regions indeede (I meane that of Niger, and that of Prester Iohn, and the Troglodytes) lye due East and West. But as for Cush and the Region of the Ismaelites, &c. they are extended di∣rectly North from that Aethiopia, which is beyond Aegypt. Now, that Iosephus was exceeding grosse herein, it appeareth by that fiction, which hee hath of Moses when he serued Pharao, in the warres against the Aethiopians: for in that (to make Chus, Aethiopia) hee transporteth Madian by miracle ouer the Red Sea, and beyond all Aegypt, and setteth it in Aethiopia, as shall be shewed more at large in the Chapter of the Worlds Plantation. Againe, that Gehon was improperly translated , Pere∣rius confesseth, and layeth it rather to the corruption of the Greeke Copie, than other∣wise. And whereas the Septuagint haue conuerted this place of the Prophet HIE∣REMIE; And what hast thou now to doe in the way of Aegypt, to drinke the water of Ni∣lus? C. 2. v. 18. Quidtibi vis in via Aegypti, vt bibas aquam Gehon? to this saith PERERIVS, pro∣fectò Hebraicè ibi non est vox Gehon, sed Sichor, quae significat nigrum & turbidum; Truly (saith PERERIVS) the word Gehon in this place, is not found in the Hebrew, but Sichor, which signifieth blacke and troubled water. Furthermore, this is a manifest and vnanswerable argument, that Chus was ill ta∣ken Exod. 2. 21. 3. 1. for Aethiopia. Moses married the Daughter of Iethro, Prince and Priest of Madian, whom both the Greeke and Latine call a Madianite, and not Aethiopissam, as (with .) Num. 12. 1. The Geneua conuerts it, though it helpe it a little with a marginall note. Now it is without dispute, that Zipporah was of the Countrie of Madian, which is that part of Arabia Petraea, bordering the Red Sea; for it is written in the second of Exodus, that MOSES fled from PHARAO into the Land of Madian, and sate downe by a V. 15 Well, &c. and againe, in the third of Exodus; when MOSES kept the sheepe of IETHRO V. 1. his father in law, Priest of Madian, &c. Indeed, these foure nations are where mixt in the Scriptures, because they dwell confusedly togther (to wit) the Madianites, the Ismaelites, the Amalekites, and the Chusites, which were all in one generall word, Ara∣bians, and in the Scriptures sometimes called by one of those names, and sometimes by another, as in Gen. 37. v. 25. 27. & 28. that Ioseph was sold to the Ismaelites; and in the same Chapter, v. 36. it is written, that the Madianites sold Ioseph to , Pha∣rao's Steward. The Geneuians, in a marginall note (to auoid this confounding of the Nations) say, that Moses wrote according to their opinion, who tooke the Madianites and Ismaelites to be all one. But Moses wrote not after any mans opinion, he wrote the truth, and these were all Arabians, and so in this very place it appeareth by their merchandise, which they brought with them, when they bought Ioseph: for their Camels were loden with Spicery and Balme, and Myrrhe, which are the Trades of Gen. 37. 25. Arabia foelix: from whence chiefly, and from the East India, all the World is serued with Myrrhe and Frankincense; and their Spices they receiued from the East side of the Arabian Gulfe, as aforesaid. And in the 39. Chapter it is said: That Putiphar V. 1. bought Ioseph of the Ismaelites, which the Chaldaean Paraphrast in the same place cal∣leth Arabians. Now, to make this the more manifest, it is written in the sixt of , That when Israel had sowen, then came vp the Madianites, and the Amalekites, and V. 3. they of the East, and came vpon them: they of the East, were Arabians of the Desart; so as where before in the buying of Ioseph, the Madianites and the Ismaelites were confused, here the Madianites and Amalekites are made one Nation. For in the pro∣secution of the Story of Gedeon, the Madianites only are named, as comprehending C. 7. both Nations; and in the eight Chapter, v. 24. these Nations are all called Ismaelites, and neyther Madianites nor Amalekites. As when Gedeon desired, that euery man would giue him the golden eare-rings, which they had taken after the victory against Zebah and Zalmunna, Kings of Arabia, amounting to 1700. shickles of gold, it is writ∣ten: For they had golden eare-rings, because they were Ismaelites. And these Ismaelites C. 8. v. 24. were a great and valiant Nation, and euer in action of warre. Manus eius contr , Gen. 16. 12. & manus omnium contra eum; His hand (sayth God of ISMAEL) shall bee against all men, and euery mans hand against him. Of these Ismaelites came the Mahometan Ara∣bians, though some Writers thinke Mahomet to be of the Schenitae. And these Ismae∣lites, which inhabit chiefly in Cedar, and the Desarts of Sur and Pharan (saith Iosephus) vse poyson vpon their Arrowes, as the Indians doe. Towards the South-east are the Madianites, and Chusites: and beyond them, towards the Desarts of Arabia, the Ama∣lekites; and all are one Nation, and all Arabians. Lastly, the ill translation of Aethiopia for Chus, is among other places, made most apparent, in the second of Chronicles, in these wordes: So the Lord stirred vp against Chro. 2. c. 21. 16. IEHORAM, the spirit of the Philistines, and the Arabians, which confine the Aethiopians; so Hierome reades it: the Geneua translation hath it, which were besides the Now, how farre it is off betweene the Philistines, and the Negro's, or the e∣uery man that looketh in a Map may iudge. For the Philistines and Arabians doe mixe and ioyne with the Land of the Chusites, and are distant from Aethiopia about two and thirtie, or three and thirtie degrees, and therefore not their next Neighbours; but all Egypt, and the Desarts of Sur and Pharan, are betweene them. So as this place of the second of Chronicles, should haue beene translated in these words: So the Lord stirred vp against IEHORAM, the spirits of the Philistines, and the Arabians, which confine and border vpon the Chusites, who indeed are their next Neighbours. Steuch. Eu∣gub. in Gen. c. 2. Nulla superest dubitatio quin Aethiopia in Sacris literis sit Arabiae propinqua; There remaineth no doubt (sayth STEVCHIVS) but Aethiopia in the Scriptures, is taken for that Countrey, which ioyneth to Arabia. Now may we thinke is it probable, or possible, that Moses could bee ignorant of Nilus? No, he knew it, no liuing man so well, and therefore would neuer haue named Gehon, for Nilus, or Nilus for Gehon. Surely, if Moses had meant Nilus, when he named Gehon, he would haue called the Riuer (into which he was cast vpon Reeds, and pre∣serued by God, working compassion in the Daughter of Pharao) a Riuer of Egypt, Exod. 2. wherein he was borne and bred, and wrought so many Miracles. Besides, the Riuer of Nilus is often named in the Scriptures, but neuer by the name of Gehon. And if Moses had told the Israelites, that Nilus had beene a Riuer of Paradise, they might iustly haue thought, that hee had derided them: for they had liued there all dayes of their liues, and found no such Paradise at all, nor any memory, or speech thereof; ex∣cept wee shall beleeue the Paradise of Hesperides, where (sayth Plinie) there was no∣thing Plin. l. 5. c. 1. found in his time, but wild Oliues in stead of golden Apples. But Nilus is twice called Sichor, once in Esay, and once in the Prophet Hieremie; and yet in those places it C. 23. v. 3. is not said to be a Riuer of Aethiopia, but of Egypt. For in a word, the Israelites had ne∣uer C. 2. v. 18. any communion or affaires with the Aethiopians, nor any intelligence, or trade, beyond Egypt, to the South; but the Enemies which they had on the South, and East-parts, were these Nations of the Chusites, Philistines, Ismaelites, Amalekites, and Madianites: who being often gouerned by many little Kings, or Reguli, were distin∣guished in names, according to the Fathers and Heads of those Nations; but in one generall name were all Arabians. On the North-side of Canaan, they were afflicted with the Coelesyrians, with the Magogians, Tubalines, and others their adherents; and thirdly within themselues, the Nations, which remained of the ancient , held the strongest Cities vpon the Sea-coast (as) Tyre, Sidon, Acon, Gaza, and many o∣thers: yea, Hierusalem it selfe was with-held from Israel (from the dayes of Moses, euen vnto the time of Dauid) by the Iebusites. That which now remaineth of most difficultie is, that it doth not appeare, that any part of Gehon watereth that part of Arabia the stonie, which the Chusites inhabi∣ted in the times of the Kings of Israel: and in this Desart it was that Matt. Beroaldus lost himselfe in seeking out Paradise: for hee was driuen (to my vnderstanding) to create two Riuers, and call them Gehon, and Pison; to the end that the one might wa∣ter Chus, and the other Hauilah, for I finde none such in rerum natura, as hee hath described: by which Riuers hee also includeth within Paradise, euen Arabiathe Desart. And as he well proued that Pison was not Ganges, nor Gehon, Nilus: so where to find them else-where it seemeth he knew not. Certainely this Riuer of Gehon, which he maketh to fall into the Mediterran at Gaza, and whose Springs hee findeth farre East in Arabia, is but imaginary: for the Current by Gaza is but a small streame, rising betweene it and the Red Sea, whose head from Gaza it selfe is little more then twentie English myles, as shall appeare hereafter. But questionlesse, hence it comes that many were mistaken. They all considered of the habitations of the Chusites, as they were planted when the state of Israel stood, and when it flourished, being then their neere Neighbours, and neuer looked backe to the first seates and plantation of CHVS. For after the Floud, CHVS and his children neuer rested, till they found the Valley of Shinar, in which, and neere which himselfe with his sonnes first inhabited. HAVILAH tooke the Riuer-side of Tigris chiefly on the East, which after his owne name he called HAVILAH, (now Susiana:) Raamah, and Sheba farther downe the Riuer, in the entrance of Arabia foelix. NIMROD seated himselfe in the best of the Valley, where he built Babel, whereof that Region had afterwards the name of Baby∣lonia. CHVS himselfe and his brother MIZRAIM first kept vpon Gehon, which fal∣leth into the Lakes of Chaldaea, and in processe of time, and as their people increased, they drew themselues more Westerly towards the Red or Arabian Sea: from whence MIZRAIM past ouer into Aegypt, in which Tract the Chusites remained for many yeeres after. Now because there could bee no such Riuer found in Arabia the stonie, which they might entitle Gehon, they translated Chus Aethiopia, and , Nilus. And if we doe examine this mistaking by example, wee shall the better perceiue it as it was. For let vs suppose, that BRVTE, or whosoeuer else that first peopled this Iland, had arriued vpon the Riuer of Thames, and calling the Iland after his name BRITANNIA, it might be said that Thames or Tems was a riuer, that watered Bri∣tannia: and when afterwards in processe of time, the same BRVTE had also discoue∣red and conquered Scotland, which he also entituled by the same name of Britannia, after-ages might conclude that Scotland was no part thereof, because the riuer of Tems is not found therein. Or let vs suppose that EVROPA, the daughter of the King of Tyre in Phoenicia, gaue the name to Europe, according to Herodotus, and that . l. 1. & 4. the first discouerers thereof arriued in the mouth of some riuer in Thrace, which then watered as much of Europe, as hee first discouered, shall wee in like sort resolue, that France, Spaine, and Italie, &c. are no parts of Europe, because that Riuer is not found in them, or any of them? In like manner was it said by Moses in his description of Gehon, that it watered the whole land of Chus; but not the whole land which the Chusites should or might in future time conquer, people, and inhabit, seeing in after∣ages they became Lords of many Nations, and they might (perchance) haue beene Masters in time, (as the Saracens which came of them were) of a great part of the world. For (though the Babylonian Empire, which tooke beginning in NIMROD the sonne of CHVS, consisted at the first but of foure Cities, (to wit) Babel, Erech, Acad, and Chalne, yet wee finde, that his Successours within a few yeares after com∣maunded all the whole world in effect: and the fame of Babel consumed the memo∣rie of Chusea. For of this Tower of Confusion did all that land take the name of Baby∣lonia: and the greatnesse of that Empire founded by NIMROD a yonger sonne, ob∣scured the name and nation of his father CVSH in those parts, vntill they crept far∣ther off, and in places not yet entituled, and farther from the Babylonian Empire, where the Chusites retained their names, which also they fastned to the Soile and Territorie by themselues afterwards inhabited and held. And we may not thinke, that CHVS or any of his could in haste creepe through those desart Regions, which the length of 130. yeares after the floud had (as it were) fortified with thickets, and permitted euery bush and briar, reede and tree to ioyne themselues (as it were) into one maine body and Forrest. For if wee looke with iudgement and reason into the worlds plantation, we shall finde, that euery family seated themselues as neere toge∣ther as possible they could; and though necessitie enforced them, after they grew full of people, to spread themselues, and creepe out of Shinar or Babylonia, yet did they it with this aduice, as that they might at all times resort, and succour one ano∣ther by riuer, the fields being then (without all doubt) impassable. So NIMROD, who out of wit and strength vsurped dominion ouer the rest, sate downe in the very confluence of all those riuers, which watered Paradise: for thither it was to which the greatest troupes of NOAHS children repaired; and from the same place whence Mankinde had his beginning, from thence had they againe their increase. The first Father of men ADAM, had therein his former habitation. The second Father of Mankinde NOAH, began from thence his dispersion. Now as NIMROD the yongest, yet strongest, made his choice of Babel (as afore∣said) which both Tigris and Euphrates cleansed and enriched; so did HAVILAH place himselfe vpon Piso-tigris: RAAMAH and his sonne SHEBA farther downe vpon the same Riuer, on the Sea-coast of Arabia: CHVS himselfe vpon Gehon, the fairest branch of Euphrates. And when they began to spread themselues farther off, yet they alwayes fastened themselues to the Riuers sides: for Niniue, Charran, Reseph, Canneh, Vr in Chaldaea, and the other first-peopled Cities were all founded vpon these Nauigable Riuers, or their branches, by which the one might giue succour and assi∣stance to the other, as is alreadie often remembred. §. XV. A conclusion by way of repetition of something spoken of before. BVT now to conclude this dispute, it appeareth to mee by the testimo∣nies of the Scriptures, that Paradise was a place created by God, and a part of this our Earth and habitable World, seated in the lower part of the Region of Eden, afterward called Aram fluuiorum, or Mesopota∣mia, which taketh into it also a portion of Shinar and Armenia: this Region standing in the most excellent temper of all other, (to wit) 35. degrees from the Aequinoctiall, and 55. from the North-pole: in which Climate the most excel∣lent Wines, Fruits, Oyle, Graine of all sorts are to this day found in abundance. And there is nothing that better proueth the excellency of this sayd soyle and temper, then the abundant growing of the Palme-trees, without the care and labour of man. For wherein soeuer the Earth, Nature, and the Sunne can most vaunt, that they haue excelled, yet shall this Plant be the greatest wonder of all their workes: this Tree alone giueth vnto man whatsoeuer his life beggeth at Natures hand. And though it may bee said, that these Trees are found both in the East and West Indies, which Countries are also blessed with a perpetuall Spring and Summer, yet, lay downe by those pleasures and benefits the fearefull and dangerous Thunders and Lightnings, the horrible and frequent Earthquakes, the dangerous diseases, the multitude of ve∣nimous beasts and wormes, with other inconueniences, and then there will be found no comparison betweene the one and the other. What other excellencies this Garden of Paradise had, before God (for mans in∣gratitude and crueltie) cursed the Earth, we cannot iudge; but I may safely thinke, that by how much Adam exceeded all liuing men in perfection, by being the imme∣diate workemanship of God, by so much did that chosen and particular Garden ex∣ceed all parts of the Vniuersall World, in which God had planted (that is) made to grow the Trees of Life, of Knowledge; Plants only proper, and becomming the Paradise, and Garden of so great a Lord. The summe of all this is, That whereas the eyes of men in this Scripture haue beene dimme-sighted (some of them finding Paradise beyond our knowne World: some, aboue the middle Region of the Ayre: some, eleuated neere the Moone: o∣thers, as farre South as the Line, or as farre North, as the Pole, &c.) I hope that the Reader will be sufficiently satisfied, that these were but like Castles in the Ayre, and in mens fancies, vainly imagined. For it was Eastward in Eden (sayth Moses) East∣ward, in respect of Iudaea, that God planted this Garden, which Eden wee find in the Prophets where it was, and whereof the name (in some part) remaineth to this day. A Riuer went out of Eden to water this Garden, and from thence diuided it selfe in∣to foure branches; and we find that both Tigris and Euphrates swimming through E∣den, doe ioyne in one, and afterward taking wayes apart, doe water Chus and Hauilah, according to Moses: the true seates of Chus and his Sonnes then being in the Valley of Shinar, in which Nimrod built Babel. That Pison was Ganges, the Scripture, Reason, and experience teach the contrary: for that which was neuer ioyned, cannot bee diui∣ded, Ganges, which inhabiteth India, cannot bee a branch of the Riuers of Eden; That Gehon was Nilus, the same distance maketh the same impossibilitie, and this Riuer is a greater stranger to Tigris and Euphrates, then Ganges is: for although there are betweene Tigris and Ganges aboue foure thousand miles, yet they both rise in the same quarter of the World; but Nilus is begotten in the Mountaines of the Moone, almost as farre off as the Cape of good hope, and falleth into the Mediterran Sea: and distilleth out of the Mountaines of Armenia, and falleth into the Gulfe of Persia: the one riseth in the South, and trauaileth North: the other riseth in the North, and runneth South, threescore and three Degrees the one from the o∣ther. In this lease following, I haue added a Chorographicall description of this ter∣restriall Paradise, that the Reader may thereby the better conceiue the preceding Discourse; and this is the reward I looke for, that my labours may but receiue an allowance suspen∣ded, vntill such time, as this description of mine be reproued by a better. CHAP. IIII. Of the two chiefe Trees in the Garden of Paradise. §. I. That the Tree of Life was a materiall Tree: and in what sense it is to be taken, that man by his eating the forbidden fruit, is made sub∣iect to death. FOR eating the forbidden fruit of the Trre of Know∣ledge was Adam driuen out of Paradise, in exilium vita temporalis, into the banishment of temporall life, sayth Be∣da. That these Trees of Life and Knowledge were ma∣teriall Trees (though Figures of the Law and of the Gospell) it is not doubted by the most religious and learned Writers: although the wits of men, which are so volatile, as nothing can fix them, and so slippery, as nothing can fasten them, haue in this also deliuered to the World an imaginarie doctrine. The Tree of Life (say the Hebrewes ) hath a plurall construction, and is to be vnderstood, Lignum vitarum, The Tree of liues, because the fruit thereof had a propertie, to preserue both the growing, sensitiue, and rationall life of man; and not only (but for Adams transgression) had prolonged his owne dayes, but also giuen a durefull continuance to all posteritie; and that, so long, as a . sept. 2. l. 1. 174. bodie compounded of Elements could last. And although it is hard to thinke, that flesh and bloud could bee immortall, but that it must once perish and rot, by the vnchanged Law of God imposed on his crea∣tures, Man (notwithstanding) should haue enioyed thereby a long, healthfull, and vngrieued life: after which (according to the opinion of most Diuines) hee should haue beene translated, as Enoch was. And as before the Floud, the dayes of men had the long measure of eight hundred or nine hundred yeeres; and soone after the floud, of two hundred yeeres and vpwards, euen to fiue hundred: so if Adam had not diso∣beyed Gods first and easie Commandement, the liues of men on Earth might haue continued double, treble, or quadruple to any of the longest times of the first age, as many learned men haue conceiued. Chrysostome, Rupertus, Tostatus, and others were of beliefe, that (but for Adams fall and transgression) Adam and his Posteritie had beene immortall. But such is the infinite wisedome of God, as he foresaw that the Earth could not haue contained Mankind; or else, that Millions of soules must haue beene vngenerated, and haue had no being, if the first number, wherewith the Earth was replenished, had abode thereon for euer: and therefore that of Chrysostome must bee vnderstood of immortalitie of bodies, which should haue beene translated and glorified. But of what kind or Species this Tree of Life was, no man hath taken on him to teach: in which repect many haue conceiued, that the same was not materiall, but a meere Allegorie, taking their strength out of Salomon, where Wisedome is compared to the Tree of Life, and from other places, where also Christ is called the Tree of Life, and out of the Apocalypsis, I will giue to him that ouer commeth, to eate of the Tree . 2. 7. of Life, which is in the Paradise of God. But to this place Saint Augustines answere may suffice, (which is) That the one doth not exclude the other, but that, as there was a terrestriall Paradise, so there was a celestiall. For although Agar and Sara were Fi∣gures of the Old, and New Testament, yet to thinke that they were not Women, and the Maid and Wife of Abraham, were meere foolishnesse. And so in this place the sense of the Scripture is manifest. For God brought out of the earth euery tree faire to sight, and sweet to taste; the tree also of Life in the midst of the garden: which sheweth, that among the trees, which the Earth by Gods commandement produced, the tree of Life was one, and that the fruit thereof was also to be eaten. The report of this Tree was also brought to the ancient Poets: for as from the indigested matter or Chaos, Hesiodus, Homer, Ouid, and others, steale the inuention of the created world; so from the Garden of Paradise, they tooke the Plat-forme of the Orchard of Al∣cinous, and another of the Hesperides: and from the tree of Life, their Nectar and Am∣brosia; for Nectar, according to , signifieth making yong, and Ambrösia, im∣mortalitie; and therefore said to be the meate and drinke of the gods. §. II. Of BECANVS his opinion, that the Tree of Knowledge was Ficus Indica. NOw for the Tree of Knowledge of good and euill, some men haue pre∣sumed farther, especially Goropius Becanus, who giueth himselfe the ho∣nor to haue found out the kinde of this Tree, which none of the Wri∣ters of former times could euer ghesse at, whereat Goropius much mar∣uaileth. But as he had an inuentiue braine, so there neuer liued any man, that beleeued better thereof, and of himselfe. Surely, howsoeuer his opinion may be valued, yet he vsurpeth the praise due to others, at least if the inuention be at that price at which he setteth it. For Moses Bar-cephas fastened on this coniecture aboue sixe hundred yeeres before Becanus was borne: and Bar-cephas himselfe refer∣reth the inuention to an antiquitie more remote, citing for his Author Philoxenus Maburgensis, and others, whose very wordes Goropius vseth, both concerning the Tree, and the reasons wherewith he would induce other men to that beliefe. For Moses Bar-cephas in his Treatise of Paradise (the first Part and fol. 49.) saith, That the Tree of Knowledge was Ficus Indica; The Indian Fig-tree, of which the greatest plentie (saith Becanus ) are found vpon the bankes of Acesines, one of the Riuers which falleth into Inaus, where Alexander built his Fleet of Gallies in, or neere the Kingdome of Porus. This Tree beareth a fruit of the bignesse of a great peaze, or (as Plinie reporteth) Plin. l. 11. c. 5. somewhat bigger, and that it is a tree, se semper serens; Alwayes planting it selfe; that it spreadeth it selfe so farre abroade, as that a troupe of horsemen may hide themselues vnder it. Strabo saith, that it hath branches bending downewards, and leaues no lesse Lib. 1. cap. 2. then a shield. Aristobulus affirmeth, that fiftie horsemen may shaddow themselues vnder one of these trees. Onesicritus raiseth this number to foure hundred. This tree (saith Theophrastus ) exceedeth all other in bignesse, which also Plinie and Onesicritus confirme: to the trunke of which, these Authors giue such a magnitude, as I shame to repeate. But it may be, they all speake by an ill-vnderstood report. For this In∣dian Fig-tree is not so rare a plant, as Becanus conceiueth, who because he found it no where else, would needes draw the garden of Paradise to the Tree, and set it by the Riuer Acesines. But many parts of the world haue them, and I my selfe haue seene twentie thousand of them in one Valley, not farre from Paria in America. They grow in moist grounds, and in this manner: After they are first shot vp some twentie or thirtie foote in length (some more, some lesse, according to the soile) they spread a very large top, hauing no bough nor twigge in the trunke or stemme: for from the vtmost end of the head branches there issueth out a iuyce, which hang∣eth downe-ward like a cord or sinew, and within a few Moneths reacheth the ground; which it no sooner toucheth but it taketh roote, and then being filled both from the top boughes, and from his owne proper roote, this cord maketh it selfe a Tree exceeding hastily. From the vtmost boughes of these yong Trees there fall againe the like cordes, which in one yeere and lesse (in that World of a perpetuall spring) become also trees of the bignesse of the nether part of a lance, and as straight, as arte or nature can make any thing, casting such a shade, and making such a kinde of groue, as no other Tree in the world can doe. Now one of these trees considered with all his yong ones, may (indeede) shrowd foure hundred or foure thousand horsemen, if they please; for they couer whole Vallies of ground where these trees grow neere the Sea-banke, as they doe by thousands in the inner part of Trinidado. The cordes which fall downe ouer the bankes into the Sea, shooting alway downe∣ward to finde roote vnder water, are in those Seas of the Indies, where Oysters breed, intangled in their beds, so as by pulling vp one of these cordes out of the Sea, I haue seene fiue hundred Oysters hanging in a heape thereon; whereof the report came, that Oysters grew on trees in India. But that they beare any such huge leaues, or any such delicate fruit, I could neuer finde, and yet I haue trauailed a dozen miles together vnder them: but to returne to Goropius Becanus. This tree (saith he) was good for meate and pleasing to the sight, as the tree of Knowledge of good and e∣uill is described to be. Secondly, this tree hauing so huge a trunke (as the former Authors report, and Becanus beleeueth) it was in this tree that Adam and Eue hid themselues from the presence of God, for no other tree (saith he) could contayne them. But first it is cer∣tayne, that this Tree hath no extraordinarie magnitude, as touching the trunke or stemme, for among ten thousand of them it is hard to finde any one bigger then the rest, and these are all but of a meane size. Secondly, the wordes of Moses translated in medio ligni, are by all the interpreters vnderstood in the plurall number (that is) in the middest of the trees. But his third argument (or rather the argument of Moses Bar-cephas, word for word) is, That when Adam and Eue found themselues naked, Gen. 3. 7. they made them breeches of Fig-leaues; which proueth (indeede) that either the tree it selfe was a Fig-tree, or that a Fig-tree grew neere it: because Adam being possest with shame, did not runne vp and downe the garden to seeke out leaues to couer him, but found them in the place it selfe; and these leaues of all other were most commodious by reason of their largenesse, which Plinie auoweth in these wordes; Latitudo foliorum peltae effigiem Amazoniae habet; The breadth of the leaues hath the shape Pl. l. 12. c. 5. of an Amazonian shield: which also Theophrast confirmeth; the forme of which Tar∣gets Virgil toucheth: Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis Virg. AEn. l. 1. 494. PENTHESILAEA furens. The Amazons with Crescent-formed shield PENTHESILAEA leades into the field. Here Becanus desireth to be beleeued, or rather threatneth vs all that reade him, to giue credit to this his borrowed discouerie, vsing this confident (or rather chole∣ricke) speech. Quis erit tam impudenter obstinatus, si haec à nobis de ficu hac ex antiquis scriptoribus cum MOSIS narratione comparet, vt audeat dicere aliam arborem inueniri posse, quae cum illa magis quadret? Who will be so impudently obstinate, if he compare these things which we haue reported of this Fig-tree, and out of ancient Writers deliuered, with the narration of MOSES, as to dare to auow, that any other tree can be found, which doth more properly answere, or agree therewith? But for my selfe, because I neither find this tree, sorting in body, in largenesse of leaues, nor in fruit to this report, I rather incline to the opinion of Philo: That the Earth neuer brought forth any of these trees, nei∣ther before nor after; but I leaue euery man to his owne beliefe, for the matter is of no great weight as touching his kinde: only thereby, and by the easie Commande∣ment by God giuen to Adam, to forbeare to thereon, it God to make tryall of his obedience: Prohibita, non propter aliud, quàm ad commendandum pur ae ac August. de , . 13. c. 20. simplicis Obedientiae bonum; Being forbidden, not for any other respect, then thereby to commend the goodnesse of pure and simple Obedience. § III. Of BECANVS his not vnwittie allegorizing of the Storie of his Ficus Indica. BVt in this I must doe Becanus right, that he hath very wittily allegori∣zed this Tree, allowing his supposition of the Tree it selfe to be true. The effects whereof, because his discourses are exceeding ample, I haue gathered in these few wordes. As this Tree (saith he) so did Man grow straight and vpright towards God, vntill such time as he had transgressed and broken the Commandement of his Creator; and then like vnto the boughes of this tree, he began to bend downeward, and stouped toward the earth, which all the rest of Adams posteritie after him haue done, rooting themselues therein and fastning themselues to this corrupt world. The exceeding vmbragious∣nesse of this tree, he compareth to the darke and shaddowed life of man, through which the Sunne of iustice being not able to pierce, we haue all remained in the shad∣dow of death, till it pleased CHRIST to climbe the tree of the Crosse for our en∣lightning & redemption. The little fruit which it beareth, and which is hard to finde among so many large leaues, may be compared (saith he) to the little vertue, and vnperceiued knowledge among so large vanities, which obscure and shaddow it o∣uer. And as this fruit is exceeding sweet, and delicate to the taste and palate: so are the delights and pleasures of the world most pleasing, while they dure. But as all those things which are most mellifluous, are soonest changed into choller and bitternesse: so are our vanities and pleasures conuerted into the bitterest sorrowes and repen∣tances. That the leaues are so exceeding large, the fruit (for such leaues) exceeding little, in this, by comparison we behold (saith he) the many cares and great labours of worldly men their sollicitude, their outward shewes, & publike ostentation, their apparent pride and large vanities; and if we seeke for the fruit, which ought to be their vertuous and pious actions, we finde it of the bignesse of the smallest peaze; glorie, to all the world apparent; goodnesse, to all the world inuisible. And further∣more, as the leaues, body, and boughes of this Tree, by so much exceede all other Plants, as the greatest men of power and worldly abilitie surpasse the meanest: so is the little fruit of such men, and such trees, rather fitting and becomming the vnwor∣thyest Shrub, and humblest Bryar, or the poorest and basest Man, then such a flou∣rishing statelinesse, and magnitude. Lastly, whereas Adam, after he had disobayed God, and beheld his owne nakednesse and shame, sought for leaues to couer him∣selfe withall, this may serue to put vs in minde of his and our sinnes, as often as we put on our garments, to couer and adorne our rotten and mortall bodies: to pamper and maintaine which, we vse so many vncharitable and cruell practices in this world. §. IIII. Of the name of the tree of Knowledge of good and euill: with some other notes touching the storie of ADAMS sinne. NOw, as touching the sense of this tree of Knowledge of good and euill, and what operation the fruit thereof had, and as touching the proper∣tie of the Tree it selfe, Moses Bar-cephas an ancient Syrian Doctor (translated by Masius ) giueth this iudgement: That the fruit of this tree had no such vertue or qualitie, as that by the tasting thereof, there was any such knowledge created in Adam, as if he had beene ignorant before; but as Iunius also noteth: Arbor scientiae boni & mali (id est) experientiae boni & mali ab euentu; The Tree of knowledge of good and euill (that is) the experience of good and euill by the euent. For thus much we may conceiue, that Adam being made (according to the Hebrew phrase) by the workemanship of Gods owne hand, in greater perfection then euer any man was produced by generation, being (as it were) the created plant, out of whose seede all men liuing haue growne vp; and hauing receiued immortali∣tie from the breath or spirit of God, he could not (for these respects) be ignorant, that the disobaying of Gods commandement was the fearfullest euill, and the ob∣seruation of his Precepts the happiest good. But as men in perfect health doe (not∣withstanding) conceiue, that sicknesse is grieuous, and yet in no such degree of tor∣ment, as by the suffering and experience in themselues they afterwards witnesse: so was it with Adam, who could not be ignorant of the punishments, due to neglect and disobedience; and yet felt by the proofe thereof in himselfe another terror then he had fore-thought, or could imagine. For looking into the glasse of his owne guiltie foule, he beheld therein the horror of Gods iudgements, so as he then knew, he fee∣lingly knew, and had tryall of the late good, which could not be prized, and of the new purchased euill, which could not be exprest. He then saw himselfe naked both in body and minde; that is, depriued of Gods grace and former felicitie: and there∣fore was this tree called the tree of Knowledge, & not because the fruit thereof had any such operation, by any selfe qualitie or effect: for the same phrase is vsed in many places of the Scriptures, and names are giuen to Signes and Sacraments, as to acts performed, and things done. In such sort as this tree was called the tree of Know∣ledge, by cause of the euent (as is aforesaid) so was the Well of contention therefore Num. 20. 13. called Esek, and the Well of hatred Sitnath, because the Heardsmen of Isaac and Ge∣rar Gen. 26. 20. 21. contended for them; and the heape of stones, called the heape of witnesse, be∣tweene Iacob and Laban, not that the stones bare witnesse, but for a memorie of the Cap. 31. 48. couenant. So Iacob called the house of God Bethel: and Hagar, the Well in the De∣sart, Cap. 28. 19. Cap. 16. 14. Viuentis, & videntis. But Adam being both betrayed and mastered by his affections, ambitious of a farther knowledge then he had perceiued in himselfe, and looking but slightly (as all his issues doe) into the miseries and sorrowes incident, and greatly affecting the sup∣posed glorie which he might obtaine by tasting the fruit forbidden, he was transpor∣ted and blowne forward by the gentle winde of pleasing perswasions vnawares; his progression being strengthened by the subtile arguments of Satan, who laboured to poyson mankinde in the very roote, which he moystned with the liquor of the same ambition, by which himselfe perished for euer. But what meanes did the Deuill finde out, or what instruments did his owne sub∣tletie Bart. sem. 2. l. 2. present him, as fittest and aptest to worke this mischiefe by? euen the vnquiet vanitie of the woman; so as by Adams harkening to the voyce of his wife, contrarie to the expresse commandement of the liuing God, Mankind by that her incantation became the subiect of labour, sorrow, and death: the woman being giuen to man for a comforter and Companion, but not for a Counseller. But because thou hast obayed Gen. 3. 17. the voyce of thy wife, &c. (said God himselfe) Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sor∣row shalt thou eate of it all thy life. It is also to be noted, by whom the woman was tempted; euen by the most vgly and vnworthy of all beasts, into whom the Deuill entred and perswaded. Secondly, what was the motiue of her disobedience? euen a desire to know what was most vnfitting her knowledge, an affection which hath euer since remained in al the posteritie of her Sexe. Thirdly, what was it that moued the man to yeeld to her perswasions? euen the same cause which hath moued all men since to the like consent, namely, an vnwillingnesse to grieue her and make her sad, lest shee should pine and be ouer-come with sorrow. But if Adam in the state of perfection, and Sa∣lomon the sonne of Dauid, Gods chosen seruant, and himselfe a man endued with the greatest wisedome, did both of them disobay their Creator, by the perswasion and for the loue they bare to a Woman, it is not so wonderfull as lamentable, that other men in succeeding ages haue been allured to so many inconuenient and wicked pra∣ctices, by the perswasions of their wiues, or other beloued Darlings, who couer ouer and shaddow many malicious purposes with a counterfait passion of dissimulate sorrow and vnquietnesse. CHAP. V. Of diuers memorable things betweene the fall of ADAM, and the floud of NOAH. §. I. Of the cause and the reuenge of CAINS sinne: and of his going out from God. THE same Pride and Ambition which began in Angels, and afterward possest Adam, Cain also inherited: for Cain (enuious of the acceptation of his Brothers prayer and sacrifice) slue him, making himselfe the first man-slayer, and his brother the first Martyr: the reuenge of which vnnaturall murther, although it pleased God to mitigate, when Cain cryed out that his punishment was greater then he could beare: For the same offence chiefly (wherewith the sonnes of Adam, as it were, vrged and prouoked God) he destroyed all mankinde, but Noah and his family: for it is written. The earth also was corrupt before God: of which in the same place Moses giueth a rea∣son, Gen. 6. v. 11. 13. for saith he, The earth was filled with crueltie: and anon after, God himselfe made the cause knowne vnto Noah, saying; An end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with crueltie through them, and behold, I will destroy them with the earth, or from the earth. Neither was this crueltie meant to haue beene in taking away the liues of men only, but in all sorts of Iniustice and Oppression. After this murther of ABEL, CAIN went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of NOD, Gen. 4. v. 16. towards the East side of Eden: in which wordes, The going out of Cain from the pre∣sence of the Lord, is not to be vnderstood after the literall sense; God being wholly in all parts of the world: Totus in coelo est, totus in terra, non alternis temporibus, sed Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei, l. 12. c. 19. Vtrum{que} simul; God (saith S. AVGVSTINE) is wholly in heauen, and wholly in earth, not by enterchanged times, but all at once; and that this is true, Dauid witnesseth: If I Psal. 139. 8. be in beauen (saith DAVID) thou art there; if in hell, thou art there also: but what is meant thereby? Exijt à facie Dei (saith CHRYSOSTOME) CAIN went out from Chrysost. in Gen. Homil. 2. the presence of the Lord (that is) he was left of God, disfauoured and bereaued of his protection. §. II. Of CAINS dwelling in the Land of NOD: and of his Citie Enoch. THis word Nod or Naid, S. Hierome and many others vnderstand to sig∣nifie . rad. wandring, or incertayne habitation: vexation or agitation, saith Hebi. ; but the Seuentie conuert it otherwise, and take Nod for the proper name of a Countrie, and so doth Iosephus. But it seemeth to Ioseph. l. 1. c. 3. me, that Cain was rather a Vagabond or Wanderer in his cogitations, then any thing else, and that his thoughts and conscience had no quiet or rest, in re∣gard of the murther committed, iustly fearing (by his owne words) the like violence: And whosoeuer findeth me (saith CAIN) shall slay me. Now that Nod or Naid was a Gen. 4. 14. Region wherein Cain inhabited, appeareth by the word ( dwelt ) for dwelling signi∣fieth an abiding: and we call those people Wanderers and Vagabonds that haue no dwelling place. And to make this dwelling and abiding more manifest, Moses teach∣eth Gen. 4. 16. in what part of the earth this his habitation was, which he affirmeth towards the East side of Eden. Secondly, it is said by Moses, that after Cain departed from the presence or fauour of God, he built a Citie, and called it by the name of his first 17. borne, Enoch; which sheweth that he feared to wander, and rather sought to fortifie himselfe against reuenge. Cyrillus saith, that Cain and Abel were figures of Christ, and of the Iewes; and that as Cain, after that he had slaine Abel vniustly, had thence∣forth no certayne abiding in the world: so the Iewes, after they had crucified the Sonne of God, became Runnegates: and it is true, that the Iewes had neuer since any certayne Estate, Common-weale, or Prince of their owne vpon the earth. Now this Land of Nod, Iunius taketh to be in Arabia Deserta, a Region of Nomades; but Ara∣bia the Desart is not Eastward, or on the East part of Eden, neither are these Nomades any particular People or Nation. For all these, in what part of the world soeuer, which in old time liued by pastorage, and fed (as we call it in Ireland ) vpon white meate, without tilling of the ground, are called by the Greekes, Nomades, and by the Latines, Pastores vagi, as the Northerne Tartarians, the Getulians, and Numidians in Africa, the ancient Brittans, and the Northerne Irish: yea, such were the inhabitants of Italie it selfe, till such time as Italus (who gaue them that name) taught them the husbandrie of tillage, vsed at this day. But the Region Eastward from Eden is that part of Assyria, called by Ptolemie, Calena, which also might be deriued of Carena, the Countrie of Cain. And that Cain inhabited in those parts, it may be gathered by the first possession of his Father Adam; for thus it is written, GEN. 3. Therefore the Lord Vers. 23. God sent him forth from the garden of Eden to till the earth whence he was taken: and in the Verse following: Thus he cast out man, &c. and at the East side of the garden of Eden he 24. set the Cherubins: which sheweth that the entrie into Paradise was from the East, by which entrance Adam was cast out, and therefore inhabiting on that side of Paradise which was Eastward, according to the Text. Cain also in the same Region sought his dwelling place. Now, if the word Nod or Naid doe signifie profugus, that is, a fugi∣tiue, we can giue no longer time to this vncertayne habitation of Cain, then till he built the Citie of Enoch, the first of the world, which he inclosed either for his owne defence, or (as Iosephus writeth) to oppresse others thereby. So as for mine owne o∣pinion, I am resolued with the Septuagint, that Nod was the proper name of a Region; and for the word (vagabond) which Cain vseth of himselfe, it seemeth by the per∣close of the same Verse, that (vagabond) is therein vnderstood for such an one as trauaileth in feare of reuengement: for whosoeuer findeth me (saith CAIN) shall slay me; or else (vagabond) is taken for a man without protection, and cast out from the fa∣uour of God. And because these Henochians, so called of the Citie Henoch, were the first societie and ciuill assembly of all other, it is likely that the fame of these people (either for crueltie, strength, or other actions) liued in the memorie of Noah and his sonnes; so that after the Floud (as there were of all sorts of natures, some vertuously, some im∣piously disposed, and euery actiue minde setting before it whom to follow or imi∣tate) those people, which delighted in crueltie and oppression tooke on them their names whose natures they most liked and allowed; of whom these Henochians were not the least. Perchance the place it selfe where Henoch stood before the Floud, and whereof the Monuments might remaine (as the pillars or the foundation of Iappe did) gaue occasion to the Planters of that place to cal themselues by the same names: for of those Henochians there were many Nations in the borders of Pontus, and Col∣chis in Iberia, Segdiana, and Bactria, and of the same name many Mountaines, as those which are otherwise called Coraxici. And seeing that it is hard to find out the truth of Quotidièaliquid in boc magno or∣be mutatur, noua vrbium iaciuntur, noua Gentium nomina (extinctis nominibus prio∣ribus) oriuntur, ad Albi∣num. these things, which the most aged Time hath couered ouer or defaced, we may (ac∣cording to the counsaile of Plato ) exceedingly reioyce, and therewith satisfie our selues, if of so great and almost worne-out antiquitie, if of the eldest peoples names and Nations there remaine any printor foot-steps to Posteritie. In Plin. l. 6. c. 9. 11. & 16. , P. Mela, Strabo, Valerius Flaccus, Lucan, Stephanus, wee finde those Henochei described, though diuersly written, as in Plinie, sometimes Heniochij, in Mela Eniochi, in Flaccus Heniochi, in Lucan Enochij, all which inhabite vpon the Sea Euxinus, but yet none of these are on the East side of Eden, or (according to Moses words) East∣ward from Eden. For Moses, in all places where he describeth any Region, was so exceeding precise, as sometime hee vseth the word East or South without borrow∣ing Mel. l. 1. c. vlt. Strabo lib. 11. or addition, at other times with a borrowing, as Eastward or Southward, or to∣wards Val. Flacc. l. 6. the East or South. In the place of Genesis the eleuenth hee writeth the word Lucan. l. 3. v. 37. (East) simply and directly. And as they went from the East, they sound a Plaine in the V. 2. Land of Shinar, but in this of Cain he addeth the word (towards) as, in the Land of Nod towards the East side of Eden; which may be taken, as inclining some one point or two eyther to the North or to the South of the East. But as we may coniecture that these Nations tooke name of Henoch, the Citie of Cain, or of the Region wherein it stood, when the same was repeopled after the Floud: so it is probable that these Henochij of Colchis, and other parts adioyning were not the first of that name, after the sonnes of Noah began to fill the World againe: because, had this Henoch the Citie of Cain stood in any of these parts, it had then beene seated North, and not East or Eastward from Eden. But as Plinie findeth their habitation towards Pontus, so afterwards he goeth on Eastward, till hee tracke them or trace them out to their originall. For he calleth these of Colchis (now Mengrelia ) Plin. l. 6. c. 4. 5. Sanni ; ; beyond which an hundred and fiftie myle Eastward Ptol. tab. Asiae. 3. hee findeth another Nation of them about Iberia and Albania; and beyond these a∣gaine hee discouereth a third Nation, from whence all the rest tooke beginning, which inhabited on the West side of the Mountaines of Paro-panisus, betweene them and the great Riuer of Oxus, which bordereth Bactria on the North side; and these Henochij are due East from the Region of Eden, and Eastward from the very Garden it selfe. And although we cannot be assured, that these Henochij tooke name from the me∣mory of the Citie of Enoch directly, yet because they inhabited due East from Para∣dise, and afterwards spred themselues Westward (as all Noahs sonnes did that came into Shinar ) the coniecture is farre more probable, then that of Annius the Fryer, who sets Henoch in Phoenicia, quite contrary to Moses word: Phoenicia from all parts of Eden being directly West. And besides these seueral Nations of the Henochij, Stephanus findeth a Region cal∣led Steph. de Vrb. Henochia, and the same also in the East, with diuers Mountaines about Bactria and Sogdiana of the same name. Onely the Graecians (according to their fabulous inuen∣tions of all things else) out of the word ( Heniochi ) which signifieth Carts or Coach∣men, Nat. Comes cal∣leth them Rhecas. make these Nations to haue sprung from the Waggoners of Castor and Pollax (to wit) AMPHITES and Telchius, who attended them in the enterprize of Iason into And though I doe not deny, but that Iason with other Greekes ranged the . Com. l. 8. c. 9. Coasts of Asia the lesse in an open Boate or kind of small Galley, In the second Booke of this first Part, Cap. 13. §. 5. of whom I shal Strab. l. 11. speake in his owne time: yet no man doubteth but that the tale of the Golden Fleece was for the most part Poeticall; and withall that in such an open Boate, which could hardly carie their owne Rowers, being foure and fiftie, there was no place, and lesse vse of Coach-horses or Waggoners. §. III. Of MOSES his omitting sundry things concerning CAINS Generation. BVT of the remembrance and testimonies of the name of the Citie of Henoch in prophane Story, thus much may suffice; Now it followeth to answere some few obiections against certaine particulars in the fourth and fifth Chapter of Genesis: against which for the first it is de∣manded, how it was possible for Cain (hauing no other assistance then his sonne Henoch ) to performe such a worke as the building of a Citie, seeing there is thereto required so many hands, and so great a masse of all sorts of Materials? To which it is answered, that we are first to consider, That of Cain (because he was the Parent of an impious race) MOSES vseth no ample declaration; and so it best agreeth with his diuine reason, seeing that he containeth the whole Story of the first race, which wasted by the least account, 1656. yeeres, in fiue short Chapters. Yet thus much may euery man borrow of his owne weakest reason, That seeing it pleased God to bestow on the first generations of mens liues so long a measure, as 800. and 900. yeeres, that in such a space Cain had not want of leasure and meanes to build many such Cities as Henoch, be the capacitie answering to what other of the World soeuer: for in what age of Cains life he built it, the Scriptures are silent: as of whose times, and the times of his issues Moses had the least care. And as it was sayd of Cain, that he built a Citie: so was it sayd of Noah, that his three sonnes peopled all the World; but in both, the processe of time required to bee vnderstood: which aduice seeing Moses vseth where the space lesse requireth it, as knowing that hee writ the Scriptures to reasonable men, wee may easily vnderstand, that such was his meaning also in all reports of like nature. For in making but a difference betweene the birth of Abel, and oblation of Cain, he spake it in this sort, Fuit autem post dies multos or à fine dierum (that is) in processe of time, it came to passe that CAIN brought an Oblation. And therefore it is in like sort to bee vnderstood of Cain, that many yeeres fore-gone, and when his people were increased, he built the Citie of Enoch or Henoch. And where it is written, as of Cain, that he built Enoch, so of Salomon, that hee built the Temple of Hierusalem; yet it is well knowne of Salomon, that hee employed in 2. King 6. that worke, 150000. Labourers: for this phrase or speech is common with our selues to say, The King inuaded; when hee caused an inuasion to bee made: and hee built, when he commanded such a building. And therefore seeing wee find, that Moses had no regard to the ages, to the birth, or to the death of any of Cains issues, it is not to be maruailed at, why he also passeth ouer in a word the building of Enoch, without addition of any circumstance: for of Cain, Moses writeth in this manner: CAIN Gen. 4. 17. also knew his wife, who conceiued and bare HENOCH, and hee built a Citie, and called the name of the Citie after the name of his sonne HENOCH. And to HENOCH was borne 18. IRAD, and IRAD begat MEHVIAEL, and MEHVIAEL begat METHVSAEL, and ME∣THVSAEL LAMECH. Now of Seth, Moses writeth farre otherwise, and in this manner. And SETH . 6. v. 5. 105. yeeres, and begat ENOCH, and SETH liued after hee begat ENOCH 807. yeeres, and begat Sonnes and Daughters: so as all the dayes of SETH were 912. yeeres, and hee dyed: as for the yeeres and times of the wicked, they were not numbred in libro viuentium, sayth CYRIL. But in SETH was the Church of GOD established, from whom Christ descended, as touching his manhood: and therefore this way and worke Mo∣ses walked in, and finished it with care, passing ouer the Reprobate Generation (as a∣foresayd. Of the Line of Adam by Cain, Moses remembreth but eight Generations, reckoning Adam for one, and of the Line of Adam by Seth ten, counting Adam also therein, as followeth: ❧ 1. ADAM. 2. Cain. 2. Seth. 3. Henoch. 3. Enosh. 4. Irad. 4. Cainan. 5. Mahuiael. 5. Mahaleel. 6. Mathusael. 6. Iarad. 7. Lamech, who by Ada had 7. Henoch. 8. Iubal and Tubal, and by Silla Tubalcain, and Noëma. 8. Mathusalem. 9. Lamech, and 10. Noah. These be the Generations of Adam by Cain, which the Scriptures mention: but Iosephus giueth vnto Lamech threescore and seuenteene Sonnes and Daughters, by his two wiues Ada, and Silla: and to these three sonnes of Lamech, Moses ascribeth the inuention of Pastorage, of Musicke, and the working in Metall; for it seemeth that Iubal first gathered together, and made familiar those beasts which formerly were vntamed, and brought them into Heards and Droues: Tubal inuented Musicke, Gen. 4. 20. 21. 22 and Tubalcain the working in Brasse and Iron: the one being addicted to Husbandry, the other was Mechanicall, the third giuen to idlenesse and pleasure. In whom be∣gan these three meaner degrees of Sheep-heards, Handy-crafts-men, and Musicians. And in the issues of Seth began the Seruices of God, Diuinitie, Prophecie, and A∣stronomie: the children of the one beheld the Heauens, the other the Earth. §. IIII. Of the diuersities in the Ages of the Patriarchs when they begat their children. A Second scruple hath beene made, How it came to passe that the Pa∣triarchs begat their children at so diuers Ages, as Cainan or Cenan at se∣uentie yeeres, Mahaleel and Enoch at threescore and fiue yeeres, whereas lared begat not any of his vntill hee was 162. yeeres olde: Mathusalem begat at 187. Lamech at 182. and Noah at 500. yeeres. Now this diffe∣rence hath bin the more enforced, because it cannot be coniectured, that eyther Iared, Mathusalem, or Lamech abstained from marriage out of the Religion of abstinence, seeing that Enoch, who was translated by God for his singular sanctities, begat chil∣dren before he was threescore and ten yeeres olde. The apparent difference hereof ariseth in this, that Moses did not number the ge∣nerations before the Floud precisely, according to the first begotten and eldest sonnes of the Patriarchs, but he drew downe the Line of Noah from Seth, and afterward from Noah to Abraham, by their true Ancestors, were they elder or yonger as hee found them: for it is likely that Henoch was not the eldest of Iarad, nor Lamech the first borne of Mathusalem, nor Noah of Lamech; neither is there any thing knowne to the contra∣rie, but that Noah might haue had many sonnes before Shem, Ham, and Iaphet, though these three were only named, and suruiuing, and which by God were reserued to bee the Fathers of Mankind after the Floud; and therefore when we find Mahaleel to bee begotten by Kenan at threescore and ten yeeres who was the first sonne of Kenan, and then reck on that Mathusalem begat Lamech in the 187. yeere of his life, the difference seemeth strange, where Lamech is taken for the eldest. But Moses reiecteth all the o∣ther sonnes of Mathusalem but Lamech only, because he was the Father of Noah as a∣foresaid. Of this Saint Augustine hath somewhat else in his 20. and 21. Chapters, De . But as Moses counted the Generations of the first age, and so to Abraham, and the children of the promise after him, so doth S. Matthew recite the Genealogie of Christ, not by the eldest sonnes, but from those whom God had chosen and blessed, without respect of the first-borne, who haue hereby the prerogatiue in Estates, worldly and transitorie only; and therefore the Euangelist nameth Isaac, and not Ismael, though Mat. 1. 2. Ismael were first in time: so doth he take Iacob the yonger, and not Esau the elder; neyther is Chris̄t deriued from any of the three eldest Patriarchs, Reuben, Simeon, or Leui, but from Iuda a fourth brother, and so from Dauid a yonger sonne of Iessai; and lastly we find, that the Kingdome it selfe of Iuda was not giuen to the Heire in 1. Kings 2. nature, but to the Heire of grace, namely Salomon. §. V. Of the long liues of the Patriarchs: and some of late memorie. THE third Obiection is, that the great difference of yeeres betweene those of the first Age, whereof some of them had well-neere seene a thousand yeeres, makes it disputable, whether the account of times were of the same measure as in after-ages, seeing, that soone after the Floud, men liued not a third part of that time, and in succeeding ages and to this day not the tenth. They that haue hereon resolued that those yeeres were but Lunarie yeeres, (to Solin. Poli Hist. cop. 3. wit) of a Moneth or thereabouts, or Egyptian yeeres, are easily confuted. For where∣as . Satur. Seth begat Enosh in the yeere of his life 105. if those yeeres bee tāken but for l. b. . cap. . Moneths, then had Seth liued but eight yeeres and one Moneth when hee begat E∣nosh: Plin. . 7. c. 98. and if the time of Enosh haue the same allowance, when he begat Kenan, then could Enosh at that time haue beene but sixe yeeres and fortie eight weekes old; and so it may be gathered of the rest; excepting only Adam, who was created perfect in his kind, as were the Trees in their kinde, bearing fruit and seed. But this were too ridiculous to imagine. For to giue an abilitie of Generation at 6. 7. or 8. yeeres, a∣greeth with the short liues of the Pigmies, and not with the constitutions of our first Fathers, who being descended from Adam, the workemanship of Gods hands, and begotten and borne in the strong youth of the World, had length of daies and ability of body agreeable. Againe, if we allow this idle conceit of the Lunarie yeeres, then there would follow this extremitie, that those which liued longest, and vpwards of nine hundred yeeres, had by that account but the time of fourescore and tenne and odde yeeres, which were not only lesse by farre then the Patriarchs liued after the Floud, but short of many mens liues in this decrepit age of the World, wherein ma∣ny exceed fourescore, and some hundred yeeres. Further (if need bee) to disprooue this reckoning, whereas it is written, Gen. 25. That Abraham dyed in a good Age, an old man, and of great yeeres: all which (if the former account were of Lunarie yeeres) makes but seuentoene and an halfe of our yeeres. And if we seeke for a cause of this long life in Nature, then is it reasonable, that the first man, created in highest perfection, should also beget children of equall strength or little differing: for of the first and purest seed there must of necessitie spring vp the fairest and fruitfullest Plants. Secondly, the Earth it selfe was then much lesse cor∣rupt, which yeelded her increase, and brought forth fruit and food for man, with∣out any such mixture of harmefull qualitie, as since that time the Curse of God for the crueltie of mans heart brought on it and Mankind: Neither had the Waters of the Floud infused such an impuritie, as thereby the naturall and powerfull operation of all Plants, Herbes, and Fruits vpon the Earth receiued a qualification and harme∣full change. And as all things vnder the Sunne haue one time of strength, and an∣other of weaknesse, a youth and beautie, and then age and deformitie: so Time it selfe (vnder the deathfull shade of whose wings all things decay and wither) hath wasted and worne out that liuely vertue of Nature in Man, and Beasts, and Plants; yea the Heauens themselues being of a most pure and clensed matter, shall waxe old as a garment; and then much more the power generatiue in inferiour Creatures, who Psal. 102. v. 25. by the ordinance of God receiue operatiue vertue from the superiour. But besides the olde age of the World, how farre doth our education and simpli∣citie of liuing differ from that old time? the tender bringing vp of children, first fed and nourished with the milke of a strange Dugge; an vnnaturall curiositie hauing taught all women (but the begger) to find out Nurses, which necessitie only ought to commend vnto them: The hastie marriages in tender yeeres, wherein, Nature being but yet greene and growing, we rent from her and replant her branches, while her selfe hath not yet any root sufficient to maintaine her owne top; and such halfe∣ripe seeds (for the most part) in their growing vp wither in the bud, and waxe olde euen in their infancie. But aboue all things the exceeding luxuriousnesse of this glut∣tonous Age, wherein we presse Nature with ouer-waightie burdens, and finding her strength defectiue, we take the worke out of her hands, and commit it to the artifi∣ciall helpe of strong Waters, hot Spices, and prouoking Sawces; of which Lucan hath these elegant Verses: — — — O prodiga rerum Pharsal. l. Luxuries, nunquam paruo contenta paratu: Et quaesitorum terra pelago{que} ciborum Ambitiosa fames, & lautae gloria mensae, Discite quàm liceat producere vitam: Et quantum Natura petat. Non auro myrrhâ{que} bibunt: sed gurgite puro Vitaredit: satis est populis Ceres{que}. O wastfull Riot, neuer well content With low-priz'd fare; hunger ambitious Of Cates by Land and Sea farre fetcht and sent: Vaine glorie of a Table sumptuous, Learne with how little life may be preserued. In Gold and Myrrhe they need not to carrouse, But with the Brooke the peoples thirst is serued: Who fed with Bread and Water are not sterued. The Aegyptians affirme, that the longest time of mans life is a hundred yeeres, be∣cause Pier. Hierog. l. 2. the heart in a perfect bodie waxeth and groweth to strength fiftie yeeres, and afterwards by the same degree decaieth and withereth. Epigenes findeth in his Philo∣sophie, that the life of man may reach to the period of an hundred and twenty yeeres, and Berosus to a hundred and seuenteene yeeres. These opinions Plinie repeateth and reprooueth, producing many Examples to the contrary. In the last taxation, number and reuiew of the eighth Region of Italie, there were found in the Roll (sayth Plinie ) Plin. l. 7. c. 29. foure and fiftie persons of an hundred yeeres of age: seuen and fiftie of an hundred and ten: two, of an hundred and fiue and twentie: foure, of an hundred and thirtie: as many that were hundred and fiue and thirtie, or hundred and seuen and thirtie yeeres old: and last of all three men of an hundred and fortie: and this search was made in the times of Vespasian the Father and the Sonne. The simple dyet and temperate life of the Essaeaus gaue them long account of ma∣ny Ioseph. antiq. l. 13 cap. 8. yeeres: so did it to the Secretaries of Aegyptian Ceremonies, to the Persians Ma∣gicians and Indian Brachmans. The Greckes affirme out of Homer, that Nestor liued Plin. l. 7. c. 48. three Ages, and Tiresias sixe, Sybilla three hundred yeeres, Endymion of the lesse Asia little lesse: Also Masantssa of Numidia liued very long, and Dando of Illyria. Among the Kings of Arcadia many liued three hundred yeeres (sayth Ephorus. ) Hellanicus af∣firmeth of the Epeians, that some of them liue full two hundred yeere: and so doth Diodorus Siculus of the Aegyptians; and that these reports are not fabulous; Iosephus bringeth many witnesses with himselfe, as Marethon, Berosus, Mochus, Estius, Hiero∣nymus Aegyptius, Hecataeus, Ephorus, and others. And Anthonie Fume an Histo∣rian of good reputation reporteth, that in the yeere 1570. there was an Indian pre∣sented to Solyman, Generall of the Turkes Armie, who had out-liued three hundred yeeres. I my selfe knew the old Countesse of Desmond of Inchiquin in Munster, who liued in the yeere 1589. and many yeeres since, who was married in Edward the Fourths time, and held her Ioynture from all the Earles of Desmond since then; and that this is true, all the Noblemen and Gentlemen of Munster can witnesse. Stroz∣zius Cigogna, out of Torquemada Maffaeus, and the like Authours, telleth of some that haue not only farre exceeded the terme prescribed by Epigenes; but beene re∣payred from the withered estate of decrepit age to fresh youth. But for length of life, if we note but the difference betweene the abilitie of men in those dayes wherein Galen the Phisician liued, it may easily proue vnto vs what reeds we are in respect of those Cedars of the first age. For Galen did ordinarily let bloud sixe pound weight, whereas wee (for the most part) stop at sixe Ounces. But to conclude this part, there are three things (not counting Constellations) which are the naturall causes of a long and healthfull life; (to wit) strong Parents, a pure and thin Ayre, and tem∣perate vse of dyet, pleasure, and rest: for those which are built of rotten timber, or mouldring stone, cannot stand long vpright; on Ayre wee feed alwayes and in euery instant, and on meates but at times: and yet the heauy load of abundance, where∣with we oppresse and ouercharge Nature, maketh her to sinke vnawares in the mid∣way; and therefore with a good constitution, a pure Ayre, and a temperate vse of those things which Nature wanteth, are the only friends and companions of a long life. §. VI. Of the Patriarchs deliuering their knowledge by Tradition: and that ENOCH writ before the Floud. A Fourth scruple hath beene made, How the certaine knowledge of the Creation came to Moses, seeing there was no Storie thereof written, and if any such had beene, yet it is conceiued, that all memorie of Antiqui∣tie perished in the Vniuersall Floud. But if we consider the curiositie and policie of elder ages, we shall find, that know∣ledge was the greatest treasure that men sought for, and which they also couered and hid from the vulgar sort, as Iewels of inestimable price, fearing the irreuerent construction of the ignorant and irreligious: so as whatsoeuer was attained vnto con∣cerning God, and his working in nature, the same was not left to publike dispute, but deliuered ouer by heart and tradition from wise men to a posteritie equally zealous; Ex animo in animum sine , medio intercedente verbo: From minde to minde without Dion. Arcop. Letters, by way of tradition or word of mouth. And it was thought by Esdras Origen, and Hilaerius, (as Mirandula conceiueth) that Moses did not onely vpon the Mount Fol. 18. receiue the Law from God, but withall, secretiorem & veram leg is enarrationem; a more secret and true explanation of the Law; which (saith he, out of the same Authours,) hee deliuered by mouth to Iosuah, and to the Elders: For to teach these mysteries, which hee called secretiora, to the rude multitude, were no other quàm dare sanctum canibus, & inter Porcos spargere Margaritas, then to giue holy things to Dogges, and to cast Pearles before Swine. In succeeding times this vnderstanding and wisedome began to bee written in , and Characters, and Letters bearing the forme of beasts, birds, and other creatures; and to be taught onely to such as serued in their Tem∣ples, and to their Kings and Priests. Of the first the Cabala of the Iewes was an imi∣tation: the inuention of the other is ascribed to Zoroaster, Mercurius, Cadmus, and others; but falsely. This importeth a Law, receiued by tradition and vnwritten. Cabala in He∣brew Cabala est stien∣tia Theologiae non , P. M. 82. is receptio in Latine, and a in English. And this custome was also held by the & Bards of our ancient Brittaines, and of later times by the Irish Chroni∣clers called Rymers. If then such as would seeme wisest in the vse of reason, will not Mirand. 110. fol acknowledge, that the storie of the Creation or beginning of all things was written by inspiration, the holy Ghost guiding the hand of Moses; yet it is manifest, that the knowledge thereof might by tradition (then vsed) be deliuered vnto him by a more certayne presumption, then any or all the testimonies which prophane antiquitie had preserued and left to their successors: which their wise men (as they terme them) did lay vp and defend from the iniurie of the time and other hazzards. For, leauing to remember that Adam instructed Seth, and Seth his children and succes∣sors, which cannot be doubted of, it is manifest, that Methusalem liued together with Adam himselfe two hundred and three yeeres, and Noah with Methusa∣lem no lesse then fiue hundred yeeres: and before Noah dyed, Abraham was fiftie and eight yeeres old; from whence this knowledge by an easie and ordinarie way might come to Israel, and so to Moses. But besides this tradition, it is questionlesse, that the vse of letters was found out in the very infancie of the world, proued by those prophecies written on pillars of stone and bricke by Enoch: of which Iosephus affirmeth, that one of them remayned Ios l. 1. euen in his time (meaning belike some ruine or foundation thereof) which pillars by others are ascribed to Seth. But of these prophecies of Enoch Saint Iude testifi∣eth; Iud. Ep. v. 14. and some part of his Bookes (which contayned the course of the Starres, their names and motions) were afterward found in Arabia foelix, in the Dominion of the Queene of Saba (saith Origen ) of which Tertullian affirmeth that he had seene Origen. Homil. 1 in Num. and read some whole pages. It is not therefore strange, that Moses came to the know∣ledge of the Creation, and storie of the first Age, seeing he might receiue it both by tradition and letters, had not the spirit of God instructed and inspired him as it did: which also his many and strange miracles (performed before he wrote the Scrip∣tures) make more manifest. Now for the Bookes of Enoch, howsoeuer some men make question of them, sure I am that Tertullian, Origen, Augustine, Beda, Procopius, Gazeus, (with others) cite Orig. Homil. 2 & in Num. & Comment. in Euang, . them in their writings: although Medina, for an argument to proue them vnwrit∣ten traditions, alleageth that Pope Gelasius among other the Apocryphall Scriptures (which he reiecteth) named not these of Enoch; but that whatsoeuer was remem∣bred Gelas. dist. 15. out of them, the same was deliuered by Tradition from the Iewes. But I ra∣ther thinke with Pererius, that such a Booke there was, and that the same was cor∣rupted after the death of the Apostles, and many things added thereunto by He∣retikes, who tooke occasion vpon the antiquitie thereof, and out of that place of Michael contending with the Deuill about the body of Moses, to frame and adde thereunto many inuentions of their owne. One of the greatest arguments against these Bookes, is, that neither Philo, nor Iosephus (the most diligent searchers of An∣tiquitie) make mention thereof. But against it I will set this opinion of Saint AV∣GVSTINE, Scripsisse quidem nonnulla diuina ENOCH illum septimum ab ADAM nega∣re non possumus: That ENOCH the seuenth from ADAM did write diuers diuine things we cannot denie. Now his writings which came afterwards to light, were suspected be∣cause of the antiquitie, and of fables of Giants, supposed to be begotten of Angels, and others; and by so much the more, because no such Booke was found amongst those Canonicall Scriptures, kept by the diligence of the Hebrew Priests in Armario Iu∣daico (saith Tertullian ) who yet affirmeth that this Booke might be preserued by Tertul. de . . Noah. Surely, that Enoch wrote the prophecies remembred by Iude, no man can denie; how they were deliuered to posteritie I know not, whether by the Iewes Cae-balae, or by what other meanes, the same is but mans coniecture. And (certainely) by the knowledge ascribed to Noah of the motions of the Heauens, and of the Natures and coniunctions of the Starres; and afterwards to some of his sonnes, to Zoroaster, Hebr. 11. 5. and then to Abraham, it is very probable that Noah had seene and might preserue this booke. For it is not likely, that so exquisite knowledge therein (as these men had) was suddenly inuented and found out, but left by Seth to Enoch, and by Enoch to Noah, as hath beene said before. And therefore if letters and arts were knowne from the time of Seth to Enoch, and that Noah liued with Methusalem, who liued with Adam, and Abraham liued with Noah, it is not strange (I say) to conceiue how Moses came to the knowledge of the first Age, be it by letters, or by and Tradition, had the vndoubted word of God neede of any other proofe then selfe-authoritie. §. VII. Of the men of renownie before the floud. NOw let vs consider the relation of Moses, who nameth seuen descents of Cains children, and of Adam by Seth ten: Seth being giuen by God in stead of Abel; and of Seth was Enosh begotten, in whose time men began to professe Religion, and to offer sacrifice in publike. For al∣though Adam instructed his children in the knowledge of God their Creator, as appeared by the sacrifice offered by Cain and Abel; yet it seemeth that after the birth of Enosh men began publikely to call on the name of the Lord, that is, they serued and praised God by Communion and in publike manner, or calling vpon the name of the Lord, and thereby were the sonnes of God or the godly di∣stinguished from the wicked. From the birth of Enosh the sonne of Seth, to the time of Henoch the sonne of Iared, there is nothing remembred by Moses, but their owne births, the births of their sonnes, the length of their liues, and deaths. But of Henoch it is written, That he walked with God, and he was no more seene: for God tooke him a∣way. Gen. 5. 24. By that, that he walked with God, was meant, that he was a iust and vpright man, and that he feared, loued, and obayed God. For the same phrase Moses vseth of Noah. NOAH was a iust and vpright man in his time, and NOAH walked with God. The Se∣uentie 6. 9. conuert it, ENOCH placuit Deo; HENOCH pleased God. And although Aben-Ezra and others vnderstand this place, (tulit eum Deus:) scilicet, mortuus est; God tooke him away (that is) he dyed, which (indeede) agreeth both with the phrase of the Scripture, and with our manner of speech to this day, to say, God tooke him a∣way, when he dyed; yet the difference which Moses maketh betweene the pietie of Henoch and the rest of the Patriarchs, and by omitting the word (death) which he v∣seth to all else, makes it manifest, that Henoch was not dissolued as the rest. For to all the rest of the Patriarchs, Moses vseth these wordes, And he dyed; but of Henoch he spake otherwise, saying only, he was missing, or he was not seene. Et non inueniebatur (saith the Epistle to the Hebrewes) quia Deus eum transtulit; And he was not found, for the Lord tooke him away. In the same place it is expresly added, that he saw not death. But whether this taking away of Enoch were not with the same kind of changing, which S. Paul promiseth, when he saith, that when the end shall come, we shall not all die, 1. Cor. 15. 51. but all shall be changed, I leaue it to the learned Diuines. After Henoch, Moses passeth ouer to Methusalem and Lamech, remembring (as of the rest) the times of their birth and death: sauing that Lamech prophecied of his sonne Noah, saying, This same shall comfort vs concerning our worke, and sorrow of our Gen. 5. 29. hands, as touching the earth which the Lord hath cursed. Of Noah, Moses writeth more amply, then of any of the rest of Adams children by Seth, being the last of the ten ge∣nerations of the first Age, whom God (with his familie) preserued, because he was Gen. c. 6. 9. an vpright man in his time, and feared God. But of the warre, peace, gouernement, and policie of these strong and mightie men, so able both in body and wit, there is no memorie : whose stories if they had beene preserued, and what else was then performed in that newnesse of the world, there could nothing of more delight haue beene left to posteritie. For the exceeding long liues of men (who to their strength of body and naturall wits had the experience added of 800. and 900. yeeres) how much of necessitie must the same adde of wisedome and vndertakings? Likely it is that their works excelled all what∣soeuer can be told of after-times, especially in respect of this old age of the world, when we no sooner begin to know, but we begin to die; according to HIPPOCRA∣TES: , longa, tempus praeceps; (which is) Life is , Arte is long, and Time is . headlong. And that those people of the first age performed many things worthy ad∣miration, it may be gathered out of these words of MOSES: These were mightie men, . 5. 4 which in old time were men of renowne. But these men of renowne (whom the Scrip∣ture afterwards calleth Giants, both for strength of body and of minde) tru∣sted so much to their owne abilities, as they forgat altogether the pietie of Seth, and the wayes wherein Henoch walked: for all the imaginations of their hearts were euill, only Vers. 5. euill, and continually euill. And this wickednesse was not only found in the issues of Cain, but it was then sall, when the children and sonnes of God (or of the god∣ly) were corrupted and misted by their idolatrous Wiues, the Daughters of Cain, or of those other men, louing themselues and the world only. That these sonnes of God were Angels, which being taken with the beautie of wo∣men, Gen. . v. . accompanied them and begat Giants, some of the Fathers supposed, namely, Lactantius and Eusebius, misled by : of whom I cannot doubt, but that they afterward changed their former opinions. And of this mistaking many Writers haue taken great aduantage, and haue troubled themselues with large answeres and very needlesse: the question being vncapable of dispute, especially since S. Chryso∣stome and S. Augustine haue answered it largely long agoe. For, that good and godly men were honored with the title of Gods children, it doth euery where appeare in the Scripture; and on the contrary, to thinke that Angels, who (as Christ witnes∣seth) behold the face of God, (that is) alwayes attend his Commandements, should after a separation from the rest which fell with Lucifer, for sake the glorious presence of their Creator, and become Incubi, or Succubi, contrarie both to Nature and Grace, were more then madnesse to imagine. §. VIII. That the Giants by MOSES so called, were indeede men of huge bodies: as also diuers in later times. OF these Giants which Moses calleth mightie men, Goropius Becanus an Antuerpian (who thought his owne wit more Giganticall then the bodies of Nimrod or Hercules ) hath written a large discourse, intituled Gigantomachia, and strained his braines to proue, that there were neuer any such men: his reasons (whosoeuer desires to lose time) he may finde them in the Treatises beforenamed. It is true that Cyrillus reproues the Grae∣cian Poets for their monstrous fictions: who affirme shamelesly, That the Giants haue in elder times not only cast vp Mountaynes vpon Mountaynes, but remoued Islands out of the Sea, with like fooleries. And for that inuention of casting vp Hils, and making warre with the Gods, no doubt but that the same was borrowed out of the storie of Nimrod, as before remembred; and euen out of this Scripture, That the Sonnes of God saw the Daughters of Men, of whom the first Giants were be∣gotten, was that conceit taken of Orpheus and Hesiodus, That Giants were the sonnes of the Heauen and the Earth; meaning by the Heauens the sonnes of God, and by the Earth the Daughters of men: which verses of Orpheus are by Iohn Cassam (who hath written a wittie discourse of this subiect) thus changed into Latine: Nomine coelestes illos dixêre Gigantes Orti quòd terrâ fuerint & sanguine coeli. From the Earth, and from thy bloud, ô heauen, they came, Whom thereupon the Gods did Giants name. But what will not Opiniators and selfe-beleeuing men dispute of, and make doubt of, if they cannot conceiue that there were in the first Age such kind of men; and of which there haue beene in all times since? Seeing the Scriptures auow the one ma∣nifestly, and common experience the other? And for that superlatiue strayning of wordes, and the meaning of them, that the name of Giants was giuen to Oppressors and Tyrants, and not to strength of body and eminent stature: such men might with better reason call them Oppressors, be∣cause they were Giants, and therefore had abilitie to oppresse, then say, That they were called Giants onely, because Oppressors. For first, Moses himselfe calleth them mightie men; which sheweth a strength surpassing others: and afterwards, men of renowne, (that is) of great vndertaking and aduenterous action. And if the same stature of body, and abilitie had not beene found among diuers Nations after the generall floud, then might this place of Moses haue more willingly harkened to a dispute, and yeelded to interpretation. But besides all these famous Giants found in prophane Histories (which I will re∣serue to accompanie the Giants of Albion, in the storie of Britanie ) the Scriptures doe cleerely and without all allegoricall construction auow, That, besides Nimrod, there were found of these Giants in the time of Abraham, of Moses, of Iosua, and of Gen. 14. 5. Dauid; namely, the Rephaims in Asteroth; the Zuzaei or Zanzummims in Ham, and the Num. 15. 34. Emims, which dwelt anciently in the Land of Moab: whom Moses (for stature) com∣pareth Deut. 2. v. 21. 20 with the Anakims, which dwelt in Hebron; for they also were taken for Giants as the Anakims: Likewise, where Moses speaketh of the Land of Ammon, he vseth these words: That also was taken for a land of Giants, for Giants dwelt therein afore-times: Vers. 21. and, whom the Ammonites call Zamzummims: a people that was great, and many, and tall as the Anakims. And these Giants called Rephaims in Asteroth and Karnaim, and the Zuzaei or Zanzummims, Chedorlaomer King of Elam ouer-threw, assisted by other Kings his associates. Also the Prophet Amos found among the Ammonites men of Amos c. 1. Giantlike stature, whom he compareth to the Cedar, and whose strength to the Okes; and the Prophet BARVCH, These were the Giants famous from the beginning, that were Bar. 3. v. 26. of so great stature, and so expert in warre. Particularly it is written of Og, King of Deat. 3. v. 11. Basan, that his bed of yron was nine cubits long, and foure cubits broad: for onely Og King of Basan remayned of the remnants of the Giants, who commanded the Kingdome of Basan, foure hundred yeeres after the Expedition of Chedorlaomer. Moreouer, those Discouerers and Searchers of the Land of promise (sent by Moset from Cadesbarre in Paran ) made report at their returne of the great stature of those people in generall, and especially of the sonnes of Anak, in these wordes: All the Num. 13. v. 34. people which we saw in it are men of great stature: for there we saw Giants, the sonnes of ANAK, which come of the Giants, so that we seemed in our sights like Grasse-hoppers, and so we were in their sight, (that is) the Searchers found in their owne iudgements a mar∣uailous difference between the Anakims and themselues: insomuch that the Israelites were so stricken with feare, as they rather sought and desired to returne againe into Aegypt, and were more willing to endure their former slauerie, then to fall by the Cap. 14. 4. strokes of those fearefull Nations. Furthermore, the Scriptures put vs out of doubt, 1. Sam. 17. 4. that Goliah the of Gath, was a Giant of sixe cubits and a span long: the Ar∣mor which he wore waighed fiue thousand shickles of brasse: the shaft of his speare was like a Weauers beame, and his speare head waighed sixe hundred shickles of y∣ron. Also in Samuel there is mention of another Goliah, surnamed Getheus, because 2. Sam. 21. v. 19. he was of Gath: and of three other Giants; of which the first was slaine by Iehona∣than, 1. Cbron. 20. 21. Dauids , who had twelue fingers, and as many toes: a man of great stature, and were by sixes, euen foure and twentie. Also surpassing strength, no man doubteth, who tore a Lyon . 14. 6. as it beene a Kid, and after thirtie of the Philistines, and (after that) a 14. 19. thousand more of them with a iaw-bone of an Asse: And lastly, he tooke the gates 16. 3. of , and the two Posts, and lifted them away with the barres, and put them vpon his shoulders, and carryed them to the top of the Mountayne before Ebron. If then it be approued by euery iudgement, that both Nature and the Heauens waxe old, and that the great age of Time hath (with it selfe) infeebled and almost worne out the vertue of all things, then I say, That as in all other kindes the Earth (before that had increased the curse and corruption) brought forth her yong ones more strong and beautifull, then it did in after-ages: so also those Giants, those mightie men, and men of renowne as farre exceeded the proportion, nature, and strength of those Giants, remembred by Moses of his owne time, and after him their successors, as the ordinarie proportion of all men in generall, soone after the floud and in times farre off, exceeded the bulkes and bodies of men which are now borne in the withered quarter and Winter of the world: If therefore Giants were com∣mon in the third and fourth age, much more in the first flourishing youth and new∣nesse of the world. But the wickednesse (especially in and oppression) of these men was such, as God therefore by the floud gaue end to all flesh, but to the iust Noah and his fa∣mily. And God repented him that he had made man, which S. Augustine thus expoun∣deth: Gen. 6. 6. Ne{que} enim sicut hominem, ita Deum facti sui poenitet, cuius est de omnibus om∣ninò De Ciuit l. 15. c. . rebus tam fixa sententia, quàm certa praescientia. Sed si non vtatur a talibus verbis, non se quodammodo familiarius insinuabit omni generi hominum, quibus vult esse consultum: vt & perterreat superbientes, & excitet negligentes, & exerceat quaerentes, & alat intelligentes; God (saith he) doth not repent him of any thing which he hath done: (as men vse to doe) but if the Scripture did not vse those wordes or the like, it should not (in a sort) insinuate it selfe familiarly to all sorts of men, for whom it would prouide: that it might terrifie the proud, stirre vp the negligent, exercise the searchers of truth, and nourish those that vnder∣stand. CHAP. VI. Of idolatrous corruptions, quickly rising, and hardly at length vanishing in the world: and of the Reliques of Truth touching these ancient times, obscurely ap∣pearing in Fables and old Legends. §. I. That in old corruptions we may finde some signes of more ancient truth. HERE before wee proceede any further, the occasion offereth it selfe for vs to consider, how the Greekes and other more ancient Nations, by fabulous inuentions, and by breaking into parts the Storie of the Creation, and by deliuering it ouer in a mystical sense, wrapping it vp mixed with other their owne trumperie, haue sought to obscure the truth thereof; and haue hoped, that after-ages, being thereby brought into many doubts, might receiue those inter-mixt discourses of God and Nature, for the inuentions of Poets and Phi∣losophers, and not as any thing borrowed or stolne out of the bookes of God. But as a skilfull and learned Chymist can aswell by sepa∣ration of visible elements draw helpfull medicines out of poyson, as poyson out of the most healthfull herbs and plants (all things hauing in themselues both life and death) so, contrarie to the purposes and hopes of the Heathen, may those which seeke after God and Truth finde out euery-where, and in all the ancient Poets and Philosophers, the Storie of the first Age, with all the workes and maruailes thereof, amply and liuely exprest. §. II. That the corruptions themselues were very ancient: as in the family of NOAH, and in the old Aegyptians. BVt this defection and falling away from God, which was first found in Angels, and afterwards in Men (the one hauing erred but once, the other euer) as concerning mankinde it tooke such effect, that thereby (the liberall grace of God being with-drawne) all the posteritie of our first Parents were afterwards borne and bred in a world, suffering a perpetuall Eclipse of spirituall light. Hence it was that it produced plants of such imperfection and harmefull qualitie, as the waters of the generall floud could not so wash out or depure, but that the same defection hath had continuance in the very generation and nature of mankinde. Yea, euen among the few sonnes of Noah, there were found strong effects of the former poyson. For as the children of Sem did inhe∣rit the vertues of Seth, Enoch, and Noah; so the sonnes of Cham did possesse the vices of the sonnes of Cain, and of those wicked Giants of the first Age. Whence the Cbal∣deans began soone after the floud to ascribe diuine power and honor to the Crea∣ture, which was only due to the Creatour. First, they worshipped the Sunne, and then the fire. So the Aegyptians and Phoenicians did not only learne to leaue the true God, but created twelue seuerall gods, and diuine powers, whom they worshipped; and vnto whom they built Altars and Temples. For Herodotus sayth, Duodecim Deo∣rum Herod. in Eu∣terpe. nomina primos Aegyptios in vsu habuisse, at{que} Graecos ab illis cepisse mutuatos, eos{que} prius aras, & imagines, & templa Dijs sibi erexisse; The Aegyptians (sayth he) first deuised the names of the twelue Gods, which the Greekes receiued from them, who first erected vnto themselues Altars, Images, and Temples for the Gods. §. III. That in processe of time these lesser errours drew on greater: as appeareth in the grosse Superstitions of the Aegyptians. BVT as men once fallen away from vndoubted truth, doe then after wander for euermore in vices vnknowne, and daily trauaile towardes their eternall perdition: so did these grosse and blind Idolaters euery Age after other descend lower and lower, and shrinke and slide down∣wards from the knowledge of one true and very GOD; and did not thereby erre in worshipping mortall men only, but they gaue diuine reuerence, and had the same respect to Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Fowles, Winds, Earth, Water, Ayre, Fire, to the Morning, to the Euening, to Plants, Trees and Rootes, to Passions and and Affections of the Minde, to Palenesse, Sicknesse, Sorrowes, yet to the most vn∣worthy and basest of all these. Which barbarous blasphemie, Rhodius Anaxandrides Nat. Com. l. 1. c. 7 derideth in this manner. Bouem colis, ego Deis macto bouem. Tumaximum Anguillam Deum putas: Obsoniorum credidi suauissimum. Carnes suillas tu caues, at gaudeo Hijs maximè: canem colis, quem verbero Edentem vbi deprehendo fortè obsonium. I sacrifice to God the Beefe, which you adore. I broyle the Aegyptian Eeles, which you (as God) implore: You feare to eate the flesh of Swine, I find it sweet. You worship Dogges, to beate them I thinke meet, When they my store deuoure. And in this manner IVVENAL. Porrum aut cape nefas violare aut frangere morsu: Sat. 15. 2. 9. O sanctas gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina! The Aegyptians thinke it sinne to root vp, or to bite Their Leekes or Onyons, which they serue with holy rite: O happy Nations, which of their owne sowing Haue store of gods in euery Garden growing! §. IIII. That from the reliques of ancient Records among the Ae gyptians and others the first Idols and Fables were inuented: and that the first IVPITER was CAIN, VVLCAN, TVBALCAIN, &c. BVT in so great a confusion of vanities, were among the Heathens themselues there is no agreement or certaintie, it were hard to finde out from what example the beginnings of these inuentions were bor∣rowed, or after what ancient patterne they erected their building, were it not certaine, that the Aegyptians had knowledge of the first Age, and of whatsoeuer was done therein, partly from some inscriptions vpon stone or metall remaining after the Floud, and partly from Mizraim the sonne of Cham, who had learnt the same of Cham, and Cham of his Father Noah. For all that the Aegyptians write of their ancient Kings, and date of times cannot be fained. And though other Nations after them had by imitation their Iupiters also, their Saturnes, Vulcans, and Mercuries with the rest, which S. Augustine out of Varro, Eusebius out of many pro∣phane Aug. l 19. c. 22. Historians; Cicere, Diodorus Siculus, Arnobius, and many more haue obserued, De Ciuit. Dei. to wit, the , Phrygians, Cretians, Greekes, and other Nations; yet was Cain Euseh. l. 1. . Euang. c. 7. & li. 2. c. 23. the sonne of Adam (as some very learned men conceiue) called and reputed for the first and ancient ; and Adam for the first Saturne: for Iupiter was sayd to haue Cic. l. 3. de nat. Dcorum. inuented the founding of Cities; and the first Citie of the World was built by Cain, Arnob. 4. contra Gent. which he called Enoch, of whom were the Henochij before remembred. And so much may be gathered out of Plato in Protagoras, which also Higinus in his 275. Chapter confirmeth. For besides that, many Cities were founded by diuers men; Tamen primam latissimam à primo & antiquissimo Iovae : yet the first and largest was built by the first and most ancient IVPITER, seated in the East parts, or in India, according to that of MOSES: And dwelt towards the East side of Eden, &c. where also the Gen. 4. 16. Henochij were found after the Floud. And therefore was Iupiter by the Athenians cal∣led Polieus, a Founder of Cities, and Herceios, an Incloser or strengthener of Cities; (say Phornutus and Pausanias ) and that to Iupiter Herceios there were in very many Phorn. l. dena∣tura Deorum. Pansan. l. 4. 5. & 10. . places Altars & Temples erected. And that there were Cities built before the Floud, Plato also witnesseth, as may be gathered in this his affirming, that soone after Man∣kind began to increase, they built many Cities; which as his meaning hee deliuereth in plaine termes, in his third Booke of Lawes: for he saith, that Cities were built an exceeding space of time before the destruction by the great Floud. This first Iupiter of the Ethnickes was then the same Cain, the sonne of Adam, who marrying his owne Sister (as also Iupiter is sayd to haue done) inhabited the East, where Stephanus de vrbibus placeth the Citie Henochia. And besides this Citie of Henoch, Philo conceiueth that Cain built sixe others, as Maich, Iared, Tehe, , Selet and Gebat: but where Philo had this I know not. Now as Cain was the first Gen. 4. 20. 21. 22 Iupiter, and from whom also the Ethnickes had the inuention of Sacrifice: so were Iu∣bal, Tubal and Tubalcain (Inuentors of Pastorage, Smiths-craft, and Musick) the same, which were called by the ancient prophane Writers, Mercurius, Vulcan and Apollo; . l. 4. c. 27. and as there is a likelihood of name betweene Tubalcain and Valcan: so doth Augu∣stine expound the name of Noema or Naamath, the Sister of Tubalcain, to signifie Ve∣nusta, or beautifull Voluptas, or pleasure; as the wife of Vulcan is sayd to be Venus, the Ladie of pleasure and beautie. And as Adam was the ancient and first Saturne, Cain the eldest Iupiter, Eua, Rhea, and Noema or Naamah the first Venus: so did the Fable of the diuiding the World betweene the three Brethren the Sonnes of Saturne arise, from the true Storie of the diuiding of the Earth betweene the three Brethren the Sonnes of Noah: so also was the Fiction of those Golden Apples kept by a Dragon taken from the Serpent, which tempted Euah: so was Paradise it selfe transported out of Asia into Africa, and made the Garden of the Hesperides: the prophecies, that Christ should breake the Serpents head, and conquer the power of Hell, occasioned the Fables of Hercules killing the Serpent of Hesperides, and descending into Hell, and captiuating Cerberus: so out of the taking vp of Henoch by God, was borrowed the conuersion of their Heroes (the Inuentors of Religion, and such Arts as the life of man had profit by) into Starres and Heauenly Signes, and (withall) that leauing of the World, and ascension of ; of which Ouid: Vltima terras Astraea reliquit; Ouid. Met. l. 1. Astraea last of heauenly Wights the Earth did leaue. For although thereby the Ethnickes would vnderstand Iustice it selfe to haue fai∣led, Nat. Com. l. 2. c. 2 as it is a vertue abstract, and may bee considered without a person; yet as it is v∣sual among the ancient Potes to describe Vertues and Vices by the persons of Men and Women, as Desire by Cupid, Valour by Mars, Beautie or Lust by Venus, so doe they also the persons of Men by like Vertues and Vices, and therfore by Iustice and , Enoch: the Iustice and pietie of Enoch being in the same manner exprest, as V. 1. that of Noah was by Moses, for Noah was sayd to be a iust man; And NOAH walked Gen. 7. with God. And of Enoch it is written, that he walked with God, and hee was no more seene: Gen. 5. 22. 24. for God tooke him away. From this Storie also of the first Age, and from that part where Moses remem∣breth the Giants begotten by the Sonnes of good men vpon the Daughters of the wicked (whom Moses calleth mightie men, and men of renowne) did they steale those wondrous great acts of their ancient Kings, and powerfull Giants; and againe their warre vndertaken against the gods, from the building of the Towre of Babel by the Giant Nimord, as S. Augustine termeth him. Which warre of their Giants L. de Ciuit. Dei. Cornelius Seuerus thus describeth: Tentauêre (nef as) olim detrudere mundo Syder a, captiui{que} IOVIS transferre Gigantes Imperium, & victo leges imponere coelo. The Giants did aduance their wicked hand Against the Starres, to thrust them headlong downe, And robbing IOVE of his Imperiall Crowne, On conquered Heauens to lay their proud command. Whereby was meant that Nimrod purposed to raise the building of Babel to that height, as God neither by drawing waters from the deepe, not by any coniunction of the Starres, should bury them vnder the moysture of a second Floud, but that by this building (if they had beene herein victorious) they would haue giuen the Law to Heauen it selfe. Also the making of Leagues, Peace and Couenants among Hea∣then Nations and Kings, confirmed by Sacrifice, where of Virgil both in the eight and twelfth of his Aeneides hath a touch, was as it seemeth borrowed from Moses, Exod. 24. Who when he read the Booke of the Couenant, sprinkled the people with bloud. We find also many remembrances of Seth, the paternall Ancester of Henoch and Ioseph. l. 1. contra Appian. Noah: for Amenophis, the same King of Aegypt, which raigned at such time as Moses carried thence the children of Israel, (as of late some learned men mistaking his time supposed) called his Sonne and Successour Setho, of Seth, and of the same Seth (as many men of good iudgement haue granted) were the Princes of Thrace called Seuthes, whereof there were many very famous. But herein was the memorie of Plut. in Iside. Seth most manifestly preserued, that the Aegyptians worshipped Seth, as their most ancient parent, and of the first tradition: in honour of whome they called a princi∣pall Prouince Setheitica. Wee also finde in Bithynia the Citie of Sethia, and others of Strab. l. 17. the same name elsewhere. And sure from the Aegyptians did the borrow this kind of Theologie, though they scorned to acknowledge any antiquitie prece∣ding their owne; and that they might not seeme to learne elsewhere, they gaue the same names to their owne Idols which the Aegyptians did to theirs. §. V. Of the three chiefest IVPITERS; and the strange Storie of the third. BVT of all those Armies of Iupiters remembred by the Ancients, Cicero maketh but three, because those were of most fame: which other Wri∣ters haue also done, who sought out, and laboured in their originals. The first was Iupiter, the sonne of Aether and Dies, so called, because the one had reference to his celestiall conditions ( is as much as shining or pure fire) the other discouered his naturall vertues, which dayes and times make more perfect, and are the witnesses of mens actions. The second was said to bee the sonne of Coelum or Heauen, for the same former respect; and this Iupiter was an Arcadian, and King of Athens. The third of whom all the Fables were deuised, was of Creet (now Can∣die ) the sonne of Saturne and Ops. The name deriued from the Latine is taken of Pater, from the Greeke Word Zeus, it signifieth life, but somewhat strained. Boccas in his Genealogie of the gods conceiueth, that his name was borrowed from Iupiter the Planet; but whether that Starre had such a name, before the same was gi∣uen to men, I know not. Iupiter is hot and moist, temperate, modest, honest, aduen∣turous, liberall, mercifull, louing, and faithfull, (that is) giuing these inclinations. And therefore those ancient Kings beautified with these conditions, might be called there after Iupiter; but howsoeuer they were, or were not with those vertues en∣riched, yet, by imitation, all kings in the eldest times assumed those Titles and Sir∣names: great Princes affecting as high Titles of honor and reputation in the World, (howsoeuer deserued) as the worthiest, that euer were, acquired by their well defer∣uings. Ioues omnes Reges vocârunt antiqui, The Ancients called all Kings IVPITERS, as TZETZES in his Varia historia confirmeth: Regesolim IOVES vocârunt omnes: In olde times all Nations called their Kings IVPITERS. But where this last and most remem∣bred IVPITER was borne it is vncertaine. Some there are that make him of Creet: others, that hee was but sent thither by his Mother Ops or Opis, to bee fostered and Nat. Com. l. 1. c. 7 hidden from the furie of Titan his Vncle: because it was conditioned betweene Sa∣turne and Titan, that Saturne being a yonger brother, and raigning (for his owne life) by Titans permission, hee should put to death all his male children, lest the Titans might be interrupted by any of them in their succession; which agreement because Saturne performed in his first borne, it is fained that Saturne deuoured his owne chil∣dren. Hereof Lycophron, thus turned into Latine: Haud fit pinguior, Crudis sepulchrum quòd sit ipse . Saturne to be the fatter is not knowne, By being the graue and buriall of his owne. This composition betweene Titan and Saturne, Sybilla also witnesseth in these; Conceptis verbis; TITAN iurare SATVRNVM, de senatum ne nutriat vllum, Quo possint regnare senis post fata Nepotes. Things thus agreed: Titan made Saturne sweare No Sonne to nourish; which by raigning might Vsurpe the right of Titans lawfull Heire. But Opis the mother of Iupiter, being deliuered at once both of Iupiter and Iuno, conueied Iupiter (first called Lysanias ) into Crete, as shee did afterwards his two brothers, Neptune and Pluto: where hee was brought vp in Gnossus, the chiefe Ci∣tie of that Iland, by Cresta the King, or by the Curetes, a people and Nation thereof. Euseb. in Temp. Other challenge him to be of Thebes, and a Thebane: others call him an Arcadian: others make him of Messena. The like contention is found among the Greekes tou∣ching his education and first fostering. Some affirme, that he was fed by Hony-bees: in recompence whereof he changed their blacke coats and skins into yellow; a re∣ward well fitting such a God: others, that he was nourished by Beares: others, by Goats: and of all these the idle Greekes haue many prettie Tales But in the end when Titan had knowledge, that Saturne had broken his faith, he set on him, and tooke him and his wife Prisoners, whom Iupiter againe rescued and deliuered. But lastly, the Father and the Sonne equally ambitious, the one doubted the other. Saturne being the lesse powerfull fled into Italie, and left his Kingdomes in Greece to his sonne. And although this Prince at the first purchased great honour, and for his many vertues the name of Iupiter was giuen him; yet, after he was once settled and became potent, he gaue himselfe ouer wholly to palliardize and adultery, without all respect of honour, Law, or Religion. And it is reported by such, as doe ascribe the actions of many to one Iupiter, that not therewith satisfied, hee was after∣wards knowne to offend in the sinne of Sodome with Ganimedes and others; and did not onely begin with incest, marrying his owne sister Iuno, but he rauished, betrayed, stole away, and tooke by strong hand all the beautifull women borne in his time, within the limits of his owne Kingdomes, or bordering them. Among whom these hereafter written were of greatest fame, Niobe, Laodemia, and the wife of Amphitryon, by whom he had Pelasgus, Sarpedon, Argus, and Hercules: by Taygete he had Taygetus; of whom the Mountaine Taygetus tooke name, with another sonne called Saon, of whom Sauona: by Antiope he had Amphion and Zetus: by Leda Castor and Pollux, Helen and Clytemnestra: by Danaë Perseus: by Iordana Deucalion: by Charme (the daughter of Eubulus ) Britomartis, by Protogenia hee had Athlius the Fa∣ther of Endymion; and by Io (the Daughter of Inachus) Epaphus, the Founder of Memphis in Aegypt: which Epaphus married Libya, of whom that Countrey tooke name, for so the Greekes afterward called Africa. Hee rauished Aegina the Daugh∣ter of Aesopus, and carryed her into the Iland Oenopia or Oenotria, afterward called Aegina, on whom he begat Aeacus: by Torrhebia hee had Archesilaus and Carbius: by Ora Colaxes: he had also Dardanus by Electra, who built Dardanium, afterward Ilum and Troy. Hee begat the Brothers Talici, on Thalia, and on Garamantis Hiarhas. Hee had besides these (if they belye not their chiefe God) Phileus and Pilumnus, inuen∣tors of Bakers Craft; and I know not how many more; but I know well that hee could not be Father to all these, who were borne in Ages so farre differing. And of these his seuerall rauishments, betrayings, stealing away of mens Wiues, Daughters and Sonnes, buying of Virgins, and the like, came in all those ancient Fables of his transformations into showres of Gold, Eagles, Buls, Birds, and Beasts; and of him, and by him (in effect) all that rabble of Forgeries. And yet did not the Greekes and Romanes feare to entitle this Monster, Optimus Maximas, though in his second Booke de Deorum affirme, that he deserued nothing lesse, and in his Oration pro domo sua, reprocheth Clodius for his Incest, by the name of Iupiter. His buriall was in Crete (saith Lucian ) Cretenses non solùm natum apud se & sepultum Luc. in . IOVEM testantur, sedetiam sepulchrum eius ostendunt; The Cretians or Candians doe not onely that IVPITER was borne and buried among them, but they shew his graue and sepulchre: which Epiphanius also confirmeth, for in his time there remained the Mo∣numents of his Tombe in the Mountaine Iasius. This Callimachus in his Hymnes also witnesseth, but as offended thereat, sayth thus; The Cretians euer Lyars were, they care not what they say: For they a Tombe haue built for thee, O King, that liu'st alway. Diodorus Siculus tels by way of report from the Libyan Fables, confirmed (as hee Diod. l. 2. c. 5. saith) by some Greeke Writers, that the originall of these gods was from the Westerne parts of Africk. For there among the Atlantidae raigned one Vranus (which signifieth Heauen) called so for his great skil in Astrologie, and for his knowledge, and benefits to the people, honoured by them as a God after his death. He had by many Wiues 45. Sons; but by his principall Wife Titea, hee had 17. Sons and two Daughters, all which were called after their Mothers name the Titanes. Of Titea, likewise it is said, that she for her goodnesse was canonized as a Goddesse, being dead, and called the Earth, as her Husband was stiled Heauen. But of al the children of Titea, her Daugh∣ter Basilea (which name sounding as Queene in English, she is by the Latine Trans∣lator of Diodorus called Regina ) excelling the rest as far in vertue as in yeeres, was by generall consent of her Brethren, and of the people, appointed to rule as Queene af∣ter her Fathers death, being as yet a Virgin. Shee tooke to Husband her Brother Hyperion, to whom shee bare a Sonne and a Daughter, called Sunne and Moone. The beautie and towardlinesse of these children moued her Brethren to enuie, and bred in them a feare of being excluded from the Succession: wherefore they tooke the Boy and drowned him in the Riuer Eridanus, now called Poe. The losse of this childe caused his Sister to breake her owne necke; and the losse of both her Children made the Mother to play many mad prankes, dancing with Cymbals, after a wild fashion, in sight of all the people, before whom shee is said to haue vanished away. Ere shee dyed, her Sonne (as the Fable hath it) signified vnto her in a Dreame, that he and his Sister by the prouidence of God should become immortall, that also the Sunne and Moone should bee called by their names, and that their death should bee reuenged vpon the Murderers. According to which it is said, that the people did so call those two Planets, and withall held her selfe as a Goddesse, and termed her the great Mo∣ther, which name they had formerly giuen to her, for her motherly care in cherishing her Brethren whilest they were young. Hyperion and his Race being extinguished, the other Sonnes of Vranus diuided the Kingdome. Of these Atlas and Saturne were chiefe. Atlas raigned ouer the Countries lying about the Mountaines, which afterward bare his name; a iust and wise Prince, deeply skilfull in Astrologie, and for inuention of the Sphere, sayd to haue supported Heauen. Hee had many Sonnes; but the principall of them called Hesperus, being of his Fathers qualities and studies, was sayd to haue beene carried away by the Winde, from the top of an high Hill in the midst of his Contemplations, and his name in honour of him, imposed by the people vpon the Morning Starre. The seuen Daughters of Atlas were also sayd to haue beene excellent Ladies, who accompanying such as came to be deified, or registred among the Worthies, brought forth Children, answerable in qualitie to those that begat them. Of these it is held, that the seuen Starres called Pleiades tooke name. Saturne the Brother of Atlas raigned in Sicilia, part of Africk and Italie. Iupiter another of the Sonnes of Vranus, raigned in Crete; who had tenne Sonnes which he called Curetes; he called that Iland after his Wiues name Idea; in which Ile he dyed, and was buried. But this Iupiter must not haue beene that great one, but Vncle to the Great Iupiter, if these Fables of the Libyans were true. Saturne (as these Libyans tell the Tale) was a great Tyrant, and fortified strong places, the better to keepe his people in subiection. His Sister Rhea was married to Hammon, who raigned in some part of Africk. Hammon louing others as well as his Wife, or better, got a Daughter, called Minerua, neere to the Riuer Triton, who thereupon was called Tritonia. Hee also begat on Amalthea a Sonne called Bacchus, whom he caused secretly for feare of his life to be brought vp at Nysa, an Iland in the Riuer Triton, vnder the tuition of his Daughter Minerua, and certaine Nymphes. To Amalthea he gaue in reward a goodly Countrie, that lay on the Sea-coast, bending in forme of a horne, whence grew the Tale of Amaltheas plentifull Horne, famous among the Poets. When Rhea heard these newes, she fled from her Husband to her Brother Saturne, who not onely enter∣tained her as a Sister, but tooke her to wife, and at her instigation made warre vpon Hammon, vanquished him by assistance of the Titanes, and made him flee into Crete. The Curetes, Iupiters children before mentioned, held the Iland at that time; which was new named Crete by Hammon, after the name of Creta the Kings Daughter, whom he tooke to wife, and had with her (women as may seeme being very gra∣cious in those times) the Kingdome. Bacchus was growne a proper yong man, had found out the making of wine, the arte of planting trees, and many things else com∣modious for mankinde, before the flight of his Mother in law. Now therefore hearing report of all that had hapned, and that Saturne was comming against him with the Titanes; he leuyed an Armie, to which the Amazons liuing not farre from Nysa, added great forces, in loue of Minerua, who was entred into their profession. So Bacchus leading the men, and Minerua the women, they set forward against Sa∣turne, met him, ouerthrew him, and taking many of the Titanes prisoners, returned to Nysa; where pardoning the prisoners, that promised to become his true followers, he prepared for a second Expedition. In the second Expedition he behaued him∣selfe so well, that he wan the loue of all the people by whom he passed; insomuch that partly for good affection to him, partly in hatred of Saturnes rigorous gouerne∣ment, he was greatly strengthened, and the Enemie as much infeebled by daily re∣uolts. Comming to the Citie of Hammon, he wan a battaile of Saturne, before the very walls. After which Saturne with his wife Rhea fled by night, setting the Towne on fire to despight Bacchus. But they were caught in their flight, pardoned by Bac∣chus, and kindly entreated. Saturne had a yong sonne by Rhea, called Iupiter. This child Bacchus tooke with him in a great Expedition that he made into the East coun∣tries; and comming into Aegypt, he left this Iupiter, being then a Boy, Gouernour of the Countrie; but appointed vnto him as an Ouer-seer, one Olympus, of whom Iupiter grew to be called Olympius. Whilest Bacchus trauayled through all Nations, as far as into India, doing good in all places, and teaching many things profitable to the life of man; the Titanes had found out his Father Hammon in Crete, and began to warre vpon him. But Bacchus returned out of India, with whom Iupiter from Ae∣gypt, and his sister Minerua, together with the rest that afterwards were held as gods, ioyning all their forces, went into Crete, ouerthrew the Titanes, chased them, tooke, and slue them, and freed the world of them all. After all this, when Hammon and Bacchus were dead, they were deified; and the great Iupiter the sonne of Saturne succeeding them, reigned Lord alone ouer all the world, hauing none of the Titanes left aliue, nor any other to disturbe him. Betweene this tale of the Libyan Gods, and the Aegyptian fables of Osiris, there is a rude resemblance, that may cause them both to be taken for the crooked Images of some one true historie. For the expeditions of Osiris, and of Bacchus; the warres of the Giants in the one storie, of the Titanes in the other; the Kingdome of Aegypt giuen by Hercules Lybicus to Orus, by Bacchus to Iupiter, the Rattles of Isis, and the Cymbals of Basilea, with many pettie circumstan∣ces, neerely enough resemble each other, howsoeuer not alike fitted to the right persons, Sanchoniato (as Eusebius cites him) would haue all these to be Phaenicians, Euseb. l. 1. c. 7. and is earnest in saying, That it is a true storie, and no Allegorie. Yet he makes it seeme the more allegoricall, by giuing to Vranus or Heauen for Daughters, Fate and Beautie, and the like, with addition of much fabulous matter, omitted by Diodorus, though Diodorus haue enough. To the Genealogie he addes Elius or the Sunne, as Fa∣ther of Vranus, and among the children of Vranus, Iapetus, Baetilus, and Dagon (whom Diodorus doth not mention by their names) giuing withall to Vranus the proper name of or Indigena, and of Illus to Saturne, but omitting Iupiter of Crete. The Pedigree of them is this: §. VI. Of CHAM, and other wicked ones, whereof some gat, some affected the name of Gods. OF Iupiter Belus, the sonne of Saturnus Babylonicus, otherwise Nimrod, it seemeth that Cicero had not heard, (at least by that name) who was more ancient than any of the former three by him remembred: for long after these times were the Greekes but Saluages, if they seeke no farther off for their Gods. But the Aegyptians, euen after the floud, began (somewhat before this Chaldaean Iupiter ) to intitle Cham, the parent of their owne Mizraim, Iupiter Chammon, or Hammon. For the Etymologie of this word ( Hammon ) which the Greekes deduce de Oracul. ab arenis; from the sands, is ridiculous (saith Peucer; ) neither yet is his owne much better, who brings it from Hammath, which signifieth heate: because the said Tem∣ple of Iupiter Hammon was seated in Libya, where the ayre is exceeding hot and scortching. And as for the antiquitie of the latter Iupiter (among the Greekes and Romans the most renowned) it is certaine that he was borne not long before the war of Troy, as by many of his sonnes is made manifest; namely, Castor, , Hercules, Sarpedon, and others, which liued in that age of Priumus, vnder whom, and with whom Troy was destroyed. Now seeing that mortall men, and the most wicked, were esteemed immortall a∣mong the Heathen; it was not to be wondred at, that Alexander Macedon, Tyberius, Nero, Caligula, and others, sought to be numbred among them, who were as defor∣med monsters as the rest: For by what reason could the same Deitie be denyed vnto Laurentia and Flora, which was giuen to Venus? seeing they were as notorious and fa∣mous Harlots as shee was. §. VII. That the wiser of the ancient Heathen had farre better opinions of God. BVt that euer Pythagoras, or Plato, or Orpheus, with many other ancient and excellently learned, beleeued in any of these fooleries, it cannot be suspected, though some of them (ouer-busily) haue mixed their owne inuentions with the Scriptures: for, in punishment for their fictions, did Pythagoras hang both Homer and Hesiodus in hell, where he fayned that they were perpetually stung and pinched with Serpents. Yet it can∣not be doubted, but that Homer had read ouer all the bookes of Moses, as by places stolne thence, almost word for word, may appeare; of which Iustine Martyr remem∣breth many in that Treatise conuerted by Mirandula. As for Plato, though he dis∣sembled in somethings, for feare of the Inquisition of the Areopagites, yet S. Augu∣stine hath alreadie answered for him (as before remembred) Et mirificè ijs delectatus est, quae de vno Deo tradita fuerant; And he was greatly delighted in the doctrine of one God, faith Iustine Martyr. Now howsoeuer Lactantius pleased to reprehend Plato, because (saith he) Plato sought knowledge from the Aegyptians, and the Chaldaeans, neglecting the Iewes, and the bookes of Moses: Eusebius, Cyrillus, and Origen, finde Euseb. Praep. E∣uang. lib. 11. Cyril. cont. Iu∣lian. reason to beleeue the contrarie, thinking that from thence he tooke the grounds of all by him written of God, or sauouring of Diuinitie: and the same opinion had S. Ambrose of Pythagoras. Origen. cont. . But whether it were out of the same vanitie, which possest all those learned Phi∣losophers Ambr. ad Iren. Ep. 6. lib. 1. and Poets, that Plato also published (not vnder the right Authors names) those things which he had read in the Scriptures; or fearing the seueritie of the A∣reopagites, Areopagus, or domus seu mons Martis, Mars his hill: a house wherein capi∣tall matters were tryed: so called at first: because Mars therein first pleaded his cause for the murder of Hu∣lirrothos. and the example of his Master Socrates, by them put to death by poyson, I cannot iudge. Iustine Martyr (as it seemeth) ascribeth it wholly to Platoes feare, whose wordes among many other of the same effect, are these: PLATO MOSIS mentionem facere, obid, quod vnum solum{que} Deum docuerat, sibi apud Athenienses tutum non putauit, veritus Areopagum; PLATO fearing the Areopagites thought it not safe for him among the Athenians to make mention of MOSES, that he taught that there is but one God. But for that Diuinitie which he hath written in TIMAEO; id ipsum de Deo dis∣seruit quod & MOSES; He discoursed and taught the same of God (saith IVSTINE MAR∣TYR) which MOSES did. For where it pleased God by his Angell to answer MOSES, Ego sum existens (which is) I am; and, existens misit me ad vos; I am hath sent me vnto Pausan, in Attic. Nat. Com. l. 2. c. 7 Iust. Mart. . Gent. fol. 8. 14. vt sup. Exod. 3. 14. you, herein did Plato (saith Iustine Martyr ) no otherwise differ then that Moses vsed the word ( qui ) and Plato the word quod: MOSES enim qui existit (inquit) PLATO quod existit; For MOSES saith, He who is; PLATO, That which is. Now of Gods in∣comprehensible nature, and of the difficultie either to conceiue, or expresse the same, he giueth this testimonie: Genitorem Vniuersitatis tam difficile est inuenire, quàm inuen∣tum In Timaeo. impossibile digne profari; It is as hard to finde out the Creator of the Vniuersall, as it is impossible, if he were found, to speake of him worthily. And what can be more agreeable to the Maiestie of Gods nature, then this propertie by Plato acknowledged? Deus De Legib. 1. 10. bonus, & quidem, Deus causa bonorum: malorum autem omnium non causa; God is absolute∣ly good, and so (assuredly) the cause of all that is good: but of any thing that is euill he is no cause at all: and againe, Charitas Dei fuit causa faction is mundi, & origin is omnium re∣rum; The loue of God was the cause of the worlds creating, and the originall of all things. APVLEIVS the Platonist: Summus Deus infinitus est, non solum loci exclusione, sed etiam naturae dignitate: Et nihil est Deo similius & gratius, quàm vir animo perfecto bonus; The most high God is also an infinite God, not only by exclusion of place, but by the dignitie of na∣ture: neither is there any thing more like or more acceptable to God then a man of a perfect heart. THALES affirmed, that God comprehended all things, and that God was of Laertius. all things the most ancient: Quianunquam esse coepit; Because he neuer had any begin∣ning. ZENO, that God beheld euen the thoughts of men. Athenodorus, that there∣fore all men ought to be carefull in the actions of their life, because God was euery∣where present, and beheld all done. But what can be more agreeable to Moses storie of the Creation, then this opinion and description of the Worlds beginning in Eu∣ripides, Scholler of Anaxagoras? Coelum terra{que} vnius formae fuit: Sed cum fuissent abiuncta amplexu mutuo, Emersit omnis in lucem res progenita, Arbores, aues, ferae, quas{que} affert mare, Genus{que} mortalium. Heauen and Earth one forme did beare: But when disioyned once they were From mutuall embraces, All things to light appeared then, Of trees, birds, beasts, fishes, and men The still-remayning races. And as in Pythagoras, in Socrates, and in Plato: so we finde the same excellent vnder∣standing in Orpheus, who euery-where expressed the infinite and sole power of one God, though he vse the name of IVPITER, thereby to auoid the enuie and danger of the time; but that he could attribute those things to the sonnes of men, and mortall creatures, which he doth to this IVPITER, there is no man who hath euer heard of God, that can imagine. Nomina Deorum (saith MIRANDVLA) quos ORPHEVS canit, non decipientium dae∣monum, à quibus malum & non bonum prouenit; sed naturalium virtutum diuinarum{que} sunt nomina; The names of those Gods whom ORPHEVS doth sing, are not of deceiuing Deuils, from whom euill comes, and not goodnesse; but they are the names of naturall and diuine vertues. Yea, that he yet reacheth higher, and speaketh of God himselfe, this his instruction to Musaeus, and the Hymne following teach vs: Respiciens verò ad diui∣num hunc sermonem ei diligenter animum aduerte, intendens cordis rationis capax concepta∣culum: rectam autem ascendeviam, & solum aspice mundi Regem. Vnus est ex se genitus, Autogenes. ex omnianata sunt: Ipse vero in illis versatur, nec quisquam cum intueri potest mortalium, sed ipse nihilominus omnes intuetur. Then marking this my sacred speech, but truely lend Thy heart, that's reasons sphere, and the right way ascend, And see the worlds sole King. First, he is simply one Begotten of himselfe, from whom is borne alone All else; in which hee's still, nor could it ere befall A mortall eye to see him once, yet he sees all. And againe the same Author, IVPITER omnipotens, & primus, & vltimus idem; IVPITER est caput & medium: IOVIS omnia munus. IVPITER est fundamen humi & stellantis Olympi. IVPITER & mas est, & foemina nescia mortis. Spiritus est cunctis, validi vis IVPITER ignis. Et Pelagi radix, SOL, LVNA, est IVPITER ipse Rex, & origo simul rerum est, & terminus idem. Nam priùs occuluit, magno post numine, sacrum Cor reserans bonus in dulcem dedit omnia lucem. The first of all is GOD, and the same last is he. GOD is the head and midst, yea from him all things be. GOD is the Base of earth, and of the starred skie. He is the male and female too, shall neuer die. The spirit of all is GOD, the SVNNE, the MOONE, and what is higher. The King, th'originall of all, of all the end. For close in holy brest he all did comprehend, Whence all to blessed light, his wondrous power did send. Now besides these former testimonies, that all the learned men of ancient times were not so stupid and ignorant, as the Aegyptians, Graecians, and other Nations by them infected I will onely repeate two or three other opinions, and leaue the Reader to those large and learned Collections of Iustine Martyr, Clemens, Lactan∣tius, Eusebius, Eugubinus, Peucer, Plessis, Danaeus, and others. For Cleanthes the Stoick, being demanded of what nature God was, described him by these attributes and properties: Bonus, iustus, sanctus, seipsum possidens, vtilis, speciosus, optimus, seuerus, liber, semper commodus, tutus, gloriosus, charitas, &c. Good, iust, holy, possessing himselfe, profitable, beautifull, best, seuere, free, alwayes doing good, safe without feare, glorious, and selfe-charitie. EPICHARMVS affirmed, that God who beheld all things, and pierced euery nature, was only and euerywhere powerfull: agreeing with DEMOCRITVS: Rex omnium ipse solus; He is the only King of Kings: and with Pindarus the Poet, Deus vnus, Pater, creator summus, at{que} optimus artifex, qui progressus singuiis diuersos secun∣dum merit a praebet; One God, the Father, the most high Creator, and best artificer, who gi∣ueth to euery thing diuers proceedings according to their deserts. This God (saith ANTIS∣THENES) cannot be resembled to any thing, and therefore not elsewhere knowne; Nisi in patria illa perenni, imaginem nullam habes: Saue onely in that euerlasting Countrey, whose image thou hast none at all. Hereof also XENOPHANES COLOPHONIVS: Vnus Deusinter Deos & homines maximus, nec corpore, nec mente mortalibus similis; There is one God among gods and men most powerfull, neither corporally, nor mentally like vnto mortals: and XENOPHON, Deus qui omnia quatit, & omnia quicscere facit, magnus potens{que}, quod omnibus patet: autem forma sit, nemini, nisi ipsi soli, qui luce sua omnia perlüstrat; God who shaketh all things, and setteth all things at rest, is great and migh∣tie, as is manifest to all: but of what forme he is, it is manifest to none, saue only to himselfe, who illuminateth all things with his owne light. Finally, Plato saith: Totius rerum naturae causa, & ratio, & origo Deus, summus animi genitor, aeternus animantium sospitator, assi∣duus mundi sui opifex, sine propagatione genitor, ne{que} loco, ne{que} tempore vllo comprensus, co{que} paucis cogitabilis, nemini effabilus; God is the cause, ground, and originall of the whole nature of things, the most high Father of the soule, the eternall preseruer of liuing creatures, the continuall framer of his world, a begetter without any propagation, comprehended neither in any place, nor time; therefore few can conceiue him in thought, none can expresse what he is. Therefore was it said by S. HIEROME, Si enim cunctos Philosophorum reuoluas libros, Hieron. in Com. in Dan. In prin∣cip. necesse est vt in eis reperias aliquam partem vasorum Dei, vt apud PLATONEM, fabrica∣torem mundi, Deum: apud ZENONEM Stoicorum Principem, inferos & immortales ani∣mas, &c. If thou consider all the bookes of the Philosophers, thou canst not but finde in them some part of the Vessels of God, as in PLATO, God the Creator of the world: In ZENO Prince of the Stoicks, Hell and immortall soules, &c. And this is certayne, that if we looke into the wisedome of all Ages, we shall finde that there neuer was man of solid vnderstanding or excellent iudgement: neuer any man whose mind the arte of education hath not bended; whose eyes a foolish superstition hath not afterward blinded; whose apprehensions are sober, and by a pensiue inspection aduised; but that he hath found by an vnresistable necessitie, one true God, and euerlasting being, all for euer causing, and all for euer sustayning; which no man among the Heathen hath with more reuerence acknowledged, or more learnedly exprest, then that Ae∣gyptian Hermes, howsoeuer it fayled afterward in his posteritie: all being at length by deuillish policie of the Aegyptian Priests purposely obscured; who inuented new gods, and those innumerable, best sorting (as the Deuill perswaded them) with vulgar capacities, and fittest to keepe in awe and order their common people. §. VIII. That Heathenisme and Iudaisme, after many wounds, were at length about the same time vnder IVLIAN miraculously confounded. BVt all these are againe vanished: for the inuentions of mortall men are no lesse mortall then themselues. The Fire, which the Chaldaeans worshipped for a God, is crept into euery mans , which the lacke of fuell starueth, water quencheth, and want of ayre suffoca∣teth: Iupiter is no more vexed with Iunoes ielousies; Death hath per∣swaded him to chastitie, and her to patience; and that Time which hath deuoured it selfe, hath also eaten vp both the Bodies and Images of him and his: yea, their stately Temples of stone and durefull Marble. The houses and sumptuous buil∣dings erected to Baal, can no where be found vpon the earth; nor any monument of that glorious Temple consecrated to Diana. There are none now in Phoenicia, that lament the death of Adonis; nor any in Libya, Creta, Thessalia, or elsewhere, that can aske counsaile or helpe from Iupiter. The great god Pan hath broken his Pipes, Apolloes Priests are become speechlesse; and the Trade of riddles in Ora∣cles, with the Deuills telling mens fortunes therein, is taken vp by counterfait Aegy∣ptians, and coozening Astrologers. But it was long ere the Deuill gaue way to these his ouer-throwes and disho∣nors: for after the Temple of Apollo at Delphos (one of his chiefe Mansions) was many times robbed, burnt, and destroyed; yet by his diligence the same was often enriched, repayred, and reedified againe, till by the hand of God himselfe it receiued the last and vtter subuersion. For it was first robbed of all the Idols and Ornaments therein by the Euboean Pyrates: Secondly, by the Phlegians vtterly sackt: Thirdly, by Pyrrhus the sonne of Achilles: Fourthly, by the Armie of Xerxes: Fiftly, by the Captaynes of the Phocenses: Sixtly, by Nero, who carryed thence fiue hundred bra∣zen Images: all which were new made, and therein againe set vp at the common charge. But whatsoeuer was gathered betweene the time of Nero and Constantine, the Christian Armie made spoile of, defacing as much as the time permitted them; notwithstanding all this it was againe gloriously rebuilt, and so remayned till such time as Iulian the Apostata sent thither to know the successe of his Parthian enter∣prise, at which time it was vtterly burnt and consumed with fire from Heauen; and the image of Apollo himselfe, and all the rest of the Idols therein molten downe and lost in the earth. The like successe had the Iewes in the same Iulians time, when by his permission they assembled themselues to rebuild the Temple of Hierusalem: for while they were busied to lay the foundations, their buildings were ouerthrowne by an Earthquake, and many thousands of the Iewes were ouerwhelmed with the ruines, and others slaine, and scattered by Tempest and Thunder: though Am. Marcellinus report it more Am. Mar. l. 23, cap. 1. fauourably for the Iewes, ascribing this to the nature of that Element. For, saith hee, Allypius and the Ruler of the Prouince of Iudaea, being by Iulian busied in the reedi∣fying of this Temple, flaming Bals of fire issuing neere the foundation, and oft con∣suming the Workemen, made the enterprize frustrate. §. IX. Of the last refuges of the Deuill to maintaine his Kingdome. NOw the Deuill, because hee cannot play vpon the open Stage of this World (as in those dayes) and being still as industrious as euer, findes it more for his aduantage to creepe into the mindes of men; and in∣habiting in the Temples of their hearts, workes them to a more effe∣ctuall adoration of himselfe then euer. For whereas hee first taught them to sacrifice to Monsters, to dead stones cut into faces of Beasts, Birds, and o∣ther mixt Natures; hee now sets before them the high and shining Idoll of glorie, the All-commanding Image of bright Gold. He tels them that Truth is the God∣desse of dangers and opressions: that chastitie is the enemie of Nature; and lastly, that as all vertue (in generall) is without taste: so pleasure satisfieth and delighteth e∣uery sense: for true wisedome (sayth hee) is exercised in nothing else, then in the ob∣taining of power to oppresse, and ofriches to maintaine plentifully our worldly de∣lights. And if this Arch-politician finde in his pupils any remorse, any feare or fee∣ling of Gods future Iudgement, hee perswades them that God hath so great need of mens soules, that he will accept them at any time, and vpon any conditions: inter∣rupting by his vigilant endeuours all offer of timefull returne towardes God, by lay∣ing those great blockes of rugged pouertie, and despised contempt in the narrow passage leading to his diuine presence. But as the minde of man hath two Ports, the one alwayes frequented by the entrance of manifold vanities; the other desolate and ouer-growne with grasse, by which enter our charitable thoughts and diuine contemplations: so hath that of death a double and twofold opening: worldly mi∣serie passing by the one, worldly prosperitie by the other: at the entrance of the one wee find our sufferings and patience to attend vs: (all which haue gone before vs to prepare our ioyes) at the other our cruelties, couetousnesse, licentiousnesse, iniustice, and oppressions (the Harbingers of most fearefull and terribe sorrow) staying for vs. And as the Deuill our most industrious enemie was euer most dili∣gent: so is he now more laborious then euer: the long day of Mankind drawing fast towards an euening, and the Worlds Tragedie and time neere at an end. CHAP. VII. Of NOAHS Floud. §. I. Of Gods fore-warning: and some humane testimonies: and some doubting touching the truth of NOAHS Floud. OF this destruction it pleased God to giue warning vn∣to Ioseph. l. 1. c. 4. Noah: who (saith Iosephus ) fearing to perish among the rest, Secedens cum suis in aliam regionem migrauit: He departed with his children, and trauailed into another Region. And of these Giants from whom Noah with∣drew himselfe, Berosus writeth in this manner; That they exceeded in all sorts of inhumane and vnnaturall wic∣kednesse, and that they were contemptores & & Deorum, contemners of religion and of the Gods: a∣mong which mightie men (sayth Berosus ) vnus erat qui Deorum venerantior, & prudentior cunctis, &c. nomen erat NOAH, There was one more wise and the Gods then the rest, whose name was NOAH: who with his three sonnes Sem, Iaphetus and Cham, and with their Wiues, and the Wife of Noah, (namely Titea the great, Pandora, Noela, and Noegla ) preserued themselues in the Arke. This Arke God commanded Noah to prepare: And God sayd vnto NOAH, Make thee an Arke of Pine-trees: thou shalt make Cabines in Gen. 6. 14. V. 13. the Arke, and shalt pitch it within, and without with Pitch. For God made Noah to know that an end of all flesh was at hand, and that the graues of the rebellious and cruell Generations were alreadie fashioned in the Cloudes, which soone after should swal∣low vp and couer all liuing creatures, which breathed in the Ayre: Noah and his Fa∣mily excepted. But this vniuersall graue of waters, and generall Deluge hath not beene receiued by all: for diuine testimonies doe not perswade all naturall men to those things, to which their owne reason cannot reach: Dum obuoluta in obscuro verit as latet: Whilest Lact. in Praef. de falsa relig. the truth lieth wrapped vp in obscuritie. Many there are who hane disputed against the vniuersalitie of this ouerflowing, and haue iudged that this Floud of Noah fell but on some particular places and Kingdomes: moued so to thinke, because in elder ages there haue beene many other Flouds (as they suppose) of that nature. Hereof Nicholaus writeth in this manner, as his words are cited by IOSEPHVS: Est super Minyadam excelsus mons in Armenia, qui Baris appellatur, in quo multos confu∣gientes . l. 1 c. 4. . de . l. 9. cap. 4. sermoest diluuij tempore liberatos, & quendam simul in deuectum in huius vertice haesisse, relliquias multo tempore conseruatas, qui fortasse is , de quo etiam MOSES Legislator scribit: thus farre this Authour. There is (sayth hee) aboue Minyada (or the Countrey of ) an exceeding high Mountaine in Ar∣menia, called Baris: on which it is reported, that many hauing fled thither, were saued in the time of the Deluge: and that one was carried in an Arke, and rested vpon the top of the Mountaine, whereon there remained a long time after certaine pieces thereof; and this might be the same, of which MOSES the Law-giuer of the Iewes maketh mention. And of this opinion were the Thalmudists (sayth Annius ) that many Giants saued themselues vpon Mount . But Berosus (who after Moses was one of the most ancient, howsoeuer hee haue beene since deformed and corrupted) doth in the substance of all agree with Moses as touching the generall Floud, taking from thence the beginning of his Historie in these words: Ante aquarum famosam, qua vniuersus perijt Orbis, &c. Before that famous destruction of Waters, by which the World Vniuersall perished: witnessing with∣all, that Noah with his Wife Titea, and his three Sonnes with their Wiues (in all eight persons) were onely saued. §. II. Of the Floud in the time of : and that this was not NOAHS Floud. BVT from the vanitie of the Greekes, the Corrupters of all truth, (sayth Lactantius ) who without all ground of certaintie vaunt their Antiqui∣tie, came the errour first of all: who therein flattering themselues al∣so, sought to perswade the World, that there was no Floud preceded the Floud of Ogyges, King of the Thebans in , or rather of Attica; and therefore sayth Rhodoginus; OGYGVM id appellant Poëtae, tanquàm peruetus dixeris, . l. 15. c. 33. ab OGYGE vetustissimo: The Poets gaue the name of OGYGIA to things exceeding an∣cient, as of OGYGES the most ancient. But let Ogyges be as ancient as those men can make him, yet it is manifest, that hee liued but in Iacobs time (though Eusebius makes him later, and in Moses time) and Euseb. de . . l. 10. c. 3. Ca. 22. was borne 67. yeeres after him. There is also an opinion, that Ogyges was Cadmus (and then was he farre later) as Rhodoginus in the ninth Booke of his Antiquities re∣membreth: Sunt tamen qui in Aegyptoregnâsse autument : vnde sit CADMVS qui in Graeciam profectus Thebas condidit, à boue iugulato sic nuncupatas; quontam Syrorum lingua bos dicitur Thebe. There are (sayth he) who thinke that this OGYGES did raigne in Aegypt, whereby he should be CADMVS, who trauailing into Greece built Thebes, so na∣med of a Beefe slaine: because in the Syrian Language, a Beefe is called Thebe. But this Floud of Ogyges fell in the yeere of the World 3440. according to Euse∣bius, who followed the account of the Septuagint: and the Floud of Noah in the yeere 2242. after the same account; and so there came 1200. yeeres betweene these Flouds, wanting but two, though heerein Eusebius was much mistaken, and corrected this o∣pinion in his Chronologie. Now although the verie yeere and time of this ouerflowing in , or rather Attica, be not precisely set downe, but that there is a great diffe∣rence among Writers, yet whosoeuer makes it most ancient, finds aboue 500. yeeres difference betweene that and the generall Floud. For Paulus Orosius affirmes, that this tempest fell vpon the Athenians, but 1040. Lib. 1. c. 7. yeeres before Rome built. Bucholzerus sayth it was 1043. elder then Rome; which was founded (according to the same Bucholzerus ) in the Worlds yeere 3219. though after the account which I follow (and whereof I will giue my reasons in the Story of Abraham ) it was built in the Worlds yeere 3280. Now the generall Floud prece∣ded the building of Rome (sayth Bucholzerus ) 1563. yeeres: and the Floud of Ogyges (as before) 1043. Hence it followeth by easie calculation, that (if he place Ogyges in his true age) the difference betweene these two Flouds must bee 520. yeeres, to which we (allowing 60. more) find 580. And that this of Ogyges was not the same of Noah (except we call Noah, Ogyges priscus, as some doe) it appeares by this, that . An∣nianus. the Floud of Ogyges then King of Attica or Ogygia, did not extend it selfe any fur∣ther then the bankes of Archi-pelago, or the Sea. For whereas Mela, Plinie, and Mela. lib. 3. Plin. lib. 5. . cap. 47. Solinus witnesse, that the Citie of Ioppe in Iudaea was founded before the Floud; and that (notwithstanding the waight of Waters) there remained on certaine Altars Ioppe orbe toto, ante inundatio∣nem terrarum . . ibid. of stone the Title of the King, and of his Brother PHINEVS, with many of the grounds of their Religion: sure, it is no where found among prophane Historians nor in the Scriptures, that euer the Floud of Ogyges spred it selfe ouer any part of Sy∣ria, much lesse ouer all the Earth. But that it drowned both the Regions of Attica about Athens, and that of Achaia in Peloponnesus, it is very probable. For it see∣meth that at that time it was, when Helice and Bura were swallowed vp (Cities sea∣ted on the North part of Peloponnesus ) of which Ouid: Si quaeras Helicoen, & Buran, Achaidos vrbes, Ouid. Metam. lib. 15. 303. Inuenies sub aquis. Bura and Helice on Achaian ground Are sought in vaine, but vnder Sea are found. Of this Floud of Ogyges was inuented the Fable of Apollo and Diana. For Latona Nat. Com. l. 1. c. 6 the Daughter of Coeus, the Son of Titan, being beloued and forced by IVPITER, and by him gotten with childe, IVNO thereat enraged, permitted her (as they say) no part of the Earth to bee deliuerd on; and withall caused the monstrous Serpent Python to follow and affright her, wheresoeuer shee trauailed, till at length arriuing at the Ile of Ortygia she was there receiued: in which she was deliuered, first of Diana, and then of APOLLO, being Twins; whereof BARLAAM makes this exposition: That at such time as the Deluge (which happened in Ogyges his Raigne) ceased, out of the abundant moisture of the Earth (heat by putrefaction being thereto mixed) there were exhaled such thicke mists and fogges, that in Attica, and along the Coasts of the Aegaean Sea, neyther the beames of the Sunne by day, nor of the Moone by night could pierce the Ayre, or be perceiued by the inhabitants: so as when at length (the Earth being dryed, and these vapours dissipated) the Ayre began to be cleere, and the people of Ortygia espied the light of the Moone somewhat before day, and in the same morning the Sunne also appeared: fabulously (because DIANA re∣presented Plin. l. 4. c. 11. the Moone, and APOLLO the Sunne) they were reported to bee borne in the Ile of Ortygia, thereof afterwardes called Delos: which signifieth ma∣nifestation. And surely it is not improbable, that the Floud of Ogyges, being so great, as Hi∣stories haue reported it, was accompanied with much alteration of the Ayre sensibly discerned in those parts, and some vnusuall face of the Skies. Varro in his Bookes, De gente populi Romani (as he is cited by Saint AVGVSTINE) reporteth out of CASTOR, Aug de Ciuit. , l. 21. cap. 8. that so great a Miracle happened in the Starre of Venus, as neuer was seene before, nor in after-times: For the colour, the greatnesse, the figure, and the course of it, were changed. This fell out as ADRASTVS CYZICENVS, and Dion Neapolites, fa∣mous Mathematicians affirmed in the time of Ogyges. Now concerning the course of that or any other Planet, I doe not remember, that I haue any where read, of so good Astrologers flourishing among the Greekes, or else where in those dayes as were likely to make any calculation of the reuolutions of the Planets so exact, that it should need no reformation. Of the colour and magni∣tude. I see no reason why the difference found in the Starre of Venus should bee held miraculous; considering that lesser mists and fogges, than those which couered Greece with so long darknesse, doe familiarly present our senses with as great altera∣tions in the Sunne and Moone. That the figure should varie, questionlesse it was very strange: Yet I cannot hold it any prodigie: for it stands well with good reason, that the side of Venus which the Sunne beholds, being enlightned by him, the opposite halfe should remaine shadowed; whereby that Planet would, vnto our eyes, descrying onely that part whereon the light falleth, appeare to bee horned, as the Moone doth seeme; if distance (as in other things) did not hinder the apprehension of our . GALILAEVS, a worthy Astrologer now liuing, who by the helpe of perspectiue Glasses hath found in the Starres many things vnknowne to the Ancients, affirmeth so much to haue beene discouered in Venus by his late obseruations. Whether some waterie disposition of the Ayre might present as much to them that liued with Ogy∣ges, as Galilaeus hath seene through his Instrument; I cannot tel: sure I am, that the dis∣couerie of a truth formerly vnknowne, doth rather conuince man of ignorance, then nature of errour. One thing herein is worthy to be noted, that this great, but par∣ticular Floud of Ogyges, was (as appeareth by this of Saint AVGVSTINE) accom∣panied with such vnusuall (and therefore the more dreadfull, though naturall) signes testifying the concurrence of causes with effects in that inundation; whereas the Floud of Noah which was generall and altogether miraculous, may seeme to haue had no other token, or foreshewing, then the long preaching of Noah himselfe, which was not regarded: for they were eating and drinking, when the Floud came sodain∣ly, Luke 17. v. 27. and tooke them all away. §. III. Of DEVCALIONS Floud: and that this was not NOAHS Floud: nor the Vmbri in Italie a remnant of any vniuersall Floud. A Second Floud of great fame, and of which the time is more certaine, was that of Deucalion in Thessalia, of which Saint Augustine out of Varro: His temporibus (vt VARRO scribit) regnante Atheniensibus CRANAO, successore CECROPIS ( vt autem nostri, EVSEBIVS & HIERONYMVS) adhuc CECROPE permanente, diluuium fuit, quod appellatum est DEVCALIONIS: (that is) In these times (as VARRO reporteth) CRANAVS the suc∣cessour of CECROPS gouerning the Athenians, or (as our EVSEBIVS and HIEROME say) CECROPS yet liuing, that Floud ( called DEVCALIONS) happened. And in the beginning of the eleuenth Chapter of the same eighteenth Booke, hee vseth these words: Eduxit ergo MOSES ex Aegypto populum Dei nouissimo tempore CECROPIS Atheniensium Regis, cum apud Assyrios ASCATADES, apud Sicyo∣nios MARATHVS, apud Argiuos TRIOPAS: MOSES led the People of God out Aegypt about the latter times of CECROPS King of the Athenians, ASCATADES raigning ouer the Assyrians, ouer the Sicyonians MARATHVS, and ouer the Argiues TRIOPAS: so as leauing the curiositie of a few yeeres, more or lesse, it appeareth, that this Floud of Deucalion was eyther at the egression of the children of Israel out of Aegypt, or neere it: and then after Noah 753. yeeres, according to Functius, who makes Cecrops to liue in the yeere of the World 2409. or if we follow MERCATOR, then 739. yeeres after Noah, and in the yeere of the World 2395. But if Deucalion were borne in the age of the World 2356. according to Codoman; then giuing vnto Deucalion fortie yeeres of age when this Floud happened, it falleth within one yeere of Mercators account. But Deucalion by all approoued Historians is said to haue beene 82. yeeres olde at that time. Now Clemens Alexandrinus dates the time of this Floud of Deu∣calion, and the conflagration and burning in phoëtons time, by the Raigne of Crotopus King of the Argiues; but Crotopus liued King of the Argiues sixe yeeres after Israel departed Aegypt, which makes twentie yeeres difference, according to Functius, who will haue this Floud and burning to haue fallen fourteene yeeres before Moses left Aegypt: for he gaue of the Worlds yeeres to the Floud and burning the yeere 2440. and to Moses his egression the yeere 2454. And yet Cedrenus thinkes that Moses was Cedron. l. 1. f. 34. more ancient, and liued with Inachus; but that cannot bee true: for then had the Floud of Deucalion, and the burning of , preceded the Floud of Ogyges, which is denied by all: for that of (called Deucalions ) followed that of At∣tica (called Ogygia ) at least 250. yeeres or thereabouts. Eusebius in his Chronologie makes it 230. and so doth P. Orosius: Eusebius about the 50. yeere of Moses life, and Cyrillus about the 67. and both after Noahs Floud 770. yeeres: for these bee Clemens his words: Fuit autem in Graecia tempore quidem PHORONEI, qui fuit Clem. Alex. 1. . ex Ctes. post INACHVM, inundatio quae fuit tempore OGYGIS, There happened in Greece in the time of PHORONEVS, who liued after INACHVS, the Floud of OGYGES. Now if the Floud of OGYGES in Attica were 1020. or 1016. yeeres before the first Olympiad, ac∣cording to Eusebius and Orosius; (as before) then is it manifest, that taking 763. out of this number of 1020. it fals out that Ogyges Floud happened before the Hebrewes left Aegypt 250. yeeres, or 260. yeeres, according to the difference betweene the o∣pinions of Eusebius and Orosius. And for my selfe (who rather follow those Chrono∣logers, Euseb. in Chron. which giue 60. yeeres more to Abraham after the Floud, then the rest) I rec∣kon the times which come betweene these Flouds in this sort. The generall Floud was in the yeere of the World 1656. Iacob was borne in the yeere of the World 2169 so as from the beginning of the Floud to IACOBS birth. there were consumed 513. yeeres. Ogyges Floud happened 100. yeeres after IACOB was borne; and therefore after the generall Floud 613. yeeres. Now Deucalion was borne in the yeere of the World 2356. and had liued yeeres, when his Kingdome of Thessalie was ouer∣whelmed; (which added to 2356. make 2438.) his Floud was after Noahs Floud en∣ded 782. yeeres. And hereto Annius his Xenophon agreeth, who makes 700. yeeres betweene the generall Floud and Deucalions birth; to which adde 82. yeeres of his Age (as before) and then the Floud of Thessalie followed the generall 782. yeeres. The words of that Xenophon are these: Ab inundatione terrarum adortum DEVCALIONIS, secundo anno Sphaeri, septingenti supputantur anni, qui natus anno duos & octoginta Thes∣saliam vidit inundatam, From the drowning of the World to the birth of DEVCALION, in the second yeere of Sphaerus, are numbred 700. yeeres, and when DEVCALION was 82. yeeres old, he saw Thessalia drowned. This Floud happened in the Winter time a∣bout Parnassus: witnesse Aristotle in the first of his Meteors. And Varro (whom Saint c. 14. Augustine so often citeth for his excellent learning, especially in Antiquities) findeth this Floud of Deucalion to haue happened in the time of Cranaus, who succeeded Ce∣crops: Orosius thinkes it somewhat later, Amphitryon raigning in Athens, the third from Cecrops. Only this of Deucalion was very great, and reached not only ouer Thessalie it selfe, and the Regions adioyning Westward; but it couered the greatest part of Italie: and eyther the same, or some other particular Floud then happening opprest Aegypt, sayth Eusebius. And therefore did the Greekes eyther thinke it, or saine it to be vniuersall; and Deucalion, then King, sauing himselfe and some others on the Mountaine of Thessalie (of all other the highest, sayth Solinus ) was by reason Solin l. 14. thereof (as Strabo witnesseth) sayd to be the preseruer of Mankind. That this Floud Strab . 9. couered a great part of Italie, Plinie and Solinus make it probable: who affirme that Plin. l. 3. c. 14. Sol. c. 7. Plin. ibid. the people then inhabiting Italie were therefore called : quia ab imbribus diluuij superfuissent; and therefore also were they esteemed the most ancient Nation, as Strabo confirmeth in his first Booke, and Trezenius in his second: which Vmbri these Authours make the Parents of the Sabines, and the Sabines to bee the Parents of the Samnites, Piceni, Lucani, Brutij, and all others inhabiting anciently the bankes of the Mediterrane Sea. But that these Vmbri were not the Inhabiters of Italie before the Floud of Noah, and so tooke name by sauing themselues vpon the Appenine Moun∣taines, the Scriptures teach vs: shewing who, and who only then were preserued, which is sufficient. Report hath aduentured further, telling vs that the first people Athenaeus dipno∣soph. l. 15. out of Draco sayth that was the wife and sister of Ianus. Lact. l. 1. c. 13. which after the generall Floud inhabited Italie, were the Camesenes; (so named from Camese, whom CATO in originibus, another of Annius his Authours names for a con∣sort of Ianus ) which people liued altogether a sauage life; till such time as Saturne arriuing on those Coasts, deuised Lawes to gouerne them by: the memorie of whose acts in that Region Diodor and Thallus among the Greekes, Nepos Cassius and Varro a∣mong the Latines haue preserued; and of whom Virgil: Primus ab aethereo venit SATVRNVS Olympo, . l. 8. 319. Arma IOVIS fugiens, & regnis exul ademptis, Is genus indocile, ac disper sum montibus altis Composuit, leges{que} dedit; Latium{que} vocari Maluit. SATVRNE descending from the heauens high, Fearing the Armes of IVPITER his sonne, His Kingdome lost, and banisht thence doth flie. Rude people on the Mountayne tops he wonne To liue together, and by lawes: which done He chose to call it Latium. And afterward in the Verses following he speaketh of the Ausones, and after them of the Sicani: Nations, which againe sought to displant the ancient Inhabiters: Tum manus Ausonia, & gentes venere Sicani, Virg. l. 8. Aen. Then came th'Ausonian bands, and the Sicanian tribes. Of these Sicani (which left Spaine and sate downe in Italie ) Thucydides and Plinie giue Thucyd. l. 6. Plin. l. 3. c. 5. testimonie: who were againe expelled by the Ligij, saith Thucydides. After all these plantations and replantations came the Vmbri, descended of the Gaules (saith Annius ) Annius ex Sa∣muele Thalmu∣dista. not of those Gaules of France, but of those of Scythia, who commanded a great part of Italie, euen all Hetruria and Campania, as Herodotus, Plinie, and Dionysius haue as∣sured Herod. l. 1. vs; and therefore this floud of Deucalion was long after that of Noah. For all Plin. l. 3. c. 5. those Nations were planted in Italie, and dispossest of Italie againe, before the Vmbri Dion. l. 1. & 2. were euer heard of, or had being. So that Kingdome was first called Camasene, then Latium or Saturnia, then Ausonia, then ; before the Vmbri (in whose time Deucalions floud happened) possest the same, about 306. yeeres before the war of Troy: Lycaon then gouerning Arcadia; who being the Father of two and twentie Sonnes, the yongest called Ocnotrius inuaded Italie, who gaue it the name of Oeno∣tria. Pausan. Arcad. lib. 8. This name it held vntill Italus of the same Nation changed it into Italie, after his owne name, about 250. yeeres before the fall of Troy. After these came the Pe∣lasgi, Arist. pol. 7. c. 10. of whom Plinie in his third Booke and fift Chapter; and Strabo in his fift; Thucydides in his sixth speakes at large: and after them the Lydi vnder Tyrrhenus their Herod. l. 2. Captayne, that gaue name to the Tyrrheni; who casting thence the Vmbri, tooke Plin. l. 3. c. 4. from them three hundred Castles, and built therein twelue Cities; to which (after they had possest and past ouer the Appenine Mountaynes) they added diuers others, whereof Telsina (afterward Bononia ) was one. Now that there was not anciently such a Nation, as these Vmbri, in those parts, I doe not affirme: hauing respect to the testimonies before repeated. And Stephanus thinkes, that the name was deriued from the Greeke word Ombros; but that these Vmbri of Italie were descended of the Nation of Scythians (called Galli ) it shall be shewed hereafter. § IIII. Of some other records testifying the vniuersall floud: and of two ancient deluges in Aegypt: and of some elsewhere. SAint AVGVSTINE out of Varro affirmeth, that the Greekes and Latines made not any mention of the vniuersall floud, because they had no∣thing of antiquitie foregoing that of Ogyges; and therefore (accor∣ding to Rhodoginus before remembred) were all things among the Greekes (which antiquitie had worne out of knowledge) called Ogygia, which we in English commonly call (worme-eaten) or of defaced date. But as all the parts of the earth were successiuely planted and peopled; and as all Nations had their proper times, and not their beginning at once and at the instant: so did euery familie which afterward became a great People, with whom the knowledge of di∣uine letters was not receiued, finde no parent of more antiquitie, then such as they had themselues, nor allow of any before their owne; and as the Graecians, so did o∣thers vaunt themselues to be Indigenae, and growing out of the earth, or inuent some other prophane or ridiculous beginning. But the Chaldaeans had certayne knowledge of Noahs floud, as Berosus witnesseth; and Nicolaus Damascenus maketh particular mention thereof (as is aforesaid) though he also affirme by heare-say, that some Gi∣ants saued themselues vpon the Mountaynes Baris in Armenia, but speaketh not thereof as from any authoritie approued: vsing the word sermoest; That such a speech there was. And Eusebius remembreth a place out of the ancient Historian A∣bydenus: . de . . l. 9. c. 4. who writeth that Sissithrus, to preserue himselfe from a floud foretold him by Saturnus, fled to the hils of Armenia by ship, ad Armenian nauigio confugiebat: who the third day (after the waters were fallen) sent forth birds, that finding no land to rest on, returned againe; which he also did a second time, but at the third returne the birds feet were couered with mudde and slime. To this effect are Eusebius words out of Abydenus, which may seeme a true description (though in other termes) of Noahs floud. Cyrillus also affirmeth, that Alex. Polyhistor maketh mention of this generall floud. And Plato in Timaeo produceth an Aegyptian Priest, who recounted to Solon out of the holy Bookes of Aegypt, the storie of the floud vniuersall, which (saith he) hap∣pened long before the Graecian inundations. Fryer Annius his Xenophon remembreth a third floud, which also Diodorus Siculus confirmeth, somewhat more ancient then Diod l. 1. that of Ogyges in Attica. For he named the generall floud for the first, which happe∣ned (saith he) vnder the old OGYGES, Sub prisco Ogyge, which was Noah; he calleth the second Niliaca: Hercules and Prometheus then liuing, 44. yeeres before that of Attica, in the 34. yeere of Belochus King of the Assyrians, though I doe not beleeue him as touching the time. But this floud couered a great part of the nether Aegypt, especially all that Region subiect to Prometheus; and hereof came the fable of the Vulture on Prometheus his liuer, afterward slaine by Hercules of Aegypt: which fiction Nat. Com. l. 4. Diod. Siculus deliuereth in these wordes: Fluuium propter cursus velocitatem, profun∣ditatem{que} aquarum Aquilam tunc appellatum, HERCVLEM cum consilij magnitudine, tum virtute, volunt è vestigio compressisse, & aquarum impetum ad priorem cursum con∣uertisse: Vnde & Graeci quidam Poetae rem gestam in fabulam vertentes, HERCVLEM tradunt Aquilam PROMETHEI depascentem occidisse; This floud (meaning of Nilus) for the swiftnesse of his course, as also for the depth, was in those dayes called the Eagle: but HERCVLES by his great iudgement and vertue did againe compresse and straighten this Riuer, so farre extended and ouer-spred, turning it into the old channels: Whence certayne Greeke (conuerting this labour and worke of HERCVLES into a fable) deuised that HERCVLES slue the Eagle, which fed on PROMETHEVS liuer; meaning that he deliuered Prometheus of that sorrow and torment, which for the losse of his People and Countrie (by the waters destroyed and couered ouer) he suffered. A fourth floud chanced about Pharus in Aegypt, where Alexander Macedon built Alexandria, as Annius conceiueth out of his Xenophon, who in this briefe sort writeth of all these inundations: Inundationes plures fuere: prima nouimestr is inunda∣tio . de aequia. Comm. per An∣nium, . 37. terrarum sub prisco OGYGE: secunda Niliaca, &c. There were many inundations (saith this same Xenophon ) the first which was vniuersall of nine Moneths, and this happened vn∣der the first OGYGES: the second was Niliaca, and of one Moneths continuance in the time of Hercules and Prometheus Aegyptians: a third of two Moneths vnder Ogyges Atticus: the fourth of three Moneths in Thessalia vnder Deucoelion: and a fift of the like continuance (called Pharonica ) vnder Proteus of Aegypt, about the time of Helens rape. Diodorus in his fift Booke and eleuenth Chapter, taking the Samothraces for his Authors, remembreth a floud in Asia the lesse and elsewhere, of no lesse destruction then any of the other particular inundations, saying, that the same happened before that of Deucalion: the Sea of Pontus and Hellespont breaking in ouer the land. But there haue beene many flouds in diuers times, and ages, not inferior to any of these two last remembred, and Pharonica in Aegypt: as in the yeere of our Redemption 590. when in October of the same yeere, Gregorie then being Bishop of Rome, there happened a maruailous ouerflowing in Italie, and especially in the Ve∣netian Territorie, and in Lyguria, accompanied with a most fearefull storme of thun∣der and lightning: after which followed the great plague at Rome, by reason of the many dead Serpents cast vp and left vpon the Land, after the waters decreased and returned. And in the yeere 1446. there perished 10000. people, by the breaking in Munster. of the Sea at Dordroch in Holland: of which kinde I take that floud to be of Achaia or Attica. Before that and in the yeere 1238. Trithemius speaketh of an earthquake , & motus . tota submersa & perierunt 100000. which swallowed many thousands: and after that of a floud in Friseland, in which there perished 100000. persons. Strozius Sigog. in his Magia omnifaria, telleth of an inundation in Italie, in the time of Pope Damasus, in which also many Cities of Sicil were swallowed: another in the Papacie of Alexander the sixth: also in the yeere 1515. Maximilian being Emperor. He also remembreth a perilous ouer-flowing in Polonia, about Cracouia, by which many people perished. Likewise Viginier a French Historian speaketh of a great floud in the South part of , which fell in the yeere of our Lord 1557, with so dreadfull a tempest, as all the people attended therein the very end of the world, and iudgement day; saying, That by the violent descent of the waters from the Mountaynes, about Nismes there were remooued diuers old heapes and mountures of ground, and many other places torne vp and rent: by which accident there was found both coyne of siluer and gold, diuers pee∣ces of plate, and vessels of other metall, supposed to be hidden at such time as the Goths inuaded that Prouince, in the yeere 1156. §. V. That the floud of NOAH was supernaturall, though some say it might haue beene foreseene by the Starres. NOw howsoeuer all these flouds and many other, which haue couered at seuerall times seuerall Regions, not only in these parts of the world, but in America also, (as I haue learned of some ancient Southsayers a∣mong them) may be ascribed to natural causes and accidents; yet that vniuersall floud (in the time of Noah ) was powred ouer the whole face of the earth by a power aboue nature, and by the especiall commandement of God himselfe, who at that time gaue strength of influence to the Starres, and abundance to the Fountaynes of the deepe: whereby the irruption of waters was made more forcible, then any abilitie of nature could effect, or any second causes by whatsoe∣uer vnion could performe, without receiuing from the Fountayne of all power, strength, and faculties supernaturall. Henricus Mechlimensis, a Scholler of Albertus Magnus, in his Commentaries vpon the great coniunctions of Albu Masar obser∣ueth, that before the floud of Noah, the like coniunction of Iupiter and Saturne, happened in the last degree of Cancer, against that constellation since called the Ship of Argos; by which the floud of Noah might be foretold, because Cancer is both a waterie signe, and the house of the Moone, which is the Ladie of the Sea, and of moysture, according to the rules of Astronomie, and common experience. And this opinion Petrus de Aliaco vpon Genesis confirmeth, affirming that although Also de Concor∣dia Theolog. & Astrolog. Noah did well know this floud by diuine reuclation, yet (this coniunction being no∣torious) he could not be ignorant of the second causes thereof: for those were not only signes, but also working causes, by strength receiued from the first cause, which Gen. 7. 11. is God himselfe: and further that by The word properly signifieth any place of stoppage, against which the force of the water being naturally carryed downewards, dasheth and breaketh; of or frango. Hence, because windores doe not only open but also shut, the word hath beene expounded (Windores) for barres or floud-gates. Catarractae coeli (Englished the windores of heauen) Moses meant this great and waterie coniunction; the word (Catarractae) signifying flowing downe or comming downe. Now (saith P. de Aliaco ) it pleased God to ordaine by the course of the Heauens such a constellation, by which all men might behold therein their destruction towards, and thereby forsake those wicked wayes wherein they walked, and call vnto God for mercy. Of this iudgement was Gul. Parisiensis, who vnderstood that the wordes Catar∣ractae coeli, or windores of heauen, were to be taken for the former coniunction, or for these waterie signes, Cancer, Pisces, Pleiades, Hyades, and Orion, and of the Planets, Mars, Venus, and the Moone: which are the forcible causes of the greatest inunda∣tions. His owne words are these: intelligo Prophetam Hebraeorum catarract as coelivocâsse, nisi partes illas coeli, quae generatiuae sunt pluuiarum & inundationum aquarum, quales sunt signa aquatica, vt Cancer, &c. as aforesaid. As yet (saith he) I perceiue not what the Prophet of the Hebrewes meaneth by those wordes (Catarractae coeli, or windores of Heauen) vnlesse he thereby vnderstand those celestiall powers, by whose influences are engendred the rayne, and inundations of waters, such as are the waterie signes of Can∣cer, &c. But in a word, as it might please God, that in the course of his vnsearchable wise∣dome this coniunction should at such time be: so did he (as aforesaid) adde vigour and facultie, and gaue to euery operation increase of vertues, violent eruptions to Springs and Fountaynes, commanding them to cast out the whole treasure and heape of their waters; taking retention from the cloudes, and condensing ayre into water by the ministerie of his Angels, or howsoeuer else best pleased his Al-power∣fulnesse. §. VI. That there was no neede of any new Creation of matter to make the vni∣uersall floud: and what are Catarractae Coeli, GEN. 7. VERS. 11. NOw if it be obiected, that God doth not create any thing of new; (for God resteth the seuenth day: (that is) he did not then after create any new species ) which granted, it may seeme that then all the earth and aire had not waters sufficient to couer the habitable world fifteen cubits aboue the highest Mountaynes. Of this proposition, whether God hath so restrayned himselfe or no, I will not dispute; but for the consequent (which is) that the world had want of water to ouer-couer the highest mountaynes, I take that conceit to be vnlearned and foolish; for it is written, that the fountaynes of the great deep were broken vp (that is) the waters forsook the very bowels of the earth; and all whatsoeuer was disperst therein pierced and brake through the face thereof. Then let vs consider, that the Earth had aboue one and twentie thousand miles: the Diameter of the Earth according to that circle seuen thousand mile, and then from the Superficies to the Center some three thousand fiue hundred miles: Take then the highest Mountayne of the world, Caucasus, Taurus, Olympus, or Atlas, the Moun∣taynes of Armenia or Scythia, or that (of all other the highest) in Tenuerif, and I doe not finde, that he that looketh highest stretcheth aboue thirtie miles vpright. It is not then impossible, answering reason with reason, that all those waters mixed within the earth three thousand fiue hundred miles deepe, should not well helpe to couer the space of thirtie miles in height, this thirty miles vpright being found in the depths of the earth one hundred and sixteene times: for the Fountaynes of the great Deepe were broken vp, and the waters drawne out of the bowels of the earth. Se∣condly, if we consider what proportion the earth beareth to the extension of the ayre ouer and aboue it, wee shall find the difference exceeding great. If then it plea∣sed God to condense but so much of this ayre as euery-where compasseth and em∣braceth the earth, which condensation is a conuersion of ayre into water, a change familiar in those elements, it will not seeme strange to men of iudgement, yea but of ordinarie vnderstanding, that the Earth (God so pleasing) was couered ouer with waters without any new Creation. Lastly, for the opinions of Parisiensis, and Aliacensis, to which I may adde Berosus and others, That such a coniunction there was, foreshewing that de∣struction by waters which followed; and that by the word Catarractae coeli, or Win∣dores of heauen, was meant this coniunction; there needes no other answere then that obseruation of Ludouicus Viues, who affirmeth that by the grauest Astrologian it was obserued, that in the yeere 1524 there should happen the like coniunction, as at floud, then which (saith he) there was neuer a more fayre, drie, and seaso∣nable yeere: the like destruction was prophecied of the yeere 1588. But Picus Earle of Mirandula proueth that there could not be any such coniunction at that time. To conclude, I finde no other mysterie in the word Catarractae coeli, then that the cloudes were meant thereby: Moses vsing the word Windores of Heauen (if that be the sense of the word) to expresse the violence of the raynes, and powring downe of waters. For whosoeuer hath seene those fallings of water, which sometimes hap∣pen in the Indies, which are called the Spowts (where cloudes doe not breake into drops, but fall with a resistlesse violence in one body) may properly vse that manner of speech which Moses did; That the windores or floud-gates of heauen opened: (which is) That waters fell, contrarie to custome, and that order which we call na∣turall. God then loosened the power retentiue in the vppermost ayre, and the wa∣ters fell in abundance: Behold (saith IOB) he which holdeth the waters, and they drie Iob c. 12. v. 15. vp, or better in Latine, Et omnia siccantur; And all things are dryed vp; but when he sen∣deth them out, they destroy the earth: and in the 26. Chapter: He bindeth the waters in the cloudes; but these bonds God loosed at that time of the generall floud, and cal∣led vp the waters which slept in the great deepe: and these ioyning together couered the earth, till they had performed the worke of his will: which done, he then com∣manded Gen. 8. 1. them to returne into their darke and vast Caues, and the rest (by a winde) againe into ayre, formerly condensed into drops. §. VII. Of some remaynder of the memorie of NOAH among the Heathen. NOAH commanded by God, before the fall of those waters, entred the Arke which he had built, with his owne Wife, and his Sonnes, and his sonnes wiues, taking with them of euery Creature, which tooke life by generation, seuen of the cleane, and of the vncleane, two. Noah, according to Philo, signifieth quietnesse: after others, and according to the prophecie of his Father Lamech, cessation; to whom after-times gaue many names answering his antiquitie, zeale, vertue, and other qualities: as, The first Ogyges, because in the time of the Grecian Ogyges there was also a great floud of Achaia: Sa∣turne they called him, because he was the Father of Nations: Others gaue him the name of Prometheus, who was said to steale away Iupiters fire; fire in that place be∣ing taken and vnderstood for the knowledge of God and heauenly things. Others thinke that he was so called for his excellent wisedome and foresight. He had also the name of Ianus, (id est) vinosus, because Iain signifieth wine in the Hebrew. And so Tertullian finds him written in libris ritualibus; In the bookes of ceremonies, preceding both Saturne, Vranus, and Ioue: which three enioyed an elder time then all the o∣ther ancientest fayned gods. And this name Iain is taken from the Hebrew and Sy∣rian, and not from the Latine: for it was in vse before there was any Latine Nation, or any Kingdome by that name knowne. Of the antiquitie of Ianus, Fabius Pictor giueth this testimonie: IANI aetate nulla erat Monarchia, quia mortalibus pectoribus nondum haeserat vlla regnandi cupiditas, &c. Vinum & far primus populas docuit IANVS ad sacrificia: primus enim ar as & Pomoeria & sacra docuit; In the time of IANVS (saith he) there was no Monarchie: for the desire of rule had not then folded it selfe about the hearts of men. IANVS first taught the people to sacrifice Wine and Meale: hee first set vp Altars, instituted Gardens and solitarie Groues, wherein they vsed to pray; with other holy rites and ceremonies. A greater testimonie then this there cannot be found among the Heathen, which in all agreeth so well with the Scriptures. For first, whilest Noah flourished, there was not any King or Monarch: Nimrod being the first that tooke on him soueraigne authoritie. Secondly, Noah after the floud was the first that planted the Vine, and became a Husbandman; and therefore offered the first Gen. 9. 20. fruits of both (to wit) Wine and Meale. Thirdly, he was the first that raysed an Altar, and offered sacrifice to God, a thankes-giuing for his mercifull goodnesse to∣wards Gen. 8. 20. him. Noah was also signified in the name of Bifrons (which was giuen to Ia∣nus ) because he beheld the times both before and after the floud, Quia praeterita noue∣rit, . cont. Gent. lib. 6. & futura prospexerit, saith ARNOBIVS; Because he knew what was past, and prouided for what was to come. He was also in the person of Ianus shaddowed by the name of Chaos, and semen orbis; The seede of the world; because as out of that confused heape was drawne all the kindes of Beasts and Plants: so from Noah came all mankinde: whereof Ouid in the person of Ianus: Me Chaos antiqui (nam sum res prisca) vocabant, Ouid. de . lib. 1. Aspice quàm longi temporis acta cano. The ancient call'd me Chaos: my great yeares By those old times, of which I sing, appeares. He was also intituled Coelum and Sol, Heauen and the Sunne, for his excellent know∣ledge in Astronomie: Vertumnus, Bacchus, and Liber Pater; not that latter, which Diod. Siculus, and Alex. Aphrodiseus so call, because he was the restorer of the Greekes to their former libertie, but in respect of the floud. For the Greekes called Liber and his Nurses Hyades, of rayne, because entred the Arke, when the Sunne ioyned with the Starres Hyades, a constellation in the brow or necke of Taurus, and euer after a monument of Noahs floud. He was also by others surnamed Triton, a Marine God, the Sonne of Neptune: because he liued in safetie on the waters. So was he knowne by the name of DIONYSVS, quasi , mentem pungens; Bite∣braine, Nat. Com. lib. 5. cap. 13. or wit-stinger, though Diodorus conceiue otherwise, and deriue that name à patre & loco; Of his Father, and the place of his birth (to wit) of Ioue, and Nisa a Towne of Arabia foelix, saith Suidas out of Orpheus. He had also the by-name of Coelius. Taurus, or Taurophagus; because he first yoked Oxen and tilled the ground, according to that of MOSES: And NOAH became an husbandman. Now howsoeuer the Grecians Gen. 9. 20. vaunt of their Theban Bacchus (otherwise Dionysus ) it is certayne that the name was borrowed, and the inuention stollen from Noah. But this name of Bacchus, more an∣ciently Boacus, was taken (saith Gul. Stuckius, and out of him Danaeus ) from Noachus, Stuck. in libris conuiualibus, & Danaeus de pri∣ma mundi aetate. ( N ) being changed into ( B ); and it is the more probable, because it cannot be doubted but that Noah was the first planter of the Vine after the floud: and of Noah (the first and ancient Bacchus ) were all those fables deuised, of which Diodorus com∣playneth in his fourth Booke, and fifth Chapter. This first Bacchus (to wit) Noah, was surnamed Nysius, of the Mountayne Nysa in India, where the Grecian Bacchus ne∣uer came, whatsoeuer themselues faine of his enterprises; and these Mountaynes of Nysa ioyne with those of Paropanisus, and those other Easterne Mountaynes, on which the Arke of Noah rested after the floud. Furthermore, to the end that the memorie of this second parent of mankinde might the better bee preserued, there were founded by his issues many great Cities which bare his name; with many riuers and mountaines: which oftentimes forgat that it was done in his regard, because the many names giuen him brought the same confusion to places as to himselfe. Notwithstanding all which, we find the Citie of . l. 6. Steph. de Vrb. Herod. l. 4. Strabo. l. 7. Noah vpon the bankes of the red Sea and elsewhere: the Riuer of Noas in Thrace, which Strabo calleth Noarus; Ptolomie ; diuiding Illyria from Panonia. Thus much for the name. §. VIII. Of sundrie particulars touching the Arke: as the place where it was made, the matter, fashion and name. NOw in what part of the world Noah built the Arke, it doth not ap∣peare in the Scriptures, neither doe I finde any approued Authour that hath written thereof: onely Goropius Becanus in his Indo-Scythia conceiueth, that Noah built his Arke neere the mountaines of Caucasus, because on those hils are found the goodliest Cedars: for when Alex. Macedon made the warre among a people, called Nysaei, inhabiting the other side of Caucasus, hee found all their burials and Sepulchers wrought ouer with Cedar. To this place (saith Becanus ) Noah repaired, both to separate himselfe from the repro∣bate Giants, who rebelled against God and Nature, as also because he would not be interrupted in the building of the Arke; to which also hee addeth the conueniencie ofriuers, to transport the Timber which he vsed, without troubling any other car∣riages. Onely this wee are sure of, that the Arke was built in some part of the Easterne world; and to my vnderstanding, not farre from the place where it rested after the floud. For Noah did not vse any mast or saile (as in other ships) and therefore did the Arke no otherwise moue then the or body of a ship doth in a calme Sea. Also because it is not probable, that during these continuall and downe-right raines there were any windes at all, therefore was the Arke little moued from the place where it was fashioned and set together. For it is written: God made a winde to passe Gene. 8. 1. vpon the earth, and the waters , and therefore it may be gathered, that during the fall of the waters, there was not any storme or forcible winde at all, which could driue the Arke any great distance from the place where it was first by the waters lif∣ted vp. This is also the more probable, if that ancient opinion bee true, as it is very likely, that the Arke had fundum planum, a flat bottome, and not raised in forme of a ship with a sharpnesse forward, to cut the waues for the better speede. This kind of Vessell the Hebrewes call Thebet, and the Greekes Larnax, for so they termed Deucalions ship: and some say, that the hill Parnassus, to which in eight dayes he arriued, was first called Larnassus, and by the change of ( L ) into ( P ) Parnassus; Steph. de Vrb. fol. 227. but Pausanias thinkes that it tooke name of a Sonne of the Nymphe Cleodorae, called Parnassus, the inuentour of Auguration. Peucerus findes the word ( Parnassus ) to haue no affinitie with the Greeke, but De Oracul. fol. 94. thinkes it deriued from the Hebrew word Nahas, which signifieth Auguration and Diuination: or from Har or Parai, as in his Chapter of Oracles in the leafe before cited. Iosephus cals the Arke Machina, by the generall name of a huge Frame: and Epi∣phanius . in Ancor. out of the Hebrew Aron; but herein lieth the difference betweene Aron and Theuet, That Aron signifieth properly the Arke of the Sanctuarie, but Thebet such a Vessell, as swimmeth, and beareth it selfe vpon the waters. Lastly, this Arke of Noah differed from the fashion of a ship in this, that it had a couer and roofe, with a crest in the middest thereof, and the sides declining like the roofe of an house; to the end, both to cast off the waters, and that thereunder Noah himselfe and his children might shelter, and separate themselues from the noysom∣nesse . 6. 4. of the many beasts, which filled the other roomes and parts of the Arke. Of what wood the Arke was built it is vncertaine. The Hebrew word Gopher once and in this place onely vsed is diuersly vnderstood; and though the matter bee of little importance, yet this difference there is, That the Geneua Translation cals it Pinetree, the Robbine Cedar, the Seuentie, square timber, the Latine smooth tim∣ber. Others will haue it Cypres trees, as dedicated to the dead, because Cypres is worne at funerals. But out of doubt, if the word Gopher signifie any speciall kind of timber, Noah obayed the voyce of God therein; if not, hee was not then curious as touching the kinde or nature of the wood, hauing the promise of God, and his grace and mercie for his defence. For with Noah God promised to establish his couenant. V. 18. Plin. l. 16. c. 40. Plinie affirmeth that in Aegypt it was the vse to build ships of Cedar, which the wormes eate not; and hee auoweth that hee saw in Vtica, in the Temple of Apollo Cedar beames, laid in the time of the foundation of the Citie, and that they were still sound in his time, which was about 1188. yeares after: prouing thereby, that this kinde of wood was not subiect to putrifying or moulding in a very long time. But in that it is easie to cut, light to carie, and of a sweete sauour, lasting also better then any other wood, and because neere the place where the Arke rested, there are found great store of these Cedar trees, as also in all the mountaines of the East, be∣sides those of Libanus, it is probable enough that the Arke might be of that wood: which hath besides the other commodities the greatest length of Timber, and there∣fore fittest to build ships withall. Pererius conceiueth that the Arke had diuers sorts of timber, and that the bottome had of one sort, the decke and partition of another; all which may be true or false, if Gopher may be taken for timber in generall. True it is, that Cedar will serue for all parts of a ship, aswell for the body, as for masts and yards. But Noah had most respect to the direction receiued from God: to the length, breadth, and height, and to the partitions of the Arke; and to pitch it, and to diuide it into Cabines, thereby to seuer the cleane beasts from the vncleane, and to preserue their seuerall sorts of foode; and that it might bee capable of all kinde of liuing crea∣tures, according to the numbers by God appointed. All which when Noah had ga∣thered together, he cast his confidence wholly on God, who by his Angels steered this ship without a rudder, and directed it without the helpe of a Compasse or the North starre. The pitch which Noah vsed, is by some supposed to haue beene a kinde of Bitumen, whereof there is great quantitie about the Valley of Sodome and . Gomorra, now the dead Sea or Asphaltes: and in the Region of Babylon, and in the West India, and herein it exceedeth other pitch, that it melts not with the Sunne, but by the fire onely, after the manner of hard waxe. §. IX. That the Arke was of sufficient capacitie. THe Arke according to Gods commaundement had of length three hundred cubites, fiftie of breadth, and thirtie deepe or high: by which proportion it had sixe parts of length to one of breadth, and ten times in length to one of depth; of which S. AVGVSTINE: De Ciultat. Dei. l. 15. c. 26. figura est peregrinant is in hoc seculo Ciuitatis Dei, (hoc est) Ecclesiae, quaefit salua per lignum, in quo Mediator Dei & hominum, homo Christus Iesus: nam & mensura ipsa longitudinis, altitudinis, latitudinis{que} eius significat corpus humanum, in cuius veritate ad homines praenunciatus est venturus, & venit, &c. Without doubt (saith he) it is a figure of the Citie of God, trauailing in this world as a stranger (that is) of the Church, sa∣ued by the tree whereupon the Mediatour betweene God and Man, the man Iesus Christ did hang: for euen the very measure of the length, heighth, and breadth, answereth the shape of mans body, in the truth whereof the comming of Christ was foretold and performed. By what kinde of Cubite the Arke was measured, it hath beene a disputed que∣stion among the Fathers, and others; and the differences are in effect these: The first kinde of cubit (called the Common) containeth one foot and a halfe, measured from the sharpe of the elbow to the point of the middle finger. The second (the palme cubit) which taketh one handfull more then the common. The third is called Regi∣us Cubitus, or the Persian Cubit, which exceedeth the common cubit three inches. The fourth is the sacred cubit, which containeth the common or vulgar cubit dou∣ble, wanting but a quarter or fourth part. Lastly, there is a fift cubit, called Geome∣tricall, which containeth sixe common cubits. But of all these sortes, which were commonly measured by the vulgar cubit, the alteration and diminution of mens sta∣tures hath made the difference. For as there is now a lesse proportion of bodies: so is the common cubit, from the sharpe of the elbow to the point of the middle finger, of lesse length then it was in elder times. S. Augustine considering the many sortes of beasts and birds which the Arke held, with their food and water, was sometimes of opinion, that the Arke had proportion after the Geometricall cubit, which containeth almost sixe of the Common. For measuring the Arke by the vulgar cubit, it did not exceede the capacitie of that vessel . lib. 4. built by Hiero of Syracuse, or the ship of Ptolomie Philo-pater. But S. Augustine (who Plutar. in vita Demetry. at the first was led by Origen ) changed his iudgement as touching the Geometricall cubit; and found vpon better consideration, that there needed not so huge a bodie to praeserue all sortes of creatures by God appointed to bee reserued. For it was not needfull to take any kindes of fishes into the Arke, because they were kept liuing (saith S. Augustine) in their owne element. Nòn fuit necesse conseruare in Arca quae pos∣sent in aquis vinere; nòn solùm mersa sicut pisces, verùm super-natantia, sicut multae alites. It was not needfull to conserue those creatures in the Arke, which could liue in the waters; and not only fishes which can liuevnder water, but also those fowls which sit and swim on them: and againe, Terra, nòn aqua, maledicta, quià Adam nòn huius, sed illius fructum vetitum come∣dit. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 5. ca. 27. It was the earth, and not the waters, which God cursed: for of the forbidden fruit of the earth and not of the Sea, did Adam eat; so as S. Augustine gathereth hereupon, (as afore∣said) that so huge a Frame needed not. And if wee looke with the eyes of iudgement hereunto, wee shall finde nothing monstrous therein; although the imaginations of men, who (for the most part) haue more of mischiefe and of ignorance, then of any reuerend reason, finde many impossibilities in this worke of God. But it is manifest, and vndoubtedly true, that many of the Species, which now sceme differing and of seuerall kindes, were not then in natura. For those beasts which are of mixt natures; either they were not in that age, or else it was not needfull to praeserue them: seeing they might bee generated againe by others, as the Mules, the Hyaena's and the like: the one be∣gotten by Asses and Mares, the other by Foxes and Wolues. And whereas by dis∣couering of strange landes, wherein there are found diuers beastes and birdes diffe∣ring in colour or stature from those of these Northerne parts, it may be supposed by a superficiall consideration, that all those which weare red and pyed skinnes, or fea∣thers, are differing from those that are lesse painted, and were plaine russet or blacke: they are much mistaken that so thinke. And for my owne opinion I finde no diffe∣rence, but onely in magnitude, betweene the Cat of Europe, and the Ounce of India; and euen those dogges which are become wilde in , with which the Spa∣niards vsed to deuoure the naked Indians, are now changed to Wolues, and begin to destroy the breed of their Cattle, and doe also oftentimes teare asunder their owne Children. The common Crowe and Rooke of India is full of red feathers in the Acost. bist. India. drown'd and low Islands of Caribana; and the Blacke-Bird and Thrush hath his fea∣thers mixt with blacke and carnation: in the North parts of Virginia. The dog-fish of England is the Sharke of the South Ocean: For if colour or magnitude made a difference of Species, then were the Negro's, which wee call the blacke-mores, non animalia rationalia, not men, but some kinde of strange beastes: and so the Giants of the South America should be of another kinde, then the people of this part of the World. Wee also see it daily that the natures of fruites are changed by transplantation, some to better, some to worse, especially with the change of Cly∣mate. Crabs may bee made good fruit by often grafting, and the best Mellons will change in a yeere or two to common Cowcummers by being set in a barren soyle: Therefore taking the kindes precisely of all creatures, as they were by God created, or out of the earth by his ordinance produced: The Arke, after the measure of the common Cubit was sufficiently capacious to containe of all, according to the num∣ber by God appointed: For if we adde but halfe a foot of measure to the Common Cubit, which had a foot and a halfe of Giantly stature (and lesse allowance wee can∣not giue to the difference betweene them and vs) then did the Arke containe 600. foot in length, and 100. foot in breadth, and 60. foot deepe. But first of all to make it manifest, that the Geometricall Cubit is not vsed in the Scripture, the stature of the Giants therein named may suffice. For if the bed of Og Deut. 3. 11. King of Basan had beene nine Geometricall Cubites long, it had taken 54. Cubites of 1. Sam. 17. 4. the common, which make 80. foot: and Goliah, who had the length of 6. Cubites and a handfull, which makes nine foote and a handfull, (a proportion credible) if these Cubites had beene Geometricall, then had beene 54. foot in heighth and vpwardes, which were monstrous and most incredible: for (according to this proportion) had the head of Goliah beene nine foot long, and farre waightier and bigger then all Da∣uids body, who caried it away. Againe, if the Geometricall Cubit had been vsed for a measure in the Scripture as many Commenters haue obserued, then had the Altar (appointed to containe fiue Cubites of length, fiue of breadth, and three of heighth) haue reached the length of 27. foot vpright, and so must their Priestes haue ascended by steps or ladders to haue performed their sacrifices thereon, which was contrarie to Gods Commandement giuen in these wordes: Thou shalt not goe vp with steppes vnto mine altar, that thy shame Exod. 20. 26. bee not discouered thereon; and therefore was the Altar but three Common Cubites high which make foure foot, that their Priests standing thereby might execute their office: Wherefore I may conclude, that the Cubit mentioned in the Scriptures was not the Geometricall, but the ordinarie Cubit of one foot and a halfe, according to the measure of Giantly stature; which measure (doubtlesse) might giue much the more capacitie to the Arke, although it be also probable, that as the men were, so were the horses whereon they rode, and all other creatures of a correspondent size. And yet (as I take it) though by this meanes there were not any whit the more roome in the Arke, it were not hard to conceiue, how all the distinct Species of A∣nimals, whose liues cannot bee preserued in the waters, might according to their present quantities bee contained in a vessell of those dimensions which the Arke had; allowing to the Cubit one foot and a halfe of our now vsuall measure: whence it followeth of necessitie, that those large bodies which were in the daies of Noah might haue roome sufficient in the Arke, which was measured by a Cubit of length proportionable. How the appointed number of creatures to be saued, (that is) seuen of the cleane, two of the vncleane (with necessarie foode) might haue place in the Arke, Butaeo hath very learnedly declared: the briefe summe of whose discourse to that purpose is this. The length of the Arke was three hundred cubits, which multiplyed by the breadth, namely fistie cubits, and the product by the heighth of thirtie cubits, sheweth the whole concauitie to haue beene 450000. Now whereas the posts, walles, and other partitions of lodg∣ings may seeme to haue taken vp a great part of the hollow: the heighth of the roofe which (the perpendicular being one cubit) contained 7500. cubicall cubes, was a sufficient recompence: If therefore in a ship of such greatnesse wee seeke roome for 89. distinct Species of beasts, or (lest any should be omitted) for 100. seuerall kinds, we shall easily finde place both for them, and for the birds, which in bignesse are no way answerable to them, and for meate to sustaine them all. For there are three sorts of beasts, whose bodies are of a quantitie best knowne; the Beefe, the Sheepe; and the Wolfe: to which the rest may be reduced, by saying, (according to Aristo∣tle ) that one Elephant is answerable to foure Beeues, one Lyon to two Wolues, and so of the rest. Of beasts, some feede on vegetables, others on flesh. There are one and thirtie kinds of the greater sort, feeding on vegetables: of which number, onely three are cleane, according to the law of Moses, whereof seuen of a kinde entred into the Arke, namely three couples for breede, and one odde one for sacrifice: the other eight and twentie kindes were taken by two of each kinde, so that in all there were in the Arke one and twentie great beasts cleane, and sixe and fiftie vncleane, estimable for largenesse as ninetie one Beeues; yet for a supplement (lest perhaps any Species be omitted) let them be valued, as 120. Beeues. Of the lesser sort feeding on vege∣tables were in the Arke sixe and twentie kinds, estimable with good allowance for supplie, as fourescore Sheepe. Of those which deuoure flesh were two and thirtie kinds, answerable to threescore and foure Wolues. All these 280. beasts might bee kept in one storie or roome of the Arke in their seuerall Cabbines; their meate in a second: the Birds and their prouision in a third, with place to spare for Noah and his family, and all their necessaries. §. X. That the Arke rested vpon part of the hill Taurus (or Caucasus) betweene the East Indies, and Scythia. †. I. A praeterition of some questions lesse materiall: with a note of the vse of this question, to finde out the Metropolis of Nations. WHat time Noah tooke to build the Arke, I leaue to others to dispute, but he receiued the Commandement from God 100. yeares before the waters sell: and had therefore choice of time and leisure sufficient. As for the number of deckes and partitions, which Origen deuides into foure, S. Augustine into three, I will not trouble the Reader with the controuersie: or whether those creatures which sometimes rest on the land, other times in the waters, as the Crocodiles (now called Alegartos ) the Sea-cowes or Sea∣horses, were kept in the Arke, or no, I thinke it a needlesse curiositie; and yet to this saith Pererius, and others before him, that a fish-poole might bee made aswell within the Arke, as in Hiero his ship of Scyracuse. Lastly, to consider or labour to disproue the foolerie of the Hebrewes, who suppose that the Arke was lightened by a Car∣buncle, or had windores of Christall to receiue in light, and keepe out water, were but to reuiue the buried vanities of former times. But that which I seeke most to sa∣tisfie my selfe and others in, is in what part of the world the Arke rested after the floud: because the true vnderstanding of some of these places (as the seate of the ter∣restriall Paradise, and the resting of the Arke ) doe onely and truely teach the worlds Plantation, and the beginning of Nations, before and after the floud; and all storie, as well generall as particular, thereby may be the better vnderstood. †. II. Aproposall of the common opinion, that the Arke rested vpon some of the hils of Armenia. ANd first, for the true place where the Arke rested after the floud, and from what part of the world the children of Noah trauailed to their first settlement and plantation, I am resolued (without any presumption) that therein the most wri∣ters were vtterly mistaken. And I am not led so to thinke out of my humour or new∣nesse of opinion, or singularitie; but doe herein ground my selfe on the originall and first truth, which is the word of God, and after that vpon reason, and the most pro∣bable circumstances thereon depending. For whereas it is written, that the Arke stai∣ed Gene. 8. 4. vpon one of the mountaines of Ararat, which the Chaldaean Paraphrast hath conuer∣ted Kardu, meaning the hils Gordaei or Gordiaei in Armenia the greater: (as the wordes Gordaei and Kardu, seeme to bee one and the same) of which opinion also the most of our Interpreters are; I finde neither Scripture nor reason which teacheth any such thing: (to wit) that it rested on that part of Ararat, which is in the greater Armenis. 7. §. 1. Nicolaus cals this mountaine of Ararat, Baris, being the same which the Chaldaean nameth Kardu, to which mountaine the Fryer Annius (citing this place out of Iosephus ) makes him finde another adioyning, called Ocila, and to say that the Arke (of which Moses the Lawgiuer of the Hebrewes wrote) did first take ground on this . But I doe not finde any such mountaine in being, as this Ocila; neither is there any mention of it in the place of Iosephus. Strabo remembreth a Promontorie in A∣rabia foelix, of that name, and Plinie findes a Mart-towne so called in the same, which cals Ocilis, Pinetus Acyla, and Niger Zidon. But this Ocila of Damascenus, or ra∣ther of Annius, seemeth to bee one and a part of the Armenian mountaines. Berosus calleth those mountaines of Armenia Cordiaei, and Curtius Cordaei: Ptolomie Gordaei and Gordiaei: of which the Countrie next adioyning is by this Nicolaus Damascenus cal∣led Ninyada, perhaps (as Becanus coniectures) for Milyada or rather Minni: which Hierem. 51. 27. word is vsed for Armenia Minor. And the very word of Armenia seemes to be com∣pounded Naet. hist. l. 5. c. 12 of this word Minni, and Aram: as if we should say Minni of Syria; for that Armenia also was a part of Syria, Plinie witnesseth. Epiphanius placeth the Cardyes a∣bout these mountaines, whom others call Gordieni or Gordeni. The mountaines are seated apart from all other to the North of that Ledge of mountaines called Taurus, or Niphates in the plaines of Armenia the great, neere the Lake Thospitis: whence the Riuer of Tigris floweth in 75. degrees of longitude, and 41. and 42. degrees of lati∣tude. One of the mountaines Gordiaei (that which surmounteth the rest) Epiphanius cals Lubar, which in the Armenian signifieth a place of descent: but this out of Iose∣phus; Ioseph. de Antiq. l. 1. c. 4. which name (saith Iunius ) was of the euent, because of Noahs comming downe with his children. But this also I take to bee a supposed euent; seeing any hill, from whence on euery side we must descend, may thus bee called: as Iunius corrects the place in Iosephus ( Kubaris. ) That the place is thus to be read, he coniectureth, because Iosep. l. 1. c. 4. sayes, the place is called (as it were the descent or com∣ming downe) and Epiphan. l. 1. cont. Haeres. cals it : which word in the Armenian and Aegyptian tongue signifieth descent, of Lubar, which is to descend; whence also Lubra is a Synagogue, because it was commonly built on some high place: whereof al∣so the Latine Delubrum may seeme to be deriued; and Act. 6. 9. they that belonged to the Synagogue of the Aegyptians are called Libertini, for Lubratenu. Yet this opinion hath beene embraced from age to age: receiuing a habit of strength by time, and al∣lowance without any farther examination; although the name of Lubar might other∣wise rightly be giuen, especially to that mountaine, by reason that the passage was more faire, vp and downe vnto it, then to any of the rest adioyning. †. III. The first argument against the common opinion. They that came to build Babel, would haue come sooner, had they come from so neere a place as Armenia. BVt there are many arguments to perswade me, that the Arke of Noah did not rest it selfe in any part of Armenia, and that the mountaines Ararat was not Baris, nor any one of the Gordiaean mountaines. For first, it is agreed by all which follow , that it was in the 130. yeare, or Beros. l. 1. in the yeare 131. after the floud, when came into the valley of Shinar, which Valley was afterward called Babylonia, Chush, and Chaldaea. If then the Arke had first found land in Armenia, it is very vnprobable, that the children of Noah which came into that valley could haue spent so many yeares in so short a passage: seeing the Re∣gion of Mesopotamia was onely interiacent, which might by iourneies haue beene past ouer in twentie dayes; and to hasten and helpe which passage the nauiga∣ble riuer of Tigris offered it selfe, which is euery where transpassable by boates of great burden: so as where the Desart on the one side resisted their expedition, the ri∣uer on the contrarie side serued to aduance it; the riuer rising out of the same ri∣uer of mountaines, or at the foote of them, where the Arke of Noah was first supposed to settle it selfe; Then, if the Nations which followed Nimrod still doubted the sur∣prise of a second floud (according to the opinions of the ancient Hebrewes) it soun∣deth ill to the eare of reason, that they would haue spent many yeeres in that low and ouerflowne Valley of Mesopotamia, so called of the many Riuers which imbroyder or compasse it: for the effects witnessed their affections, and the workes, which they vndertooke, their vnbeliefe; being no sooner arriued in Shinar, but they began to prouide themselues of a defence (by erecting Babel ) against any future or feared in∣vndation. Now at Babel it was that Nimrod began his Kingdome, the first knowne Citie of the world founded after the floud, about 131. yeares, or (as others suppose) ten yeeres later: though (for my selfe) I rather thinke, that they vndertooke that worke in two respects; first, to make themselues famous, To get vs a name (saith the Gene. 10. 10. Beros. l. 1. Text:) Secondly, thereby to vsurpe dominion ouer the rest. †. IIII. The second argument, That the Easterne people were most ancient in populositie, and in all humane glorie. FOr a second Argument: The ciuilitie, magnificence and multitude of people (wherein the East parts of the world first abounded) hath more waight then any thing which hath beene, or can be said for Armenia, and for Noahs taking land there. And that this is true, the vse of Printing and Artillerie (among many other things which the East had) may easily perswade vs, that those Sunne-rising Nations were the most ancient. The certaintie of this report, that the East Indians (time out of minde) haue had Gunnes and Ordnance of batterie, confirmed by the Portugals and others, makes vs now to vnderstand, That the place of Philostratus in vita Apollonij Tianaei. l. 2. c. 14. is no fable, though exprest in fabulous wordes: when he saith, that the wise men, which dwell betweene Hyphasis and Ganges, vse not themselues to goe forth into battaile: but that they driue away their enemies with thunder and light∣ning sent from Iupiter. By which meanes there it is said, that Hercules Aegyptius and Bacchus, ioyning their forces were defeated there; and that this Hercules there cast away his golden shield. For the inuention of letters was ignorantly ascribed to Cad∣mus, because he brought them first into Greece: of which the people (then rude and sauage) had reason to giue him the honour, from whom they receiued the benefit. But it is true, that letters are no lesse ancient then Seth or Henoch were: for they are said to haue written on pillars of stone (as before remembred) long before the floud. But from the Easterne world it was that Iohn Cuthenberg a Germane, brought the de∣uice of Printing: by whom Conradus being instructed, brought the practice thereof to Rome: and after that Nicholaus Gerson a Frenchman, bettered both the letters and inuention. And notwithstanding that this mysterie was then supposed to bee but newly borne, the Chinäos had letters long before either the Aegyptians or Phoenici∣ans; and also the Art of Printing, when as the Greekes had neither any ciuill know∣ledge, or any letters among them. And that this is true, both the Portugals and Spaniards haue witnessed, who about an hundred yeares since discouered those Kingdomes, and doe now enioy their rich trades therein: for the Chinaos account all other Nations but Saluages, in respect of themselues. And to adde strength to this argument, the conquest and storie of Alex. Macedon may iustly bee called to witnesse, who found more Cities and sumptuositie in that little Kingdome of Porus, which lay side by side to the East India, then in all his other trauailes and vndertakings. For in Alexanders time learning and greatnesse had not trauailed so farre to the West as Rome: Alexander esteeming of Italie but as a bar∣barous Countrie, and of Rome as of a Village. But it was Babylon that stood in his eye, and the of the East pierced his . And if wee looke as farre as the Sun∣rising, and heare Paulus Venetus what he reporteth of the vttermost Angle and Island thereof, we shall finde that those Nations haue sent out, and not receiued, lent know∣ledge, and not borrowed it from the West. For the farther East (to this day) the more ciuill, the farther West the more saluage. And of the Isle of Iapan (now Zipin∣gari) Venetus maketh this report: Incolae religioni, literis, & sapientiae sunt addictissimi, & veritatis indagatores acerrimi; nihil illis frequentius oratione, quam (more nostro) sa∣cris in delubris exercent: vnum cognoscunt Principem, vnum Deum adorant, The Ilan∣ders are exceedingly addicted to religion, letters, and Philosophie, and most diligent searchers out of truth: there is nothing among them more frequent then prayer, which they vse in their Churches, after the manner of Christians. They acknowledge one King, and worship one God. The antiquitie, magnificence, ciuilitie, riches, sumptuous buildings, and po∣licie in gouernement, is reported to be such by those who haue beene employed in∣to those parts, as it seemeth to exceede (in those formerly named, and diuers other particulars) all other Kingdomes of the world. †. V. The third argument, From the wonderfull resistance which SEMIRAMIS found in the East Indies. BVt for a third argument, and also of a treble strength to the rest, I lay the inuasi∣on of Semiramis before the indifferent and aduised Reader: who may consider in what age shee liued, and how soone after the worlds new birth shee gathered her Armie (as Diodorus Siculus out of reporteth) of more then three Millions to inuade India, to which hee adioyned also 500000. Horse, and 100000. Waggons: whereof if we beleeue but a third part, it shall suffice to proue that India was the first planted and peopled Countrie after the floud. Now as touching the time wherein shee liued: All Historians consent, that shee was the wife of Ninus; and the most approued Writers agree, that Ninus was the Sonne of Belus, and Belus of Nimrod, that Nimrod was the Sonne of Cush, Cush of Cham, and Cham of Noah. And at such time as Nimrod came to Shinar, hee was then a great Nation, as by the building of the Citie and Tower of Babel may appeare; and being then so multiplied and in∣creased, the two descents cast betweene Nimrod and Semiramis, brought foorth in that time those multitudes, whereof her Armie was composed. Let vs then see with whome shee encountred in that warre with this her powerfull Armie: euen with a multitude, rather exceeding, then equalling her owne, conducted by Stauro∣bates King of India beyond Indus; of whose multitudes this is the witnesse of Diod. Siculus. STAVROBATES, auit is maioribus quàm quae erant SEMIRAMIDIS copijs. STAVROBATES gathering together greater troupes then those of SEMIRAMIS. If then these numbers of Indians had beene encreased but by a Colonie sent out from Shinar, (and that also after Babel was built, which no doubt tooke some time in the perfor∣mance) this encrease in the East, and this Armie of Staurobates must haue been made of stone, or somwhat else by miracle. For as the numbers which Semiramis gathered might easily grow vp in that time, from so great a Troupe as Nimrod brought with him into Babylonia (as shall be demonstrated hereafter in the Storie of Israel ) so could not any such time, by any multiplication naturall, produce so many bodies of men, as were in the Indian Army victorious ouer Semiramis, if the Colonies sent thither had beene so late as Babel ouerturned, and the confusion of Languages. For if we allow 65. yeeres time after the Floud, before Nimrod was borne: of which, 30. yeeres to Cush ere he begat Seba, after whom hee had Hauilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabtecha: Gen. 10. . and then 30. yeeres to Raamah, ere hee begat Sheba and Dedan, both which were borne before Nimrod: and fiue yeeres to his fiue elder brothers, which make 65. and then twice 30. yeeres for two Generations more, as for Nimrod, Sheba and Dedan with others, to beget their sonnes; and that a third Generation might grow vp, which makes in all 125. yeeres, there will then remaine sixe yeeres to haue beene spent in trauailing from the East, ere they arriued in Shinar in the yeere after the Floud 131. And so the followers of Nimrod might bee of sufficient multitude. But as for those which make him to haue arriued at Shinaar in the yeere 101.: and the confusion to haue beene at Pelegs birth, these men doe all by miracle: they beget whole Nations without the helpe of time, and build Nimrods Towre in the Ayre; and not on those low and marish grounds (which require sound foundations) in the Plaines of Shinaar. For except that huge Towre were built in a day, there could be no confusion in that yeere 101. or at Pelegs birth. And therefore it is farre more probable, that Nimrod vsurped Regall authoritie in the 131. yeere after the Floud, (according to Berosus ) and that the worke of Babel lasted fortie yeeres (according to GLYCAS) Hominibus in ea perficienda totis 40. ann is incassum laborantibus: Men labou∣ring . in Gen. & de Turris ctione. sol. 173. in vaine 40. yeeres to finish it. By which account it fals out, that it was 170. yeeres after the Floud, ere a Colonie was sent into East India; which granted (the one being the maine bodie, and the other but a Troupe taken thence) it can hardly bee beleeued, that Staurobates could haue exceeded Semiramis in numbers: who being then Empresse of all that part of the world, gathered the most of Nations into one bodie. †. VI. The fourth Argument from diuers considerations in the person of NOAH. FOurthly, it is no way probable, that Noah, who knew the world before the floud, and had liued therein the long time of 600. yeeres, was all that space 130. yeeres after the floud, without any certaine habitation: No, it will fall out, and better agree with reason, that Nimrod was but the conducter of those people, by Noah destined and appointed to fill and inhabite that middle part of the earth and the Westerne world; (which trauailes Noah put ouer to yong and able bodies) and that Noah him∣selfe then couered with many yeeres, planted himselfe in the same place which God had assigned him: which was where he first came downe out of the Arke from the waters: For it is written, that after Noah came downe out of the Arke he planted a Vineyard, and became a Husbandman: whose businesse was to dresse and manure the earth; and not to range ouer so many parts of the world, as from Armenia into Arabia foelix, where he should (if the tradition be sound) haue left certaine Colonies: thence into Africa towards Triton; then into Spaine, where they say he settled other companies, & built Cities after the names of Noela and Noegla his sons wiues: from thence into Italie, where they say hee found his sonne Cham the Saturne of Aegypt, who had corrupted the people and subiects of Gomer in his absence: with whom Noah (as they make the storie) had patience for three yeeres; but then finding no a∣mendment, they say he banisht him out of Italie. These be but the fancies of Bero∣sus Annianus, a plaine imitation of the Graecian fables. For let euery reasonable man conceiue, what it was to trauaile farre in such a forrest as the World was, when after so great a rotting of the earth by the floud, the same lay waste and ouer-growne for 130. or 140. yeeres, and wherein there could hardly be found either path or passage through which men were able to creepe for woods, bushes and bryars that in those yeeres were growne vp. And there are so many reasons, prouing that Noah neuer came into the valley of Shinaar, as we need not suspect his passage into Italie or Spaine: For Noah, who was Father of al those Nations, a man reuerenced both for his authoritie, knowledge, ex∣perience and pietie, would neuer haue permitted his children and issues to haue vn∣dertaken that vnbeleeuing presumptuous worke of Babel. Rather by his presence and preualent perswasions he would haue bound their hands from so vaine labours, and by the authoritie which he receiued euen from God himselfe, hee would haue held them in that awfull subiection, as whatsoeuer they had vainely conceiued or feared, yet they durst not haue disobeyed the personall commandement of him, who in the beginning had a kinde of Regall authoritie ouer his children and people. Certainely, Noah knew right well, that the former destruction of mankinde was by themselues purchased through crueltie and disobedience; and that to distrust God, and to raise vp building against his Almightie power, was as much as in them lay, a prouocation of God to lay on them the same, if not a more sharpe affliction. Where∣fore, there is no probabilitie, that euer he came so farre West as Babylonia; but rather, that hee sent those numbers which came into Shinaar (being the greatest troupe, be∣cause they had the greatest part of the world to plant) vnder Nimrod, or those vpon whom he vsurped. Nauclerus and Coelestinus take the testimonie of Methodius Bishop of Tyre for currant, that there were three Leaders of the people after their encrease (to wit) Nimrod, Suphene, and Ioctan: of which Nimrod commaunded the issues of Cham, Ioctan of Sem, and Suphene of Iaphet. This opinion I cannot iudge of, although I will not doubt, but that so great a worke as the worlds plantation, could not bee effected without order and conduction. Of the Sonnes of Sem: Ioctan, Hauilah, and Ophir, are especially noted to haue dwelt in the East India. The rest of Sems issues had also the Regions of Persia and the other adioyning to Indus, and held also a part of Chaldaea for a time: for Abraham inha∣bited Vr, till he was thence called by God; and whether they were of the Sonnes of Ioctan, or of all the rest a certaine number ( Cham and his issue onely excepted) that Noah kept with himselfe, it cannot be knowne. Of which plantation I shal speake at large in the Chapter following. Now another reason which moues me to beleeue, that Noah stayed in the East far away from all those that came into Shinar, is, that Moses doth not in any word make mention of Noah in all the storie of the Hebrewes, or among any of those Nations which contended with them. And Noah, being the Father of all mankinde, and the chosen seruant of God, was too principall a person, to bee either forgotten or negle∣cted, had he not (in respect of his age and wearisome experience of the world) with∣drawne himselfe, and rested apart with his best beloued, giuing himselfe to the ser∣uice and contemplation of God and heauenly things, after hee had directed his chil∣dren to their destined portions. For hee landed in a warme and fertile soile, where hee planted his Vineyard, and drest the earth; after which, and his thankes giuing to God by sacrifice, he is not remembred in the Scriptures, because hee was so farre a∣way from those Nations of which Moses wrote: which were the Hebrewes chiefly, and their enemies and borderers. †. VII. Of the senselesse opinion of ANNIVS the Commentor vpon BEROSVS: who finds diuers places where the Arke rested; as the Caspian and hils which are three hundred miles asunder; and also some place of Scythia. IT remaineth now that we examine the Arguments and authorities of Frier An∣nius, who in his Commentaries vpon Berosus and others, laboureth maruailously to proue, that the Arke of Noah rested vpon the Armenian mountaines called Caspij; which mountaines separate Armenia from the vpper Media, and doe equally belong to both. And because all his Authours speake of the mountaines , hee hath no other shift to vnite these opinions, but by vniting those farre-distant mountaines together. To effect which, he hath found no other inuention, then to charge those men with errour, which haue carefully ouerseene, printed, and published Ptolomies Ptol. tab. Asiae. 3. Geographie, in which they are altogether disseuered. For that last edition of Merca∣tors, sets these hils fiue degrees (which makes three hundred English miles) asunder. And certainly, if we looke into those more ancient copies of Villanouanus and others, we shall finde nothing in them to helpe Annius withall: for in those the mountaines Caspij stand seuen degrees to the East of the Gordiaei, which make 420. miles. And for those Authours by whose authoritie Annius strengtheneth himselfe, Diodorus whom hee so much followeth, giueth this iudgement vpon them in the like dispute. Aberrârunt omnes, non negligentiâ, sed regnorum situs ignorantia, They haue all erred . 3. (saith he) not through negligence, but through ignorance of the situation of Kingdomes. But for an induction, to proue that the Arke of Noah stood on the mountaines of Arme∣nia, he beginneth with the antiquitie of the Scythians: and to proue the same hee ci∣teth Marcus Portius Cato, who auoweth that 250. yeares before Ninus, the earth de orig. pars . was ouerflowne with waters, & in Scythia Sagarenatum mortale genus, and that in Scy∣thia Saga the stocke of mortall men was renewed. The same Authour also teacheth that the Vmbri before remembred (who were so called, because saued from Deucalions floud) were the Sonnes of the Galli, a Nation of the Scythians. Ex hijs venisse IANVM cum DYRIM & Gallis progenitoribus Vmbrorum, From these Scythians, he saith, that IANVS came with DYRIM and with the Galli the progenitours of the Vmbri; And a∣gaine, Equidem principatus originis semper Scythis tribuitur, Certainely, the Prime anti∣quitie of off-spring is alway giuen to the Scythians. And herein truly I agree with Annius, that those Regions called Scythiae, and now Tartaria, and by some Writers Sarmatia Asiatica, were among the first peopled: and they held the greatest part of Asia vn∣der tribute till Ninus time. Also Plinie calleth the Vmbri which long since inhabited Plin. l. 3. c. . Italie, Gens antiquissima, a most ancient Nation, who descended of these Scythians. Now that which Annius laboureth, is to proue that these ancient Scythians (meaning the Nephewes of Noah ) did first inhabite that Region of the mountaines, on which the Arke rested; and confessing that this great ship was grounded in Armenia, he faineth a nation of Scythians called Araxea, taking name of the mountaine Ararat, neere the Riuer of Araxes. And because his Authour Cato helpeth him in part (to wit, That in Scythia mankinde was restored after the great floud, 250. yeares before Ninus ) and in part vtterly destroyeth his conceit of Armenia, by adding the word Saga, as in Scythia Saga renatum mortale genus, in Scythia Saga mankinde was restored hee therefore in the Prooeme of his Commentarie vpon Berosus, leaueth out the addition of Saga al∣together Beros. l. 1. in the repetition of Cato his wordes, and writes homines in Scythia saluatos. For Scythia Saga or Sacae, is vndoubtedly vnder the mountaines of Paropanisus, on Pto. Asiae. tab. 7. which, or neere which it is most probable that the Arke first tooke ground; and from those East parts (according to Moses ) came all those companies which erected the Gene. 11. 2. Tower of Babel in Shinaar or Babylonia. But now the best authoritie which Annius hath, is out of Diodorus: where he hath read, that the Scythians were originally Armenians, taking name Scytha Rege eorum, from Scytha their King. But (in a word) we may see his vanitie, or rather (indeede) his falshood in citing this place. For Diodorus a most approued and diligent Au∣thour beginneth in that place with these words: Fabulantur Scythae, The Scythians fa∣ble: and his Interpreter in the table of that worke giueth this title to that very Chapter. Scytharum origo & successus, fabula, The originall and successe of the Scythians, a fable. And (indeede) there needes no great disproofe hereof, since Ptolomie doeth directly delineate Scythia Saga, or , and sets them in 130. degrees of longitude: and the Persians (saith Herodotus ) call all the Scythians, Sacae, which Plinie confirmeth: L. 6, c. 17. for in respect that these Sacae (saith Plinie ) are the next Scythians to the Persians, there∣fore they giue all the rest that name. Now that any Nation in Armenia can neigh∣bour the Persians, there is no man beleeueth. But this supposed Scythia Araxea in Armenia lyeth in 78. degrees of longitude (that is) 42. degrees distant from the Sa∣cae; and the Countrie about Araxes, Ptolomie calleth Colthene and Soducene and Saca∣pene, without any mention of Scythia at all: and yet all those which are or were repu∣ted Scythians, either within Imatus or without, to the number of 100. seuerall Nati∣ons are by Ptolomie precisely set downe. Tab. Asia. 7. & 8 But to come to those later Authours, whereof some haue written, others haue seene a great part of those North-east Regions, and searched their antiquities with great diligence: First, Marius Niger boundeth Scythia within Imaus, in this manner: (for Scythia without these mountaines is also beyond our purpose.) Scythia intra Ima∣um montem ca est, quae vocabulo Gassaria hoc tempore dicitur: ab Occasu Sarmatia Asiatica: ab Oriente Imao monte: à Septentrione terra incognita: à Meridiae Saccis, Sogdia∣nis, Margianis, vs{que} ostia in Hyrcanum mare exeuntis; & parte ipsius maris hinc vs{que} ad Rhafluminis ostia terminatur: Scythia within the mountaine Imaus is that part of the world, which in their ownc speech is at this time called Gassaria; and the same is bounded on the West side by Sarmatia Asiatica, (or of Asia ) on the East by the Imaan mountaines: on the North by vnknowne lands: on the South by the Saccae (which are the Sacae) the Sog∣diani, and the Margiani, to the mouth of Oxus, falling into the Hyrcan Sea, and by a part of the same Sea as farre as the mouth of Rha. now Wolga. Now if Niger sets all Sarmatia Asiatica, to the West of Scythia, then Sarmatia (que Com. 2. Asiae. sol. 472. magna sanè regio est, & quae innumer as nationes complectitur, Which is a great Region, comprehending innumerable Nations, (saith Niger ) much of it being betweene Scythis and Armenia, doth sufficiently warrant vs, that Armenia can bee no part of Scythia; and to make it more plaine, he disseuereth Sarmatia it selfe from any part of Armenia, meridiem pars septentrio∣nalis ponte , in Coracis fluuij: à parte dextra , Iberis, Albanisq, in Hyrcani prouenit. . bist. l. 30. by the Regions of Colchis, Iberia, Albania, which he leaueth on the right hand of Sar∣matia, and yet makes Sarmatia but the West bound of Scythia. And for Paulus Venetus, he hath not a word of Armenia among the Tartarian, or Nations; neither doth his fellow Frier Iohn Plancarpio (cited by Vincentius in his description of Scythia ) make any mention of Armenia; neither doth Haytonus an Armenian borne, of the bloud of those Kings, (though afterward a Monke) euer acknowledge himselfe for a Tartarian, or of the Scythian races descended: though he write that storie at large, gathered by Nicholaus Salcuni, and (by the commandement of Pope Clement the fifth) in the yeare 1307 published. Neither doth Mathias a Michou (a Canon of Craconia in Polonia ) a Sarmatian borne, and that trauailed a great part of Sarmatia Asiatica, finde Armenia any way within the compasse of Tartaria, Scythia, or Sarmatia; and yet no man (whose trauailes are extant) hath obserued so much of those Regions as he hath done: prouing and dis∣prouing many things, heretofore subiect to dispute. And among others hee bu∣rieth that ancient and receiued opinion, That out of the mountaines Riphaei, and Hyperborei in Scythia, spring the Riuers of Tanais or Don, Volga or Edel; prouing by vnanswerable experience, that there are no such mountaines in rerum natura; and (indeede) the heads and fountaines of those famous Riuers, are now by the trade of Muscouia knowne to euery Merchant, and that they arise out of Lakes, low, wooddie, and marish grounds. The Riuer of Tanois or Don, ariseth to the South of the Citie Tulla, some twentie English miles, out of a Lake called Iwanowesero in the great wood Okenitzkilies or Iepiphanolies. Volga, which Ptolomie cals Rha, and the Tartars call Edel, riseth out of a Lake called Fronow, in the great Wood Vodkonzki: from which Lake the two other famous Riuers flow of Borysthenes (now Neyper ) and or Di∣uidna. Sig. . And this learned Polonian doth in this sort bound the Europaean Sarmatia. In Sarmatia of Europe are the Regions of Russians, Lithuanians, Muscouians, and those adioy∣ning, bounded on the West by the Riuer of Vissa, the name perchance misprinted Vissa for , a Riuer which parts Germanie and Sarmatia: and for the East border hee nameth Tanais or Don. Sarmatia Asiatica hee cutteth from Europe by the same Riuer of Tanais, and the Caspian Sea, to with-hold it from stretching farther East: this Asian Sarmatia being part of that Scythia which Ptolomie calleth Scythia intra Imaum montem: Scythia within the mountaine Imaus. And the same Mathias Michon farther affirmeth, that the Scythians (which Frier Annius would make Armenians ) came not into Sarmatia Asiatica it selfe aboue three hundred and a few odde yeeres before his owne time: these be his wordes: Constat cam esse gentem nouam, & à par∣tibus Orientis, (mutatis sedibus) paulò plus abhinc trecentis annis Asiae Sarmatiam ingres∣sam: It is manifest (sayth hee, speaking of the Scythian Nation) that this is a late planted Nation, come from the Coasts of the East: from whence they entred into Asia, and gat new seates a little more then three hundred yeeres since: For (indeed) before that time the Gothes or Pouloci inhabited Sarmatia Asiaticae. And this Mathias liued in the yeere 1511. and this his Discourse of Sarmatia was printed at Augusta in the yeere 1506. as Bucholzerus in his Chronologie witnesseth. Now these Scythians (sayth hee) came from the East, for in the East it was that the Arke of Noah rested; and the Scythae Sacae were those people which liued at the North foot of those Mountaines of Taurus or Ararat, where they encounter or beginne to mixe themselues with the great Imaus. And were there no other testimonie then the generall description of the Earth now extant, and the witnesse of Ptolomie, it is plaine, that betweene al parts of Armenia and Scythia, there are not only those three Regions of Colchis, Iberia, and Albania, but the Caspian Sea: on the East shore of which Sea, but not on the West, or on that part which any way toucheth Armenia, there are (indeed) a Nation of Scythians (called Ariacae ) betweene Iaxartus and Iactus; but what are these Scythians to any Ariacae, or Scythia Araxea which ANNIVS placeth in , more then the Scythians of Europe? †. VIII. The fift argument, The Vine must grow naturally neere the place where the Arke rested. TO this if we adde the consideration of this part of the Text, That NOAH plan∣ted Gen. 9. 20. a Vineyard, wee shall finde that the fruit of the Vine or Raysin did not grow naturally in that part of Armenia, where this resting of the Arke was supposed: for if the Vine was a stranger in Italie and France, and brought from other Countries thither, it is not probable that it grew naturally in Armenia, being a farre colder Countrie. For Tyrrhenus first brought Vines into France, and Saturnus into Latium: Seruius Aeneid. Eutropius. yea at such time as Brennus and the Gaules inuaded Italie, there were few or no Vines in France. For (sayth Plutarch in the life of Camillus ) the Gaules remained betweene the Pyrenae: and the Alpes, neere vnto the Senones, where they continued a long time, vntill they drunke Wine, which was first brought them out of Italie; and after they tasted thereof they hasted to inhabite that Countrie, which brought forth such plea∣sant fruit: so as it appeared, that the Plant of the Vine was not naturall in France, but from Italie brought thither; as by Saturne from elsewhere into Italie. Now it is manifest that Noah trauailed not farre to seeke out the Vine. For the Plantation thereof is remembred, before there was any counsaile how to dispose of the World among his children: and the first thing he did was to till the ground, and to plant a Vineyard, after his Sacrifice and Thankesgiuing to God; and wheresoe∣uer the Arke rested, there did the Vine grow naturally. From whence it doth no where appeare that hee trauailed farre: for the Scriptures teach vs, that hee was a Husbandman, and not a Wanderer. †. IX. Answere to an obiection out of the words of the Text: The Lord scattered them from thence vpon the face of the whole earth. AND that all the children of Noah came together into Shinar, it doth not ap∣peare, sauing that it may be inferred out of these wordes (from thence) because it is written: So the Lord scattered them from thence vpon all the earth; which hath no other sense, but that the Lord scattered them (to wit) those that built this Towre: for those were from thence dispersed into all the Regions of the North and South, and to the Westward. And by these words of Sybilla (as they are conuerted) it see∣meth that all came not together into Shinaar, for they haue this limitation: Quidam turrem adificarunt altissimam, quasi per eam coelum essent ascensuri: Certaine of them built a most high Towre, as if they meant thereby to haue scaled the Heauens. †. X. An answere to the obiection from the name of Ararat, taken for Armenia: and the heighth of the Hils there. BVT before I conclude this part, it is necessarie to see and consider, what part of Scripture, and what reason may be found out to make it true or probable, that the Arke of Noah was forsaken by the waters on the Mountaines of Armenia. For the Text hath only these wordes: The Arke rested on (or vpon) the Mountaines of Gen. 8. 14. Ararat or Armenia, saith the marginall note of the Geneua, the Chaldaean Paraphrast cals Kardu; of which the highest hath the name of Lubar, saith Epiphanius. Now this Epiph. l. 1. centra . Ararat (which the Septuagint doe not conuert at all, but keepe the same word) is ta∣ken to be a Mountaine of Armenia, because Armenia it selfe had anciently that name: so as first out of the name, and secondly out of the heighth (which they suppose ex∣ceeded all other) is the opinion taken, That the Arke first sate . But these suppositions haue no foundation: for neyther is Ararat of Armenia a∣lone, neyther is any part, or any of those Mountaines of equall stature to many o∣ther Mountaines of the World; and yet it doth not follow, that the Arke found the highest Mountaine of all other to rest on: for the Plaines were also vncouered, be∣fore Noah came out of the Arke. Now if there were any agreement among Wri∣ters of this Ararat, and that they did not differ altogether therein, wee might giue more credit to the conceit. For in the Bookes of the Sybils it is written, that the Mountaines of Ararat are in Phrygia, vpon which it was supposed that the Arke stayed after the Floud. And the better to particularize the place and seate of these Mountaines, and to prooue them in Phrygia, and not Armenia, they are placed where the Citie of Coelenes was afterward built. Likewise in the same description she maketh mention of Marsyas, a Riuer which runneth through part of Phrygia, and afterward ioyneth it selfe with the Riuer Moeander, which is farre from the Mountaines in Armenia. We may also find a great mistaking in IOSEPHVS, (though out of BEROSVS, who is in effect the Father of this opinion) that IO∣SEPHVS sets Ararat betweene ARMENIA and PARTHIA toward ADIABENE, and affirmeth withall, that in the Pronince of Caron by others Kairos and Arnos, so cal∣led by reason that the waters haue from thence no descent, nor issue out, the people vaunt that they had in those dayes reserued some pieces of Noahs Arke. But Parthia toucheth no where vpon Armenia, for Armenia bordereth Adiabene, a Prouince of Assyria: so that all Media and a part of Assyria is betweene Parthia and Armenia. Now whereas the discouerie of the Mountaines Cordiaei was first borrowed out of Berosus by Iosephus; yet the Text which Iosephus citeth out of Berosus, differs farre from the wordes of that Berosus, which wandreth vp and downe in these dayes, set out by An∣nius. For cited by Iosephus, hath these words: Fertur & huius pars in Armenia, apud montem Cordiaeorum superesse, & quosdam bitumen inde abrasum reportare, quo vice amuleti loci huius homines vti solent: (which is) It is also that a part of this ship is yet remaining in Armenia vpon the Cordiaean Mountaines; and that di∣uers doe scrape from it the Bitumen or Pitch, and carrying it with them, they vse it in stead of an amulet. But Annius his Edition of the Fragment of Berosus vseth these wordes: Nam eleuata ab aquis in Gordiaei montis vertice quieuit, dicitur aliqua pars esse, & homines ex illa Bitumen tollere quo maximè vtuntur ad expiationem: For the whole Arke being lifted vp by the waters, rested on the top of the Gordiaean Mountaines, of which it is re∣ported that some parts remaine, and that men doe carry thence of the Bitumen to purge by Sacrifice therewith: so as in these two Texts (besides the difference of words) the name is diuersly written. The ancient Berosus writes Cordiaei with a (C.) and the Fragment Gordiaei with a (G.) the one that the Bitumen is vsed for a preseruatiue against Poyson or Inchantment; the other in Sacrifice; And if it bee said that they agree in the ge∣nerall, yet it is reported by neither from any certaine knowledge, nor from any ap∣proued Authour: for one of them vseth the word ( ) the other (dicitur) the one, that so it is reported, the other, that so it is sayd; and both but by heare-say, and there∣fore of no anothoritie nor credit. For common bruit is so infamous an Historian, as wise men neyther report after it, nor giue credit to any thing they receiue from it. Furthermore, these Mountaines which Ptolomie cals , are not those Moun∣taines which himselfe giueth to Armenia, but hee calleth the Mountaines of Armenia Moschici. These be his owne wordes: Montes Armeniae nominantur ij, qui Moschici ap∣pellantur, Pto. . . qui protenduntur vs{que} ad superiacentem partem Ponti Cappadocum; & mons qui Paryardes dicitur: The Mountaines of Armenia are they which are called Moschici, which stretch along to the higher part of Pontus of the Cappadocians: also the Hill which is called Paryardes; which Mountaines Plinie calleth Pariedri, and both which lye to the Plin. l. 6. c. 9. North of Gordiaei or Baris, in 43. and 44. and a halfe; and the Gordiaean Mountaines in 39. and a halfe: from the Northermost of which did the Georgians take their names, who were first Gordians and then Georgians, who amidst all the strength of the greatest Infidels of Persia and Turkie, doe still remaine Christians. Concerning the other suppositions, that the Mountaines of Gordiaei, otherwise Baris Kardu or Lu∣bar, (which Ptolomie calleth Togordiaion ) are the highest of the World, the same is absolutely false. †. XI. Of , and diuers farre higher Hils then the Armenian. FOR the best Cosmographers with other, that haue seene the Mountanes of Arme∣nia, find them farre inferiour, and vnder-set to diuers other Mountaines euen in that part of the World, and elsewhere: as the Mountaine Athos betweene Macedon and Thrace, which Ptolomie cals Olympus, now called Lacas, (saith Castaldus ) is farre surmounting any Mountaine that euer hath beene seene in Armenia: for it casteth shade three hundred furlongs, which is seuen and thirtie miles and vpwardes: of Plut. . . which Plutarch: Athos adumbrat latera Lemniae : Athos shaddoweth the Cow of Lem∣nos. Also the Mount of Olympus in Thessalie, is sayd to be of that heighth, as neither the Winds, Cloudes, or Raine ouertop it. Againe, the Mountaine of Antandrus in Mysia, not farre from Ida, whence the Riuer Scamandrus floweth, which runneth through Troy, is also of a farre more admiration then any in Armenia, and may bee seene from Constantinople. There are also in Mauritania neere the Sea, the famous Mountaines of Atlas, of which HERODOTVS: Extat in hoc mari Mons, cui nomen Atlas, ita sublimis esse dicitur, vt adillius verticem oculi mortalium peruenire non possint: Vpon this Coast there is a Mountaine called Atlas, whose heighth is sayd to be such, as the eye of no mortallman can discerne the top thereof. And if we may beleeue Aristotle, then are all . Met. cor. l. 1. c. 13. these inferiour to Caucasus, which hee maketh the most notorious both for breadth and heighth: Caucasus Mons omnium maximus, qui aestiuum ad ortum sunt, acumine at{que} latitudine, cuius iuga à Sole radiantur vs{que} ad conticinium ab ortu: & iterum ab occasu; Cau∣casus (saith ARISTOTLE) is the greatest Mountain both for breadth and heighth of all those in the North-east, whose tops are lightned by the Sun-beames, vs{que} ad conticinium (which is saith Macrobius ) betweene the first crowing after mid-night and the breake of day: Others affirme, that the top of this Mountaine holds the Sunne-beames when it is darke in the Valley; but I cannot beleeue eyther: for the highest Mountaine of the World knowne is that of in the Canaria: which although it hath nothing to the Westward of it for 1000. Leagues together but the Ocean Sea, yet doth it not enioy the Sunnes companie at any such late houres. Besides, these Mountaines which Ari∣stotle calleth Caucasi, are those which separate from Iberia; though (indeed) Caucasus doth diuide both Colchis, Iberia, and Albania from Sarmatia: for he acknow∣ledgeth that the Riuer of Phasis riseth in the same Mountaine, which himselfe calleth Caucasus, and that Phasis springeth from those Hils which sunder Colchis from Iberia, falling afterward into Euxinus: which Riuer (it is manifest) yeeldeth it selfe to the Sea, two degrees to the North of Trapezus (now Trabesunda ) howsoeuer Mercator bring it from Peryardes. †. XII. Of diuers incongruities, if in this Storie we should take Ararat for Armenia. SO as it doth first appeare, that there is no certaintie what Mountaine Ararat was: for the Bookes of the Sybils set it in Phrygia: and Berosus in Armenia: and as for Be∣rosus authoritie, those men haue great want of proofes that borrow from thence. Secondly, that Baris was the highest Hill, and therefore most likely that the Arke grounded thereon, the assertion and supposition haue equall credit: for there are many Hils which exceed all those of Armenia; and if they did not, yet it doth not follow (as is before written) that the Arke should on the highest. Thirdly, it cannot be proued that there is any such Hill in Armenia, or in natura, as Baris: for Baris (sayth Hierome ) signifieth high Towres: and so may all high Hils bee called indifferently; and therefore wee may better giue the name of Baris to the Hils of Caucasus (out of which Indus ) then to any Hils of Armenia. For those of Caucasus in the East, are vndoubtedly the highest of Asia. Fourthly, the Authours themselues doe not agree in what Region the Moun∣taines Gordiaei stand: for Ptolomie distinguisheth the Mountaines of Armenia from the Gordiaean, and calleth those of Armenia Moschici and Paryardes, as aforesaid. Now Paryardes is seated neere the middle of Armenia, out of which on the West-side riseth Euphrates, and out of the East-side Araxis: and the Mountaines Moschici are those Hils which disioyne Colchis, Iberia, and Albania (now the Countrie of the Georgians ) from Armenia. †. XIII. Of the contrary situation of Armenia to the place noted in the Text: and that it is no that the same ledge of Hils running from Armenia to India, should keepe the same name all along: and euen in India bee called Ararat. LAstly, we must blow vp this Mountaine Ararat it selfe, or else wee must digge it downe, and carry it out of Armenia; or find it elsewhere, and in a warmer Coun∣trie, and (withall) set it East from : or else wee shall wound the Truth it selfe with the weapons of our owne vaine imaginations. Therefore to make the mistaking open to euery eye, wee must vnderstand, that Ararat (named by Moses ) is not any one Hill, so called, no more then any one Hill among those Mountaines which diuide Italie from France is called the Alpes: or any among those which part France from Spaine is the Pyrenian; but as these being continuations of many Hils keepe one name in diuers Countries: so all that long ledge of Mountaines, which Plinie calleth by one name Taurus, and Ptolomie both Plinie in his description of Lycia. l. 5. c. 27. Taurus, Niphates, Coatras, Coronus, Sariphi, vntill they encounter and crosse the Mountaines of the great Imaus, are of one generall name, and are called the Moun∣taines of Ararat or Armenia, because from thence or thereabout they seeeme to arise. So all these Mountaines of Hyrcania, Armenia, Coraxis, Caspij Moschici, Amazonici, Heniochi, Scythici, (thus diuersly called by Plinie and others) Ptolomie cals by one name Caucasus, lying betweene the Seas Caspium and Euxinus: as all those Mountaines which cut asunder America, euen from the new Kingdome of Granado, to the streight of Magellan, are by one name called Andes. And as these Mountaines of Ararat runne East and West: so doe those maruailous Mountaines of Imaus stretch themselues North and South; and being of like extent well-neere, are called by the name of I∣maus, euen as Plinie calleth these former hils Taurus, and Moses the hils of Ararat. The reason of seuerall names giuen by Ptolomie was, thereby the better to distinguish the great Regions and Kingdomes, which these great mountaines bound and disseuer; as Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Media, Susiana, Persia, Parthia, Caramania, Aria, Margiana, Bactria, Sogdiana, and Paropanisus: hauing all these Kingdomes either on the North or South side of them. For all the mountaines of Asia (both the lesse and the greater) haue three generall names, (to wit) Taurus, Imaus, and Caucasus: and they receiue other titles, as they seuer and diuide particular places and regions. For these mountaines which sunder Cilicia from the rest of Asia the lesse on the North side, are called Taurus; and those mountaines which part it from Comagena (a Pro∣uince of Syria ) are called Amanus: the mountaines called Taurus running East and West, as Imaus doth North and South. Through Taurus the Riuer of Euphrates for∣ceth her passage, leauing the name of Amanus to the mountaines on her West banke; and on her East side the mountaines are sometimes knowne by the name of Taurus, (as in Ptolomies three tables of Asia ) and sometimes Niphates: (as in the fourth) re∣taining that vncertaine appellation so long as they bound Armenia from Mesopota∣mia: and after the Riuer of Tygris cutteth them asunder, they then take the name of Niphates altogether, vntill they separate Assyria and Media; but then they call themselues Coatras, though betweene the vpper and nether Media, they doe not ap∣peare, but altogether discontinue. For at Mazada in Media they are not found, but runne through the Easterne Media by pieces: in the middle of which Region they call themselues Orontes, and towards the East part Coronus; out of the Southerne part whereof the Riuer of Bagradus riseth, which diuideth the ancient Persia from Caramania: and then continuing their course Eastward by the name of Coronus, they giue to the Parthians and their proper Countries. This done, they change themselues into the mountaines of Sariphi, out of which riseth the Riuer Margus, af∣terward yeelding her selfe to Oxus: (now Abia ) and drawing now neere their wayes end, they first make themselues the South border of Bactria, and are then honoured with the Title of Paropanisus; and lastly of Caucasi, euen where the famous Riuer of Indus with his principal companions Hydaspis and Zaraedrus spring forth, and take be∣ginning. And here doe these Mountaines build themselues exceeding high, to equall the strong Hils called Imaus of Scythia, which encounter each other in 35. 36. and 37. degrees of Latitude, and in 140. of Longitude: of the which the West parts are now called Delanguer, and the rest Nagracot; and these Mountaines in this place onely, are properly called Caucasi (sayth Ptolomie ) that is, betweene Paroponisus and Imaus: and Ptol. tab. Asia. improperly, betweene the two Seas of Caspium and Pontus. †. XIIII. Of the best Vine naturally growing on the South side of the Mountaines Caucasi and toward the East Indies: and of other excellencies of the Soile. NOw in this part of the World it is, where the Mountaine and Riuer , and the Mountaine Nyseus (so called of Bacchus Niseus or Noa ) are found: and on these highest Mountaines of that part of the World did Goropius Becanus conceiue that the Arke of Noah grounded after the Floud: of all his coniectures the most probable, and by best reason approued. In his Indoscythia hee hath many good Ar∣guments, though mixt with other fantasticall opinions of this subiect. And as the same Becanus also noteth; that as in this part of the World are found the best Vines: so it is as true, that in the same Line, and in 34. 35. and 36. degrees of Septentrionall Latitude are the most delicate Wines of the World, namely, in Iudaea, Candia, and o∣ther parts of Greece: and likewise in this Region of Margiana, and vnder these Moun∣taines, Strabo affirmeth, that the most excellent Vines of the World are found; the clusters of Grapes containing two Cubits of length: and it is the more probable, because this place agreeth in Climate with that part of Palestina, where the Searchers of the Land by Moses direction found bunches of equall bignesse at Escol. Num. 13. 24. The fruitfulnesse of this place (to wit) on the South bottome of these Hils, Cur∣tius witnesseth. For in Margiana neere the Mountaine of Meros did Alexander feast himselfe and his Armie ten dayes together, finding therein the most delicate Wine of all other. †. XV. The conclusion, with a briefe repeating of diuers chiefe points. AND therefore to conclude this opinion of Ararat, it is true, that those Moun∣taines doe also trauerse Armenia: yea, and Armenia it selfe sometime is knowne by the name of Ararat. But as Plinie giueth to this ledge of high Hils, euen from L. 5. . 27. Cilicia to Paroponisus and Caucasus, the name of Taurus: and as the Hils of France and Germanie are called the Alpes: and all betweene France and Spaine the Pyrenes: and in America the continuation of Hils for 3000. miles together, the Andes: so was Ara∣rat the generall name which Moses gaue them; the diuersitie of appellations no o∣ther wise growing, then by their diuiding and bordering diuers Regions and diuers Countries. For in the like case doe we call the Sea, which entreth by Gibraltar, the Mediterran and inland Sea; and yet where it washeth the Coasts of Carthage, and ouer against it, it is called Tyrrhenum: betweene Italie and Greece, Ionium: from Venice to Durazzo, Adriaticum: betweene Athens and Asia, Aegeum: betweene Sestus and Abydus, Hellespont: and afterward Pontus, Propontis, and Bosphorus. And as in these, so is the Ocean to the North-east part of Scotland called : and on this side, the Brittaine Sea: to the East, the Germane and Baltick, and then the Frozen. For a finall end of this question we must appeale to that Iudge which cannot erre, euen to the word of Truth, which in this place is to be taken and followed accor∣ding to the plaine sense: seeing it can admit neither distinction, nor other constructi∣on then the words beare literally, because they are vsed to the very same plaine pur∣pose of a description, and the making of a true and precise difference of places. Surely, where the sense is plaine (and being so vnderstood, it bringeth with it no sub∣sequent inconuenience or contrarietie) we ought to be warie, how we fancie to our selues any new or strange exposition; and (withall) to resolue our selues, that eue∣ry word (as aforesaid) hath his waight in Gods Booke. And therefore we must respect and reuerence the testimonies of the Scriptures throughout, in such sort as S. Augustine hath taught vs touching the Gospell of CHRIST IESVS (which is) Nequis aliter accipiat quod narrantibus Christi) in legerit, quam si ipsam manum Des, in proprio corpore , conspexerit; That no man otherwise take or vnderstand that which he readeth in the Gospell (the Disciples of Christ hauing writ∣ten it) then if he had seene the very hand of the Lord, which he bare in his owne body, set∣ting it downe. The wordes then of Moses which end this dispute, are these: And as they went Gen. c. 11. v. 2. from the , they found a Playne in the land of Shinaar, and there they abode: which pro∣ueth without controuersie, that Nimrod and all with him came from the East into ; and therefore the Arke of Noah rested and tooke land to the East-ward thereof. For wee must remember, that in all places wheresoeuer Moses maketh a difference of Countries, hee alwayes precisely nameth toward what quarters of the world the same were seated: as where he teacheth the plantation of Ioctan, he nameth Sephar, a Mount in the East: where he remembreth departure from the presence of God, he addeth: And CAIN dwelt in the land of Nod towards the East∣side Gen. 10. 30. of Eden: And when he describeth the Tents and Habitations of Abraham after Gen. 4. 16. he departed from Sechem, he vsed these wordes: Afterwards remoouing thence vnto Gen. 12. 8. a Mountayne Eastward from Bethel, he pitched his Tents: hauing Bethel on the West∣side, and Hai on the East: and afterward in the ninth Verse of the same Chapter it is written: And ABRAHAM went forth iournying towards the South: also when Ezechiel . 38. 6. prophecied of Gog and Magog, he sheweth that these Nations of Togorma were of the North quarters: and of the Queene of Saba it is written, that shee came from the Matth. 12. 42. South to visit SALOMON: And the Magi (or wisemen) came out of the East to pre∣sents Matth. 2. v. 1, vnto Christ. And that all Regions, and these trauailes were precisely set downe vpon the points of the Compasse and quarters of the World, it is most manifest: for Eden was due East from Iudaea, South from Hierusalem: the way from Bethel to Aegypt directly South; and the Coelesyrians, the Tubalines and Magogians in∣habited the Regions directly North from Palestina, and so of the rest. But Armenia answereth not to this description of Shinaar by Moses. For to come out of Armenia, and to arriue in that Vally of Babylonia, is not a iournying from the East, nor so neere vnto the East as the North: for Armenia is to the West of the North it selfe; and we must not say of Moses (whose hands the holy Ghost directed) that he erred toto coelo, and that he knew not East from West. For the body of Armenia standeth in fortie three degrees Septentrionall, and the North part thereof in fortie fiue; and those Gordiaean Mountaynes, whereon it was supposed that the Arke rested, stand in fortie one. But Babylonia, and the Valley of Shinaar are situated in thirtie fiue, and for the Longitude (which maketh the difference betweene East and West) the Gordiaean Mountaynes stand in 75. degrees, and the Valley of in 79. and 80. And therefore Armenia lyeth from Shinaar Northwest, ninetie fiue degrees from the East; and if Armenia had beene but North, yet it had differed from the East one whole quarter of the Compasse. But Gregorie and Hierome warne vs, In scripturis ne minima differentia omitti debet: nam singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, & puncta in diuina Scriptura a plena sunt sensibus; In the Scriptures the least difference may not be omitted: for euery speech, syllable, note, or accent, and point in diuine Scriptures are replenished with their meanings. And therefore seeing Moses teacheth vs that the children of Noah came from the East, we may not beleeue Writers (of little authoritie) who also speake by heare-say and by report, vt fertur, & vt dicitur, as Berosus and Nicolaus Damascenus, determining herein without any examination of the Text, at all-aduenture. But this is infallibly true, that Shinaar lyeth West from the place where the Arke of Noah rested after the floud; and therefore it first found ground in the East, from whence came the first knowledge of all things. The East parts were first ciuill, which had Noah himselfe for an Instructer: and directly East from Shinaar in the same degree of 35. are the greatest grapes and the best Wine. The great Armies al∣so, which ouertopped in number those Millions of Semiramis, proue that those parts were first planted: And whereas the other opinion hath neither Scripture nor Rea∣son sufficient: for my selfe I build on his wordes who in plaine termes hath told vs, that the Sonnes of Noah came out of the East into Shinaar, and there they abode. And therefore did the Arke rest on those Easterne Mountaynes, called by one gene∣rall name Taurus, and by Moses the Mountaynes of Ararat, and not on those Moun∣taynes of the Northwest, as Berosus first fained, whom most part of the Writers haue followed therein. It was, I say, in the plentifull warme East where Noah rested, where he planted the Vine, where he tilled the ground and liued thereon. Placuit vero NOACHO agriculturae studium, in qua tractanda ipse omnium peritissimus esse dici∣tar: ob eam{que} rem sua ipsius lingua ISH-ADAMATH ( hoc est ) telluris vir appellatur est; The studie of Husbandrie pleased NOAH (saith the excellent learned man ARIAS MONTANVS) in the knowledge and order of which it is said, that NOAH excelled all men: and therefore was he called in his owne language a man exercised in the earth. Which also sheweth that he was no Wanderer: and that he troubled not himselfe with the contentions, beginning againe in the world, and among men, but stayed in his destined places, and in that part of the world, where he was first deliuered out of the prison of the Arke, whereinto God had committed him, to preserue him and man∣kinde. CHAP. VIII. Of the first planting of Nations after the floud; and of the Sonnes of NOAH, SEM, HAM, and IA∣PHET, by whom the earth was repeopled. §. I. Whether SHEM and HAM were elder then IAPHET. OF these Sonnes of Noah, which was the eldest, there is a question made. S. Augustine esteemed Shem for August, de Ciuit. Dei, l. 16. c. 3. the eldest, Ham for the second, and Iaphet for the yon∣gest: and herein the opinions of Writers are diuers. But this we finde euerywhere in the Scriptures, and especially in Moses, that there was neuer any respect giuen to the eldest in yeeres, but in vertue, as by the examples of Henoch, Abraham, Iacob, and Dauid, is made manifest. In a few wordes, this is the ground of the controuersie; The Latine translation, and so the Geneua, hath conuerted this Scripture of Genesis the 10. v. 21. in these wordes: Vnto SHEM also the Father of all the Sonnes of HEBER, and elder brother of IAPHET, were children borne. But Iunius agreeing with the Sep∣tuagint, placeth the same wordes in this manner: To SHEM also the Father of all the Sonnes of HEBER, and brother of IAPHET, the eldest sonne were children borne: So the transposition of the word (elder) made this difference. For if the word (elder) had followed after Iaphet, as it is in the vulgar translation placed before it, then had it beene as plaine for Iaphet, as it is by these translations for Shem. Now (the matter being otherwise indifferent) seeing Gods blessings are not tyed to first and last in , but to the eldest in pietie, yet the arguments are stronger for Iaphet then for Shem. And where the Scriptures are plainely vnderstood without any danger or in∣conuenience, it seemeth strange why any man of iudgement should make valuation of coniecturall arguments, or mens opinions. For it appeareth that Noah in the fiue hundreth yeere of his life, begat the first of his three Sonnes, Shem, Ham, and Iaphet: and in the sixe hundreth yeere (to wit) the hundreth yeere following, came the ge∣nerall floud; two yeeres after which Shem begat Arphaxad, which was in the yeere Gen. 11. 10. 602. of Noahs life, and in the yeere of Shems life one hundred: so as Shem was but 100. yeeres old, two yeeres after the floud: and Noah begat his first borne being 500. yeeres old; and therefore, were Shem the elder, he had then beene a hundred yeeres old at the floud, and in the sixe hundreth yeere of Noahs life, and not two yeeres af∣ter. Which seeing the Scripture before remembred hath denyed him, and that it is also written: Then NOAH awoke from his wine, and knew what his yonger sonne had Gen. 11. v. 24. done vnto him (to wit) HAM; of necessitie the first place doth belong to Iaphet. This yonger sonne so conuerted by the vulgar and Geneua, Iunius turnes it filius minimus; His yongest sonne; but S. Chrysostome takes it otherwise, and findes Cham to be the middle or second brother, and Iaphet the yongest sonne of all: which Cham for his disobedience and the contempt of his Father (whose nakednesse he derided) was disinherited, and lost the preeminencie of his birth, as Esau and Reuben did. Pere∣rius In Gen. conceiueth that Ham was called the yonger in respect of Shem the eldest, but auoweth withall, that the Hebrew hath not that precise difference of yonger and yongest, because it wanteth the comparatiue degree. It is true that Shem himselfe was alwaies named in the first place yet whereas in the first Verse of the tenth Chap∣ter of Genesis, Shem is accounted before Iaphet: in the second Verse Moses leaueth to begin with the issue by Shem, and reciteth the children of Iaphet first. So the first place was giuen to Shem for his election and benediction, and for this waightie re∣spect, that the Hebrew Nation, Abraham, the Prophets, Dauid, and Christ our Sa∣uiour were descended of him. And therefore, whether we shall follow the Vulgar Pagninus, and the Geneua, who agree in this conuersion, SHEM frater IAPHET maior; or with the Septuagint, Iunius, and Tremelius, SHEM fratri IAPHET maioris; or with Pererius, SHEM frater IAPHET ille magnus: inferring that Shem was the great and famous brother of Iaphet, let the Reader iudge. But for ought that I haue seene to the contrarie, it appeareth to me that Iaphet was the eldest. For where Pe∣rerius qualifieth the strength of the former Argument, That Shems age at the time of the floud did not agree with his eldership (with a supposition that the Scriptures tooke no account of smaller numbers) I doe not finde in the Scriptures any such neglect at all: for it is written, that SHEM was an hundred yeeres old, and begat AR∣PHAXAD Gen. 11. v. 10. two yeeres after the floud; and againe in the 12. Verse: So SHELA liued after he begat EBAR, foure hundred and three yeeres, &c. so as the number of two yeeres, of three yeeres, of fiue yeeres, and afterward of two yeeres were alwayes precisely accounted. §. II. Of diuers things that in all reason are to be presumed, touching the first planting of the World, as that all Histories must yeeld to MOSES: that the world was not planted all at once, nor without great direction: and that the knowne great Lords of the first ages were of the issue of HAM. BVt let vs goe vnto the Worlds plantation after the floud, which being rightly vnderstood, we shall finde that many Nations haue supposed or fayned themselues those Ancestors and Fathers, which neuer saw or approched the bounds of their Countries, and of whom they are by no way or branch descended. For it is plaine in the Scriptures how the sonnes and issues of Noah were distributed, and what Regions were first planted by them, from whence by degrees the rest of the world was also peopled. And if a∣ny prophane Author may receiue allowance herein, the same must be with this caution, That they take their beginning where the Scriptures end. For so farre as the storie of Nations is therein handled, we must know that both the truth and an∣tiquitie of the bookes of God finde no companions equall, either in age or authori∣tie. All record, memorie, and testimonie of antiquitie whatsoeuer, which hath come to the knowledge of men, the same hath beene borrowed thence, and therefore la∣ter then it, as all carefull obseruers of time haue noted: among which thus writeth Eusebius in the Prooeme of his Chronologie: MOSES is found more ancient then all those whom the Grecians make most ancient, as HOMER, HESIOD, and the Troian warre; and farre before HERCVLES, MVSAEVS, LINVS, CHIRON, ORPHEVS, CASTOR, POLLVX, AESCVLAPIVS, BACCHVS, MERCVRIVS, and APOLLO, and the rest of the gods of the Nations, their Ceremonies, or holy Rites, or Prophets: and before all the deeds of IVPITER, whom the Greekes haue seated in the top and highest Turret of their Diuinitie. For of the three Iupiters remembred by Cicero, the ancientest was the sonne of Cicero de Nat. Deorum, l. 3. Aether, whose three sonnes begotten on Proserpina, were borne at Athens, of which Cecrops was the first King: and in the end of Cecrops time did Moses bring the chil∣dren of Israel out of Aegypt: Eduxit MOSES populum Deiex Aegypto nouissimo tem∣pore CECROPIS Atheniensis Regis; MOSES brought the children of Israel out of Ae∣gypt, in the last dayes of CECROPS King of the Athenians, saith S. Augustine: and yet De Ciuit. Dei, l. 18. c. 11. was not Cecrops the Founder of the Citie it selfe, but Theseus long after him. But because the truth hereof is diuersly proued, and by many learned Authors, I will not cut asunder the purpose in hand, by alleaging many authorities in a needlesse question, but leaue it to the proper place. The Sonnes of IAPHET were, Gomer, The Sonnes of GOMER were, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, Askenaz, Riphath, Togorma. The Sonnes of IAVAN were, Meshach, and Tiras. Elisha, Tarshis, Kittim, and Dodanim. First, we are to consider that the world after the floud was not planted by imagi∣nation, neither had the children of Noah wings, to flie from Shinaar to the vttermost border of Europe, Africa, and Asia in haste, but that these children were directed by a wise Father, who knew those parts of the world before the floud, to which he dispo∣sed his children it, and sent them not as Discouerers, or at all-aduenture, but as∣signed and allotted to euery Sonne and their issues, their proper parts. And not to harken to fabulous Authors, who haue no other end then to flatter Princes (as Virgil did Augustus in the fiction of Aeneas ) or else to glorifie their owne Nations; Let vs build herein vpon the Scriptures themselues, and after them vpon Reason and Nature. First, therefore we must call to minde and consider, what manner of face the earth euery where had in the 130. yeere after the great inundation, and by com∣paring those fruitfullest Vallies with our owne barren and cold ground, informe our selues thereby, what wonderfull Desarts, what inpassable fastnesse of woods, reeds, , and rotten grasse, what Lakes and standing Pooles, and what Marishes, Fens and Bogs, all the face of the earth (excepting the Mountaynes) was pestered with∣all. For if in this our Climate (where the dead and destroying winter depresseth all vegetatiue and growing Nature, for one halfe of the yeere in effect) yet in twentie or thirtie yeeres these our grounds would all ouer-grow and be couered (according to the nature thereof) either with Woods or with other offensiue Thickets and Bush∣ments: much more did all sorts of Plants, Reedes, and Trees, prosper in the most fruitfull Vallies, and in the Climate of a long and warme Summer, and hauing with∣all the start of 130. yeeres, to raise themselues without controlement. This being considered, it will appeare, that all these people which came into Shi∣naar, and ouer whom Nimrod either by order or strength tooke the Dominion, did after the confusion of Languages, and at such time as they grew to be a mightie People, disperse themselues into the Regions adioyning to the said Vally of Shinaar, which contayned the best part of Mesopotamia, Babylonia, and Chaldaea; and from the borders thereof in time they were propagated: some of them towards the South, others towards the West and North. And although there were allotted to Shem many Regions, both East and West from Shinaar, with the Dominion of Palestina, which the Canaanites first possest; yet could he not enioy the lot of his inheritance on the suddaine, but by time and degrees. For we finde, that Abraham the true suc∣cessor of Shem dwelt in Chaldaea at Vr; and from thence (called by God) he rested at Charran in Mesopotamia: from whence after the death of Thare he trauailed to Sichem in Palestina: and yet there had passed betweene Shem and Abraham (rec∣koning neither of themselues) seuen descents, before Abraham moued out of Chal∣daea: where, and in Babylonia, all those people by Nimrod commanded, inhabited for many yeeres, and whence Nimrod went out into Assyria, and founded Niniue. In∣deed the great Masters of Nations (as farre as we can know) were, in that Age of the issues of Ham; the blessing of God giuen by Noah to Shem and Iaphet taking lesse effect, vntill diuers yeeres were consumed; and vntill the time arriued, which by the wisedome of God was appointed. For of Chus, Mizraim, and Canaan, came the People and Princes, which held the great Kingdomes of Babylonia, Syria, and Aegypt, for many descents together. §. III. Of the Iles of the Gentiles in IAPHETS portion: of BEROSVS his too speedie sea∣ting GOMER the sonne of IAPHET in Italie; and another of IA∣PHETS sonnes TVBAL in Spaine: and of the antiquitie of Longinque Nauigation. TO begin therefore (where Moses beginneth) with the sonnes of Ia∣pheth, among whom the Iles of the Gentiles were diuided: which di∣uision, as well to Iaphets sonnes as to the rest which came into Shinaar, was (if the diuision were made at Phalegs birth) in the yeere of the World 1757. or 1758. and (by that account) in the yeere after the floud one hundred and one, of which question elsewhere. The habitations proper to the sonnes of Iaphet were the Iles of the Gentiles, which include all Europe with all the Ilands adioyning, and compassing it about: Europe being also taken for an Iland, both in respect that the Sea Hellespont and Ae∣geum, Bosphorus and Euxinus cut it off from the great Continent of Asia, as also be∣cause Europe it selfe is (in effect) surrounded with water, sauing that it is fastned to Asia by the North, for it hath those Seas before named to the East, the Mediterran to the South and Southwest, the Ocean to the West, and British, Germane, and Baltick Sea, with that of Glaciale to the North North-east, and North-west. Besides, it hath about it all the Cyclades or Iles lying betweene Greece and the lesser Asia, and the Iles of Rhodes, Cyprus, Crect or Candia, Sicilia, Corsica, Sardinia, Malta, the Iles of Brittanie and Zealand, with their yong-ones adiacent. This partition and portion of Iapheth, with the part which he held in Asia, and the North, which was also very great, answereth to that blessing of God by Noah. Dilatet Deus IAPHETH; Let God spreade abroad (or increase the posteritie of) Iapheth, Gen. 9. v. 27. and let him dwell in the Tents of SHEM. For though Iunius here vseth the word ( ) and not dilatet: and the Geneuapersuadeat; yet the Septuagint haue dilatet or amplificet; and such was the blessing giuen to our Fathers, which God promised to Abraham and his seede for euer. And the dwelling in the Tents or Tabernacles of Shem was a blessing by God to the posteritie of Iapheth: noting not onely an enlargement of Territories; but that thereby they should be made participant of Gods Church. But to come to Iaphets sonnes, of whom Gomer is the eldest. This Gomer (if we may beleeue Berosus and Annius, whose authoritie the greatest number of all our late Writers haue followed) did in the tenth yeere of Nimrods reigne depart from Babylonia, and planted Italie: which also Functius confirmeth in these words: Anno de∣cimo Funct. Chronol. NIMRODI, &c. In the tenth yeere of NIMRODS reigne, GOMERVS GALLVS planted a Colonie in that land afterward called Italie: and in the twelfth yeere of the same NIMRODS reigne TVBAL seated himselfe in Asturia in Spaine (now called Biscay) which was in the 140. and in the 142. yeeres after the floud, according to BEROSVS. But this opinion is very ridiculous. For before the confusion of tongues the children of Noah did not separate themselues, at least so many of them as came with Nimrod in∣to Shinaar. Let vs therefore consider with reason, what time the building such a Citie and Towre required, where there was no prepared matter, nor any readie meanes to performe such a worke as Nimrod had erected (and as Functius himselfe out of his Author Berosus witnesseth) ad altitudinem & magnitudinem montium; To the heighth and magnitude of the Mountaines. Sure that both this Citie and Towre were almost builded the Scriptures witnesse: But the Lord came downe to see the Citie Gen. c. 11. and Towre, which the Sonnes of men builded. Let vs then but allot a time sufficient for the making of Bricke to such a Worke, of the greatest heighth (and therefore of cir∣cuit and foundation answerable) that euer was. For where the vniuersall Floud co∣uered the highest Mountaines fifteene Cubits; Let vs build vs a Citie and a Towre (saith NIMROD) whose top may reach vnto the Heauen: meaning, that they would rayse their Worke aboue fifteene Cubits higher then the highest Mountaine, otherwise they could not assure themselues from the feare of a second inundation: a great part whereof was finished before it fell, and before they left the Worke. They also be∣gan this building vpon a ground, the most oppressed with waters of all the World: as by the great ruine which these waters forceably ouer-bearing and ouer-flowing, made in the time of the succeeding Emperours, is made manifest, approued also by the Prophet Hieremie, speaking of Babylon in these wordes: Thou that dwellest vpon many waters. It cannot be doubted but that there needed a substantiall foundation, for so high a raised building on a marish ground: and to which, Glycas vpon Genesis giueth fortie yeeres. For it seemeth, that the Towre was neere finished when God ouerthrew it: it being afterward written, So the Lord scattered them from thence vpon all the earth, and they left to build the Citie. Out of which place it may bee gathered (because the Towre is not then named) that they very neere had performed the Worke of their supposed defence, which was the Towre: and that afterward they went on with the Citie adioyning, wherein they inhabited. It is also to bee noted, that till such time as this confusion seized them (whereupon the Towre was throwne downe) these Nations did not disperse themselues: for from thence the Lord scattered Gen. 11. them vpon all the Earth, (that was) when they perceiued not one anothers speech. Now to thinke that this Worke in the newnesse of the World (wanting all instru∣ments and materials) could be performed in ten yeeres; and that Tubal and Gomer in the same yeere could creepe through 3000. miles of Desart, with Women, Chil∣dren, and Cattell: let those light Beleeuers, that neyther tye themselues to the Scrip∣ture, nor to reason, approoue it, for I doe not. And if the Arke of Noah was 100. yeeres in building, or but neere such a time, (and then) when the World had stood 1556. yeeres, it were more then foolishnesse and madnesse it selfe, to thinke that such a Worke as this could be performed in ten; when the World (from the Floud to the arriuall at Babel, and beginning of this building there) had but 131. yeeres, and whereof they had spent some part in trauailing from the East. Againe, if all Asia set to their helping hands in the building of the Temple of Diana, and yet they consu∣med . in that Worke 400. yeeres (or bee it but halfe that time) and in such an Age as when the World flourished in all sorts of Artificers, and with abundant plentie of materials and carriages: This Worke of the Towre of Babel could hardly (with all the former wants supposed) bee erected in those few yeeres remembred. And for conclusion, let all men of iudgement waigh with themselues how impossible it was for a Nation or Family of men, with their Wiues and Children, and Cattell, to tra∣uaile 3000. miles through Woods, Bogs, and Desarts, without any Guide or Condu∣ctor; and we shall find it rather a Worke of 100. yeeres then of 100. daies. For in the West Indies of which the Spaniards haue the experience, in those places where they found neither path nor Guide, they haue not entred the Countrey ten miles in tenne yeeres. And if Nimrods people spent many yeeres by the account before remembred in passing from the East-India or the higher part thereof, which standeth in 115. De∣grees of Longitude, vntill they came into Shinaar which lyeth in 79. Degrees (the di∣stance betweene those places containing 36. Degrees, which make 720. Leagues, which is 2160. miles) and did all the way keepe the Mountaines and hard ground; then the difference betweene Babylon and Biscay is much more: for the bodie of Bis∣cay lyeth in ten Degrees, and Babylon or Shinaar, (as aforesaid) in 79. so the length of way from Shinaar to Asturia or Biscay is 69. Degrees, which make 1380. Leagues, or of miles 4140. And therefore if Nimrod tooke diuers yeeres to find Shinaar, which was but 2160. miles: or (supposing that the Arke rested in Armenia ) little a∣boue 400. miles: there is no cause to the contrarie, but to allow as many yeeres to Gomer and Tubal to trauaile 3000. miles to Countries lesse knowne vnto them by farre; then the Land of Shinaar was to Nimrod. For Paradise was knowne to Noah before the Floud: and so was the Region of Eden by Moses afterward remembred; but what hee vnderstood of most part of the World else it is vnknowne. And there∣fore did Annius ill aduise himselfe to plant Gomer in Italie, and Tubal in Spaine, in the tenth and twelfth of Nimrods Raigne: Shall the earth be brought forth in one day, or shall . 1. 66. . 8. a Nation be borne at one? But it may bee obiected, That the Sonnes of Iapheth might come by Sea, and so saue this great trauaile through Desarts by Land. But we neuer read of any Nauigation in those dayes, nor long after. Surely he that knoweth what it is to imbarke so great a people as we may iustly suppose those Conducters carried with them, will not easily beleeue, that there were any Vessels in those dayes to trans∣port Armies, and (withall) their Cattell, by whose Milke they liued and fed their Children: for Milke and Fruit were the banquetting dishes of our Forefathers. And in the eldest times, euen the Kings and Fathers of Nations valued themselues by the Heards and numbers of their Cattel: who had flocks of Sheep, and great Droues and Heards of their owne, and their owne Sheep-heards and Heardsmen. Now if Tubal had past by Sea from any part of Palaestina, Syria, or Cilicia, he might haue made good choice within the Streights, and not haue ouergone Granado, Valentia, and other Prouinces in that Tract: past the Streights of Gibralter, disdained all Andalusia and Portugal, with all those goodly Ports and Countries; and haue sought out the yron, wooddy, and barren Countrey of the World (called Biscay ) by a long and dangerous Nauigation. But before the iourney of the Argonautae there were scarce any Vessels that durst crosse the Seas in that part of the World: and yet that which Iason had (if the Tale be true) was but a Galley, and a poore one (God knowes) and perchance such as they vse this day in Ireland: which although it carried but foure and fiftie Passengers, yet was it farre greater then any of the former times: Erat enim antea par∣uarum Diod. Sicul. l. 4. 6. 4. fol. 115. nauicularum vsus: For in former times they vsed very small Vessels. I denie not but that the Tyrians gaue themselues of olde to farre-off Nauigations, whence Tibul∣lus ascribed the inuention of Ships vnto them: Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyros, Tibull. Eleg. 7. . l. . Tyrus knew first how Ships might vse the wind. And for those boates called longaenaues or Gallies, Plinie saith that Aegesias ascribeth Diod. Sicul. l. 1. . 7. c. 56. the deuice to Paralus: and Philostephanus to Iason: Ctesias to Samyras; and Saphanus to Semiramis: Archimachus to Aegeon: to which inuention the are said to haue added certaine numbers of Oares: and then Aminocles the Corinthian to haue . increased them: the Carthaginians afterwards to haue brought them to foure Bankes: the Quin{que} Remi first to haue beene vsed by Nesichthon the Salaminian, with which Vessels in those parts of the World, the Romans serued themselues in the Punick War. But these be perhaps but the partialities of Writers, or their ignorance. For there are that as constantly cast the deuising of these Gallies on Sesostris, though Semira∣mis vsed them in the passage of her Armie ouer Indus in Abrahams time. So it is said, that was the first that brought a Ship into Greece: and yet the Samothracians . l. 7. c. 56. . de . challenge the inuention; and yet Tertullian (on the contrarie) giues it to Minerua: others to Neptune: to the Corinthians. And so ignorant were the people Euang. c. 1. Tert. de Coron. . of those Ages, as the Aegyptians vsed to coast the Shores of the Red Sea vpon raffes, deuised by King Erythrus: and in the time of the Romans, the Brittans had a kind of Boat (with which they crost the Seas) made of small twigs, and couered ouer with Leather: of which kind I haue seene at the in Ireland, and elsewhere. Naues ex corio circumsutae in Oceano Britannico (saith Textor: ) of which Lucan the Poet: Primùm cana salix, vimine, paruam Texitur in puppim, , Vectoris patiens . Sic Venetus Pado, fuso{que} Britannus Nauigat Oceano. The moystned Osyer of the hoarie Willow Is wouen first into a little Boat: Then cloth'd in Bullockes Hide, vpon the billow Of a proud Riuer, lightly doth it float Vnder the Waterman: So on the Lakes of ouerswelling Poe Sailes the Venetian: and the Brittaine so On th' out-spred Ocean. And although it cannot bee denyed, when Noah by Gods inspiration was instructed in so many particulars concerning the Arke, that then many things concerning Na∣uigation were first reuealed; yet it appeares that there was much difference be∣tweene the Arke of Noah, and such Ships as were for any long Nauigation. Yea an∣cient Stories shew, that it was long after these times, ere any durst presume vpon a∣ny long Voyages to Sea: at least with multitudes of Women, and Children, and Cat∣tell: as also common reason can tell vs, that euen now when this Arte is come to her perfection, such Voiages are very troublesome and dangerous. So as it doth appeare, that there was not in that Age of Nimrod any Ship, or vse of Ships fit for any long Nauigation. For if Gomer and Tubal had passed themselues and their people by Sea; the exercise of Nauigation would not haue beene dead for so many hundred yeeres after. Leauing therefore the fabulous to their Fables, and all men else to their fan∣cies, who haue cast Nations into Countries farre off, I know not how, I will follow herein the Relation of Moses and the Prophets: to which Truth there is ioyned both Nature, Reason, Policie, and necessitie: and to the rest, neither probabilitie, nor possibilitie. §. IIII. Of GOG and MAGOG, TVBAL, and MESECH, seated first about , out of EZECHIEL CAP. 38. 39. NOw although many learned and reuerend men haue formed (I know not whereby led) a Plantation of the World, which also hath beene and is receiued: yet I hope I may be excused, if I differ altogether from them in many particulars. Certainely, that great learned man of this latter Age, Arias Montanus was also in some things much mistaken: and for Iosephus, as he hath many good things, and is a Guide to many errours with∣all, so was he in this Plantation of the World very grosse and fabulous, whereby both Eusebius, Hierosolymitanus, Epiphanius, and others, that haue taken his testimonies for currant, haue beene by him farre misted. But the better to conceiue what Regions of the World Gomer the first sonne of Iaphet possest, as also Tubal, it is needfull to be∣ginne with Magog: because the Scriptures take most knowledge of Gog and Magog, which two names haue troubled many Commentators, saith Matth. Beroaldus, who hath laboured herein with great diligence, and whom (of all that euer I read) I find most iudicious in the examination of this plantation. He takes authoritie from the Prophet Ezechiel chiefly, who in the 38: and 39: Chapter directeth vs, what Nati∣ons the Gomerians, Tubalines, and Togormians were, together with the Magogians: of which Gog was Prince or chiefe Conductor in their attempts against Israel. For besides the portions of Europe, and the North-east parts of the greater Asia, which Iapheths issues possest, all Asia the lesse was peopled by them. And that those of the issue of Iapheth (whom Ezechiel speakes of) were seated hereabout, it may best ap∣peare, if wee consider the circumstances of the place, and the dependencie vpon the former prophecie in the 37. Chapter. For in that 37. Chapter, Ezechiel prophecieth c. 37. v. 19. of the vniting of the two Kingdomes of Israel and Iuda, after their deliuerie from captiuitie. By which prophecie of Ezechiel, it appeareth, that God purposed to gather toge∣ther his people, to giue life to dead bones, and to rule them by one Prince. For to that purpose it is written; And DAVID my seruant shallbee King ouer them, and they shall haue one sheepe-heard, (that is) they shall bee vnited as they were in Dauids time. Heereupon in the 38. Chapter Ezechiel prophecieth against those Nations, which should seeke to impeach this Vnion, and disturbe the people of Israel, whom God purposed to receiue to grace, and promised to restore. And so in the same Chapter are those Nations coupled together, which infested the Israelites after their returne, and sought to subiect them: all which were the subiects or Allies of Gog, Prince of the Magogians, or Coelesyrians, next bordering Palaestina, or the holy Land, followed also by the rest of the Nations of Asia the lesse, which lay North from Iu∣daea. The words of Ezechiel are these: Sonne of man, set thy face against GOG, and a∣gainst c. 58. v. 2. the land of MAGOG, the chiefe Princes of MESECH (or MOSOCH and TV∣BAL: and afterward; Behold, I come against the chiefe Prince of MESHECH and TV∣BAL: and in the sixth Verse; GOMER and all his bands, and the house of TOGORMA of the North quarters. Herein Ezechiel hauing first deliuered the purpose of his Pro∣phecie, teacheth what Nations they were, that should in vaine assaile Israel. Heioy∣neth them together vnder their Prince Gog, and sheweth that their habitations were on the North quarters of Iuda, and how seated and ioyned together. Gog signifieth in the Hebrew (sayth Saint Hierome ) tectum or couering of a house: and Pintus vpon Ezechiel affirmeth, that by Gog is meant Antichrist: for (sayth hee) Antichrist us erit Diabolitegumentum sub specie humana: That Antichrist shall be the couering of the Deuill vnder humane forme. Hee addeth that Magog is as much to say as Gog: the letter In . (M) being an Hebrew Preposition, and importeth as much as of or from: so he taketh Magog for those people which follow Antichrist. So farre Pintus; at least in this not amisse, that he expoundeth Magog not for any one person, but for a Nation, with which agreeth this obseruation of Beroaldus. Magog (sayth he) in Hebrew is written Ham-Magog, which sheweth Magog to bee a Region or Nation: for the letter (He) which is vsed but for an Emphasis (which the Hebrewes call Heliaiedia ) is neuer added to proper names of men, but often to place. So as Gog was Prince of that Nation (called eyther Magog, or according to others, the people of Gog ) also Prince of Meshech, (or Mosoch ) and of Tubal: as by the first Verse of the 39. Chapter is made manifest: Bchold, I come against thee GOG the chiefe Prince of MESHECH and TV∣BAI. This must needes bee meant by the Successours of Seleucus , who did not (as other conquering Nations) seeke to make the Iewes their onely, but endeuoured by all meanes, and by all kind of violence to extinguish the Religion it selfe (which the Hebrews profest) and the acknowledging of one true God: and to force them to worship and serue the mortall and rotten gods of the Heathen; of which nothing remained but the very name, and dead Images. S. and Isi∣dore L. 2. de Fide. take Gog for the Nation of the Goths: belike because they inuaded Europe, and sacked Rome, and many other places and Cities thereabout. out of Pomp. Mela deriues the Turkes from the Scythians, esteemed Mago{que}ians of Gog Ma∣ny take Gog for the proper name of a Man: other of a Region: others for a Nation inhabiting a Region, as Iunius, who saies that Gog is the name of a Nation, denomi∣nated from him whom the Greeke Stories call Gyges: who in former time hauing slaine Candaules the Lydian, gaue his owne name to that Nation, thence after called Gygades: and thereof also the Gygean Lake; which Lake Strabo also findeth in Lydia, (of which Gyges was King) fortie Furlongs from Sardis. Plinie calleth it Gygeum Strab. l. 13. stagnum. Herodotus and Nicander set it about the Riuers of , and Moeander; but the difference is not great. Marius Niger maketh mention of this Gyges King of Ly∣dia: who after he had subdued the Countrie about the Riuer Rhodius which runneth into the Hellespont, called the Promontorie Trapese after his owne name Gyges. These Suid. col. 207. opinions doe also seeme to strengthen that of Iunius. For Magog, sayth hee, is that part of Asia the lesse, which Halyattes obtained, and after him his sonne Croesus; who (as Iunius further notes) hauing mastred all those Regions as farre South as Iun. in . 38 Libanus in that border built the Citie Gigarta or Gogkarta (which in the Syrian sig∣nifieth the Citie of Gog ) seated in , whose people were the ancient Enemies of the Iewes. Now that Magog is found in Coelesyria, Plinie affirmeth, saying; habet Bambycen, quaealio nomine Hierapo' is vocatur, verò Magog. Coelesyria hath in it Bambyce, which by another name is called Hierapolis, but of the Syrians Magog. Hee fur∣ther telleth vs that the monstrous Idoll , called by the Greekes Derceto, was here worshipped, Lucian makes mention hereof, saying that the Citie had ancient∣ly another name, which yet hee expresseth not; forbearing perhaps the word Ma∣gog, as sounding nothing elegantly in the Greeke. But if wee may beleeue Strabo, Strab. l. 16. then was Edessa in Mosopotamia the same Bambyce or Hierapolis, where the same Idoll was worshipped. Ortelius is doubtfull whether one of these Authours did not mistake the place of this Bambyce or Hierapolis. It may well enough bee that the same name and Religion was common to them both. Certaine it is, that both of them lay due North from Palestina, and were both subiect vnto the Kings of the Race of Seleucus. Now I doe not condemne the opinion of Hermolaus Barbarus fol∣lowing Iosephus, but grant that perhaps Magog might also bee the Father of the Scythians; notwithstanding that in this place, where Gog is made the Prince of Ma∣gog, the Nations of Coelesyria and the North parts adioyning bee meant by Magog: for by a latter Plantation from these parts they might bee propagated into Scythia. Yet it is not to bee denied, that the Scythians in olde times comming out of the Northeast wasted the better part of Asia the lesse, and possest Coelesyria, where they built both Scythopolis and Hierapolis, which the Syrians call Magog. And that to this Magog had reference, it is very plaine: for this Citie Hierapolis or Magog standeth due North from Iudaea, according to the wordes of Ezechiel; that from the North quarters those Nations should come. For as the Kings of the South which infested the Israelites were the Kings of Aegypt: so those of the North were the Kings of Asia and Syria, the Successours of , the Successour of Alexander Macedon. Gulielmus Tyrins thinkes that this Hierapolis is that Rages, mentioned in the Lib. 4. cap. de bello. Sacro. Storie of Tobias. Plinie takes it not onely to haue beene called Bambyce, as we haue said, but also Edessa: not that by Euphrates; but another of the same name; now the knowne name is Allepo: for so Bellonius expounds this Hierapolis, or Magog. This Ci∣tie had the title of Sacred, as the Sacred Citie, (for so the word Hierapolis signifieth) yet was it a place of most detested Idolatrie, and wherein was worshipped the Idoll of the Mermaide Atergatis, or Atirgitis, according to Plinie, which the Greekes call Derceto. If then wee conferre the words of Ezechiel in the third verse of the thirtie eight Chapter, wherein hee ioyneth together Gog Mesech, and Tubal: and withall remem∣ber that Hierapolis was the Citie of Magog, which also is seated directly North from Iudaea: with whom also Ezechiel coupleth Gomer, and all his bands of the North quarters; we may (as I conceiue) safely conclude, that these Followers and Vassals of Gog (which were Northerne Nations in respect of Iudaea ) were not the Gomeri∣ans of France, nor the Tubalines of Spaine, but a people of the lesser Asia, and Coelesy∣ria: and therefore that the opinions of Berosus, Iosephus, and whosoeuer else hath followed them therein are to bee reiected. But if Iosephus referre himselfe to later times, and thinke that some Colonie of the Tubalines might from Iberia and Asia passe into Spaine (to wit, from that piece of Land betweene Colchis (or Mengrelia) and Al∣bania: (most part possest by the Georgians) then is his iudgement of better allowance. For without any repugnancie of opinions, it may bee granted, that in processe of time these people might from their first habitation passe into the Countries neere the Euxine Sea, and from thence in after-Ages into Spaine. Iosephus makes mention of the Iberi, saying, that they were anciently called Tho∣belos, as of Tubal; from whence (saith Iustine) they passed into Spaine to search out the Mines of that Region: hauing belike vnderstood that it was a Southerly Countrie and Mountainous. For it seemeth that the Tubalines called liued altogether by the exchange of Iron, and other Metals, as Apollonius witnesseth in these follow∣ing Verses, telling how the Argonautes did visit them; Haec gens tellurem rigido non vertit aratro, Sed ferrivenas scindit sub montibus altis: Mercibus haec mutat, quae vitae alimenta ministrant: The Calybes plough not their barren soyle But vndermine high Hils for Iron Veines: Changing the purchase of their endlesse toyle For marchandize, which their poore liues sustaines. But it is more probable, that Spaine was first peopled by the Africans, who had euer since an affection to returne thither, and to repeople it anew. This appeared by the Carthaginians of old, who were easily drawne to passe ouer the Streights into that Countrie; and after by the Moores who held Granado, and the South parts eight hun∣dred yeeres, till the time of Ferdinand and Isabel. And either of these opinions are more probable, then that in the twelfth yeere of Nimrods raigne, Tubal past into Spaine, and therein built S t . Vual: a poore Towne, and a poore deuice, God knowes. Certaine it is that we must finde Mosoch or Mesech, and Tubal neighbours, and Gomer and Togarma not farre off, or else we shall wrong Ezechiel: for he called Gog the Lea∣der or Prince of Mesech and Tubal, and maketh Gomer and Togorma their assistants. And that Mesech inhabited Asia, Functius (though he followed Berosus) confesseth, for these be his wordes: MESACVS, qui à MOSE MESECH, priscos Mesios ab A∣dula monte vs{que} ad Ponticam regionem posuit: haec regio posteà Cappadocia dicta est, in qua Mazica, &c. haec est terra MAGOG principalis. MESACVS, whom MOSES calleth MESECH, placed the ancient Mesians from the mount Adulas, vnto the coast of Pontus. This Region was afterward called Cappadocia, in which is the Towne Mazica, &c. this is the principall Countrie of MAGOG. And this doth Annius also auow, and yet forgets that Gog was Prince both of Mesech and Tubal: and therefore, that the one was a Na∣tion of Spaniards, the other of Cappadocians, is very ridiculous; Spaine lying directly West, and not North from Iudaea. Also Ezechiel in the 27. Chapter, where he pro∣phecieth of the destruction of Tyre, nameth Mesech and Tubal ioyntly. And for a finall proofe, that these Nations were of a Northerne neighbour land (how farre so∣euer stretched) Ezechiel in the 38. Chapter makes them all horsemen. Thou, and much people with thee, all shall ride vpon horses, euen a great multitude and a mightie. Then if any man beleeue that these troupes came out of Spaine ouer the Pyrenes, and first passed ouer a part of France, Italie, Hungarie, and Sarmatia, and imbarqued againe about the Hellespont, or else compassed all Pontus Euxinus, to come into the lesser A∣sia, which is halfe the length or compasse of the then knowne world, he may be cal∣led a strong beleeuer, but he shall neuer be iustified thereby. But on the contrarie it is knowne, that Seleucis was a Prouince neighbouring Palestina or Iudaea, and that Hierapolis (or Magog ) ioyned vnto it: whose Princes commanded all Syria, and Asia the lesse, (namely the Seleucidae) and held it, till Asiaticus ouerthrew Antiochus the Great: after which they yet possest Syria till the time of Tigranes: and whether Meshech be in Cappadocia, or vnder Iberia, yet is it of the Tubalines, and one and the same Dominion. Of Gomer the like may be said. First he seated himselfe with Togorma, not farre from Magog and Tubal, in the borders of Syria and Cilicia. Afterward he proceeded further into Asia the lesse; and in long tract of time his valiant issue filled all Germany, rested long in France and Brittaine, and possessed the vtmost borders of the earth, ac∣complishing (as Melancton well notes) the signification of their parents name, which is Vtmost bordering. But when these borderers wanted further place, whereinto they might exonerate their swelling multitudes, that were bounded in by the great Ocean, then did they returne vpon the Nations occupying the Countries, through which they had formerly passed, oppressing first their Neighbours, afterwards the people more remote. Hereupon it was (as the worthy restorer of our antiquities, M. Wil∣liam Cambden hath noted) that they were called Cimbri, which in their old language doth signifie Robbers; necessitie inforcing them to spoile their Neighbours, to whom in their originall they were as neere ioyned, as afterwards in the seates which they possessed. For that the warlike Nations of Germanie were in elder ages accusto∣med to be beaten by the Gaules, the authoritie of Caesar affirming it is proofe sufficient. But in times following they pursued richer conquests, and more easie though further distant, by which (to omit their other enterprises not here to be spoken of) they were drawne at length into Asia the lesse, and occupyed those parts, which had for∣merly beene held by their Progenitors. I say not that they claymed those Lands as theirs by descent; for likely it is, that they knew little of their owne pedigree. Nei∣ther can any man therefore denie, that they were of old seated in Asia, because in late ages they returned thither; vnlesse he will thinke, that all those Nations which from farre parts haue inuaded and conquered the land of Shinaar, may by that argument be proued not to haue issued from thence at the first. Now concerning Samothes for his excellent wisedome surnamed Dis, whom An∣nius makes the brother of Gomer and Tubal (which brother Moses neuer heard of, who spake his knowledge of Iaphets sonnes) they must finde him in some old Poet: for Functius, a great , confesseth: Quis hic SAMOTHES fuerit incertum est; Who In Cbron. this SAMOTHES was it is vncertayne; neither is there any proofe that he was that same Dis, whom Caesar saith the suppose to be their Ancester; yea, and Vignier con∣fesseth Caesar Comment. Vigni. pars 1. . with FVNCTIVS: Mais on ne scayt qui il estoit; No man knowes who he was. §. V. Against the fabulous BEROSVS his fiction, That the Italian IANVS was NOAH. BVT before I goe on with Noah his sonnes, I thinke it necessarie to disproue the fiction which Annius hath of Noah himselfe: an in∣uention (indeede) very ridiculous, though warranted (as he hath wrested) by those Authors of whom himselfe hath Commented: as the Fragment of Berosus, Fabius, Pictor, Cato, Lauinius and others. Ann. de . Pict. de aur. . For Annius seekes to perswade vs, that Noah (surnamed Ianus ) was the same which founded Genoa, with other Cities in Italie, wherein he liued 92. yeeres. This to dis∣proue, Cato de origin. Lauin, illust. . by Moses silence, is a sufficient argument to me, if there were nothing else to disproue it. For if he vouchsafed to remember the building of Babel, Erec, Achad, Chalne and Niniue by Nimrod, Noah was a man of too great marke to be forgotten, with all the acts he did in 92. yeeres. But it were a needlesse labour for me to dis∣proue the authoritie of that , on whom Annius groundeth, seeing so many learned Men haue so demonstratiuely proued that Fragment to be counterfeit. Be∣sides that, Tatianus the Assyrian in his Oration against the Greekes auoweth, that the ancient and true Berosus wrote onely three Books, dedicated to Antiochus the suc∣cessor of Seleucus Nicanor: but Annius hath deuised fiue Bookes, wherewith he ho∣noreth . l. 1. Berosus. And whereas Berosus handled onely the estate of the and Assyrians, Annius hath filled this Fragment with the businesse of all the world. And if we may beleeue Eusebius better then Annius, then all the Kings of the La∣tines (before Aeneas) consumed but 150. yeeres: whereas no man hath doubted, but that from Noah to Aeneas arriuall into Italie there past 1126. (after the least rate of the Hebrew account) and (after Codoman) 1291. For Ianus (who was the first of their Kings) liued at once with Ruth, who marryed Booz, in the Worlds yeere (as some reckon) 2717. after the floud 1064. and Noah dyed 350. yeeres after the : and so there past betweene Ianus of Italie and Noah surnamed Ianus 704. yeeres. For Saturnus succeeded Ianus, Picus after Saturnus, Faunus after Picus, and Latinus followed Faunus: which Latinus liued at once with the 27. King of Assyria; with Pelasgus of Peloponnesus; with Demophoon of Athens; and Sampson Iudge of Israel. Now all these fiue Kings of the Latines hauing consumed but one hundred and fiftie yeeres; and the last of them in the time of Sampson: then recko∣ning vpwards for one hundred and fiftie yeeres, and it reacheth Ruth, with whom Ianus liued. True it is, that the Greekes had their Ianus; but this was not Noah: so had they Ion the sonne of Xuthus, the sonne of Deucalion, from whom they draw the Iones, who were indeede the children of Iauan, the fourth sonne of Iapheth. For the vulgar Ezech. . 19. 13 & so the place of Esai 66. 19. (for Iauan ) : and (for the plurall Ia∣uamin ) Hellenae. translation (where the Hebrew word is Iauan) writes Greece, and the Septuagint, Hellas; which is the same. So had they Medus the sonne of Medea, whom they make the parent of the Medes, though they were descended of a farre more ancient Father (to wit) Madai the third sonne of Iapheth. Lastly, we see by a true experience, that the Brittish language hath remayned among vs aboue 2000. yeeres, and the English speech euer since the inuasion of the Angles, and the same continuance haue all Nations obserued among themselues, though with some corruption and alteration. Therefore, it is strange if either Noah (by them called Ianus) had left in Italie his grand-child Gomer after him, or Tubal in Spaine, that no plaine resemblance of the Hebrew, Syrian, or Scythian (which no time could haue quite extinguished) should haue beene found in the languages of those Coun∣tries. For which reasons we doubt not but these personall plantations of Ianus, Go∣mer, Tubal, &c. in Italie, Spaine, or France, are meerely fabulous. Let the Italians therefore content themselues with the Graecian Ianus, which commanded them and planted them, and who preceded the fall of but 150. yeeres (saith Eusebius) which was in the time of Latinus the fift King: which also S. Augustine and Iustine confirme: and this agreeth with reason, time, and possibilitie. And if this be not sufficient to disproue this vanitie, I may out of themselues adde thus much: That whereas some of them make (others Camasena) the wife of this , who in∣stituted the holy of the Vestal Virgins in Rome (the and from all their Idolatrous and Heathenish ceremonies) there is no man so im∣pious, as to beleeue that himselfe (who is said by to God, to be a iust man, and whom God of all mankinde made choice of) could be either ignorant of the and only God, or so and vngratefull, to vp or deuise any Heathen saluage, or idolatrous , or haue instituted any ceremonie, to that which he knew best pleasing to God himselfe. §. VI. That GOMER also and his sonne TOGORMA of the posteritie of IAPHETH were first seated about Asia the lesse: and that from thence they spred Westward into Europe: and Northward into Sarmatia. TO turne now to the sonnes of Noah, and the worlds plantation after the floud: therein I obserue, that as both reason and necessitie taught them; so, when they multiplyed in great numbers, and dispersed themselues into the next Countries bordering to their first habitati∣ons, & from thence sent forth Colonies elsewhere, it was in such a man∣ner as that they might repaire to each other, and keep intelligence by Riuer: because the Land was yet Desart and ouer-prest with Woods, Reedes, Bogs, and rotten Ma∣rishes. As when Nimrod seated in Babylonia, Chus tooke the South part of Chaldaea, downe the Riuer of Gehon, by which he might passe to and fro from Babylon to his owne plantation: those also, which were of the race of Shem, inhabiting at Vr or Orchoa neere the Lakes of Chaldaea, might by the same Riuer get vp to Babylon, and receiue succour from thence. All which Tract of Land vpon Southward, Moses in the description of Paradise calleth the Land of Chush: because the Domini∣on and Empire was then in the hands of Nimroda Cushite, by whom the children of Shem (which came into that Valley and stayed not in the East) were for a while op∣prest, till God afterward by the seede of Abraham made them his owne Nation and victorious. Hauilah, the brother of Nimrod, and sonne of Cush, tooke both bankes of Tigris, especially on the East side of the Riuer: by which Riuer his people might al∣so passe to and fro to Babel. The Imperiall seate of which Region of Hauilah or Susian, was anciently called Chusian or Chusan, afterward Susa. Cush himselfe tooke the bankes of Gehon, and planted those Countries Westward, and Southwest-ward towards Arabia the Stony, and the Desart, where Ptolemie placeth the Citie of Chusidia, first Chusia. Ptol. , tab. 4 Seba, and Sheba with the rest that planted Arabia foelix, had Tigris to conuey them into the Persian Gulfe, which washeth the bankes of Arabia foelix on the East side: so as those sonnes of Cush might take Land downe the Riuer as they pleased. Also the Citie of Niniue was by Nimrod founded on the said Riuer of Tigris; and from thence a Colonie past to Charran, standing also vpon a nauigable branch of Euphrates. In like manner did Iapheths settle themselues together, and tooke their seates in Asia the lesse: from whence they might indifferently stretch themselues North∣ward, and Westward, into the next parts of Europe, called the Isles of the Gentiles. And it seemeth very agreeable to reason, that both Gomer, Magog, and Tubal, sate downe first of all in that part of Syria, to the North of Palestina and Phoenicia: and from thence Gomer or his children past on into the lesse, as those of Magog and Tubal did; from whence the Tubalines spred themselues into Iberia: and the Mago∣gians more Northerly into Sarmatia. The first Gomerians, and first planters in Asia the lesse, held the Countrie of the Cymmerians (witnesse Herodotus) the same Re∣gion Lib. 4. which was afterward by the Gallo-greekes called , to whom S. Paul wrote his Epistle so intituled. This Nation of the Cymmerians (whom the inuincible Scy∣thians afterwards dispersed, and forced from their first plantations) gaue names to diuers places; as to the Mountaynes aboue Albania (called Cymmerini) and to the Citie of Cymmeris in Phrygia: also Cymmerius tooke appellation from this Nation, in the out-let whereof was also a Citie of that name, called Cymmerian: which Plinie saith (mistaking the place) had sometime the name of Cerberion; but Cerbe∣rion was a Towne in Campania, so called of the vnhealthfull waters, sauouring of brimstone, which Augustus caused to be cleansed by letting in the water of the Lake Lucrinus. The children of Tubal ranged as farre as Iberia, to whom the Moschici were neigh∣bours, which others write Meshech. The Prophet Ezechiel (coupling them toge∣ther) calleth Gog the Prince of Meschech and Tubal. For these Meschi (which Ptole∣mie calleth Moschi ) inhabite Syracena a Prouince of Armenia, directly South from the Mountaynes Moschici, in the Valley betweene the Mountaynes Moschici, and the Mountaynes Paryardes: out of whose North part springeth the Riuer Phasis; from the East part Araxis; and from the West Euphrates: and of this Meschech are des∣cended also the Moscouians (saith Melanchton ) and it may be, that in processe of some of them inhabited those Regions also: For Meshech (saith Melanchton ) extendens, enlarging or stretching forth. Togorma also at first did inhabite a∣mongst his parents and kindred. The Togormians were also called , a people neighbouring the Sydonians in Gabala, a Tetrarchie of , the same which calleth Gaben: from whence Salomon had his most excellent Masons, which hewed 1. . 1. v. 18. stones for the Temple of . Thence the Togormians stretched into the lesse Armenia, whose Kings were hence called Tigranes, and their Cities : . in Gen. 10. vers. 3. of which Cities Tigranes subdued by Lucullus the Roman, built one. Hierosolymita∣nus hath planted the Togormians in Barbarie: forgetting the prophecie of Ezechiel a∣gainst the Tyrians. They of the house of TOGORMA, brought to thy Fayres horses, and . c. 7. 14. horse-men, and mules, which could not well be driuen ouer the whole length of the Mediterran Sea, but from the neighbour Countries by land. But Iosephus takes them for the parents of the Phrygians; which I doe not denie, but they might be in the en∣suing ages: and so might the Tubalines be of the Spaniards; but it was from Iberia, and many hundred yeeres after the twelfth of Nimrods reigne. The conceiue that the Turkes came of those Togormians, because their Emperor is called Togar. The make them the Fathers of the Germanes. But affirmes, that the Turkes descended of the Crim Tartar, which borders . But for these sub∣deriuations it were infinite to examine them. Only of the first and second planta∣tion, and of the first Nations after the floud is the matter which I labour to discouer; and therein to open the ignorance of some, and the corruption of other fabulous Writers. And this we must Note, that those grand-children of Noah which were Note. of a more quiet, or (perchance) of lesse vnderstanding, and had not therefore the leading of Colonies sent out, their proper habitations can be hardly knowne: onely reason hath taught vs, that they dwelt among the rest, and were couered with the fame of others, who tooke on them the Conduction and Dominion ouer the rest. From Madai the third sonne of , were the Medes. The Grecians bring them (as before) from Medus the sonne of Medea. §. VII. Of IAVAN the fourth sonne of IAPHETH: and of MESCH, of ARAM, and MESHECH of IAPHETH. OF Iauan the fourth sonne of Iapheth came the Iones, which were af∣terwards called the Greekes: and so the Latine and Greeke Interpreters for Iauan write Greece, as in ESAT: Et mittam ex qui fuerint ad gentes, in , in Italiam, & Graeciam; And I will send those that e∣scape of them to Nations in the Sea, in Italie and in Greece. The Geneus here vseth the word ( Tarshich ) for Tarsus, a Citie in Cilicia, though Tarsis in many places be taken for the Sea. The Tigurine and the Geneua vse the names Tubal and Iauan, and not Italie and Greece: keeping the same Hebrew wordes. Of these Iones were the , though themselues dreame that they were , or men without Ancesters, and growing (as it were) out of the soile it selfe: who aboun∣ding in people sent Colonies into Asia the lesse, of whom came the Iones of those parts. Others deriue the Athenians from Ion the sonne of Xuthus, the sonne of Deu∣calion; . but the antiquitie of Iauan marres the fashion of that supposition, who so many yeeres preceded Xuthus, Ion, or Deucalion. tells vs that Xuthus stole out of Thessalie with all his Fathers treasure, and his Brothers portions, and arriuing at Athens, he was graciously receiued by Erictheus, who gaue him his Daughter in marriage; of whom he receiued two sonnes, Ion, and Achaeus, the supposed Ance∣sters of the Athenians. For Attica was called Ionia (saith Plutarch in the life of The∣seus ) who, when he had ioyned Megara to Attica, erected a piller in that Isthmos or Strait, which fastneth Peloponnesus to the other part of Greece: writing on that part which looketh towards the East, these wordes: Haec non sunt Peloponnesus, ast Ionia; These Countries are not of Peloponnesus, but of Ionia: and on the other side which loo∣ked towards the South and into Peloponnesus, this: These parts are Peloponnesus, and not Ionia. Strabo out of Hecataeus affirmeth, that the Iones came out of Asia into Greece, which is contrarie to the former opinion: That the Iones of Greece transporting certayne companies into Asia the lesse, the name of Iones was thereby therein retayned. And though Strabo knew no more thereof then he learned of the Greekes themselues, yet I finde this coniecture of Hecataeus reasonable enough. For though it were to him vn∣knowne, yet sure I am that Asia the lesse had people before Greece had any: and that Iauan did not flie from Babylonia into Greece, but tooke Asia the lesse in his pas∣sage; and from thence past ouer the neerest way, leauing his owne name to some Maritimate Prouince on that side, as he did to that part of Greece so called. But yet Strabo himselfe beleeued, that tooke the name from Ion the sonne of : for so much he had learned from themselues; which was also the opinion of Pau∣sanias. True it is, that the Greekes in after-times cast themselues into that part of A∣sia the lesse, opposite vnto them, which they held for diuers yeeres. And howsoe∣uer the Greekes vaunt themselues to be the Fathers of Nations, and the most ancient; yet all approued Historians (not their owne) deride and disproue their pride, and vanitie therein. For this dispute of Antiquitie (among prophane Writers) rested betweene the and the Aegyptians, as Iustine out of Trogus, in the warre be∣tweene Vexoris of Aegypt, and Tanais of Scythia, witnesseth: which preceded far the reigne of Ninus, and was long before the name of Greece was euer heard of. And it is also manifest, that in Cecrops time the Greekes were all saluages without law or reli∣gion, liuing like brute beasts in all respects: and (saith S. Augustine ) liued to∣gether Lib. 18. de . Dei. c. 10. with Moses. The sixth sonne of Iapheth was Meshech, whom the Septuagint cal Mosoch: (a part of those Nations commanded by Gog the chiefe Prince of Meshech and Tubal. ) But this we must remember, that betweene Mesech the sonne of Aram, and Meshech (or Mosoch ) the sonne of Iapheth, there is little difference in name, and both by diuers In∣terpreters diuersly written. Montanus with the Vulgar writeth Mesch, the sonne of Aram, Mes; the Geneua, Mash; Iunius, Mesch. But it may be gathered out of the 120. Psalme, that either Meshech the sonne of Iapheth, was the parent of those people, or gaue name to that Prouince wherein Dauid hid himselfe: or else (which may rather seeme) that it tooke name from Mesch the sonne of Aram. For Dauid bewayling his exile (while he liued among a barbarous and irreligious People) vseth these words: Woe is me that I remayne in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar: which Iunius con∣uerteth Psal. 120. v. 5. thus: Hei mihi quia peregrinor tam : habito tanquàm Scenitae Kedareni: The Septuagint giues it this sense: Woe is me because my habitation (or abode) is prolonged, who dwell with the inhabitants of Kedar; with which this of the Latine agreeth: Heu mihi, incolatus meus prolongatus est, cum habitantibus Kedar: The Chal∣daean otherwise, and in these wordes: O me miserum, quia peregrinatus sum Asianis, ha∣bitaui cum taber Arabum; O wretch, that I am, for I haue trauailed among those of Asia: I haue dwelt in the Tabernacles of the Arabians. But howsoeuer or which soeuer conuersion be taken for the best, yet all make mention of Kedar: which is a Prouince of Arabia Petraea; and the Chaldaean putteth Asia in stead of Mesech, but the Hebrew it selfe hath Mesech. And if it be to be taken for a Nation, (as it is most likely, be∣cause it answeres to Kedar, the name of a Nation) seeing Mesh the sonne of Aram, 1. Chron. 17. is called Meshec, it is indifferent whether this Nation tooke name from Meshech or Mesh, both bordering Iudaea, and like enough to be commanded by one Prince; for so Ezechiel makes Mesech and Tubal. But as for those that take Mesech out of the word Mosoch (giuen by the Septuagint ) to be the : sure they presume much vpon the affinitie of names, as aforesaid. And sure I am that Dauid neuer trauailed so farre North; (for to him Muscouia was vtterly vnknowne) but about the border of Kedar (it may be) he was often in all the time of his persecuti∣on: the same being a Citie on the Mountaynes of Sanir or Galaad. And yet Arias Montanus makes Mosoch the father of the Muscouians: and herein also Melanchton runnes with the tyde of common opinion, and sets Mesech in , though with some better aduice of iudgement; as, first seated in Cappadocia, and from thence tra∣uailing Northward: expounding the places of the 120. Psalme, (Hei quòd exulo in Mesech) to signifie, Gentis eius feritatem insignem esse; That the feritie of that Nation exceeded: which siercenesse or brutalitie of the Muscoutans, Dauid neuer proued, or (perchance) neuer heard of. But the same feritie or crueltie which those Northerne had, may aswell be ascribed to the Arabians and Kedarens. For this Countrie tooke name of Kedar the second sonne of Ismael, of whom a people of e∣quall Gen. 25. v. 13. fiercenesse to any of the world were begotten, both in those times and long af∣ter, euen to this day (if the Arabians, , and Saracens, may be accounted one people:) the same being foreshewed by the speech of the Angell to Hagar, Gen. 16. v. 12. And he shall be a wild man: his hand shall be against euery man, and euery mans hand against him. Now Arabia the Desart (saith Plinie ) confronteeth the Arabians Cochlei on the East, and the Cedraei Southward, both which ioyne together vpon the . So it appeareth (as before) that Mesech, Tubal, Gomer, Togorma, and Magog, neighboured Canan and Israel, and that Kedar also did ioyne to Mesech: all which were Regions of Syria, or of Asia the lesse, commanded by the Successors of Seleu∣cus, enemies of the reestablishment of Israel and Iuda. But (as I haue alreadie said) it might well be, that long after the first plantation the issue of Mesech (or Mosoch ) might passe into Cappadocia, and thence into Hyrcania, and giue names, both to in the one, and to the Mountaynes Moschici in the other, and from thence might send people more Northerly into , and so all opinions saued. But all sal∣uage Nations ouer-growne and vncultiuated, doe (for the most part) shew a late plantation, euen as Ciuilitie, Letters, and magnificent Buildings, witnesse anti∣quitie. , the seuenth sonne of Iapheth, which Montanus reckons among the sonnes Montan. in Chr. of Gomer, was the Father of the Thracians, as all Authors (worthie the examinati∣on) affirme. Iosephus was the first that determined hereof: and because the Scrip∣tures are altogether silent, what part of the world Tiras peopled, the coniectures are indifferent, and giue no ground at all of dispute. It followeth now to speake of the sonnes of Gomer, which were three: Ascanez, Riphath, and Togorma. §. VIII. Of ASCANEZ and RIPHATH, the two elder Sonnes of GOMER. ASCANEZ was the Father of those which the Greekes call Regini, (sayth Iosephus ) but he giues no reason why. Eusebius makes Ascanez the Father of the Goths. The Iewes in their Thargum make him the root of the Germane Nation, but their exposi∣tions are commonly very idle. Plinie findeth Ascania in Phrygia, neere the Riuers of Hylas and Cios: Melanchton being of the same opinion, that the Tuiscones were descended of the Ascanez, (for Tuiscones, sayth hee, is as much to say, as of the Ascanez, praeposito articulo die ASCANEZ) and that the word signifieth a Religious Keeper of fire: it being an ancient superstition to pray at the fire of Sacrifices, as af∣terwards Melan. in car. l. 1 at the Tombes of Martyrs. Not farre from Phrygia was the Lake Ascania, knowne by that name in the Romanes time. And among the Kings which came to the succour of Troy, was Ascanius (Deo similis, sayth Homer) like God: because Hom. Iliad. 2. he was beautifull and strong: for in the same manner doth Virgil grace Aeneas, Os humcros{que} Deo similis, in face and bodie like one of the Gods. Virgil also remembreth such a Riuer together with the Hils Gargara: as, Illas amor trans Gargara, trans{que} so∣nantem Virg. ; l. 3. ASCANIVM, Appetite leades them both ouer the Mountaines Gargara, and the ro∣ring ASCANIVS. But this Plinic maketh more plaine in the description of Phrygia. For he placeth the Citie of Brillion vpon the Riuer , which is adioyning to . and is neere the border of the Empire: and the Lake Ascanez he directs vs to find by the description of Prusia, founded by Hannibal at the foot of Olympus, which Iyeth farre within the Countries of Bithynia: and then from to are ac∣counted fiue and twentie miles, in which way this Lake lyeth, euen betweene and Nicea. And so (as I conceiue him) takes them of Ascanez, to bee the inha∣bitants of Pontus, and Bithynia, and those North parts of Asia. Stephanus de makes it a Citie of Troâs, built by the sonne of Aeneas: saying, that there was another of that name in Mysia. Of Ascania a Lake of Bithynia, Ptolomie witnes∣seth: and Strabo giueth Ascania both a Lake, a Riuer, and a Towne in Mysia, neere vnto Cio; which also agreeth with Plinie. For Plinie findeth Prusia (before spoken of) neere Cio, and calleth the Islands before Troy Ascanes. Now, whether these places tooke name of the sonne of Gomer, or of Ascanius the sonne of Aeneas, it might be questioned: sure it is, that Ascanius which brought succour to the Troians, could not take his name from Aeneas sonne, who was then eyther exceeding yong, or rather vnborne: and it seemeth that the Coun∣tries whence those succours came, were not out of any part of Phrygia or Mysia, but farther off, and from the North parts of all Asia the lesse, which by Hieremie is cal∣led Ascanez, by the figure Synechdoche, as thinketh. Out of those testimo∣nies therefore which deceiue not, we may confidently determine. For of the Pro∣phet Hieremie we shall learne of what Nation the Ascenez were, whose wordes are these: Set vp a Standard in the Land, blow the Trumpet among the Nation against her, call c. 51. v. 17. vp the Kings of Ararat, , and Ascanez against her, &c. meaning against the . Ararat was Armenia the greater, as most Interpreters consent, so called of the Mountaines of Ararat which runne through it: Minni the lesser Armenia: Ar∣menia being compounded of Aram and Minni. For Minni was the ancient name: (sayth Iunius and others before him) and Aram anciently taken for Syria, which con∣tained all that Tract from Euphrates to the Sea-coasts of Phoenicia and Palaestina; and therefore being in elder times but a Prouince of Syria, the Scriptures dif∣ference it in the Storie of and , and call it Aram-padam. Then if these two Nations were of the , and ioyned with them (who altogether vni∣ted vnder Cyrus and Darius, came to the spoile of the Babylonian Empire ) we shall erre much to call Askenaz Germanie or Almaine, for wee heare of no Swart Ruttiers at that siege. But the Askenaz were of those Nations which were either subiect or allied to the Medes: of which, if any of them came afterward into Phrygia, I know not: for the dispersion of Nations was in aftertimes without account. But for the opinion of , who makes them to be Goths; or that of Iosephus, who cals them Rhegini; or of the Iewes, who will haue them to be Almaines; when they confirme it either by Scriptures or Reason, I will thinke as they doe. Of Riphath the second sonne of Gomer there is mention in the first of Chronicles. Beroaldus and Pererius thinke that hee wandered farre off from the rest of his Bro∣thers, and therefore no memorie of his plantation. But I see nothing to the contra∣rie, but that he might seate himselfe with the rest of his Family: for there wanted no roome or soile in those dayes for all the sonnes and Grand-children of Noah. There∣fore I take it to bee well vnderstood, that the Riphei were of Riphath, which the Greekes afterwards (according to Iosephus ) called the Paphlagones: and Riphei (sayth Melanchton ) signifieth Giants. These people were very famous in the North parts, and in Sarmatia: the most of number and power among them, Sarmatarum gens ma∣xima Heneti, The greatest number of the Sarmatians were the Heneti; who spake the an∣cient Polac: which being first called Riphei (for the loue of some of their Leaders or Kings) changed their names and became Heneti, (a custome exceeding common in those times) and dwelt first in Paphlagonia, as Homer witnesseth, and so doth Apollo∣nius in his Argonauticks: Now, when these Rephei (afterward Heneti ) sought new Re∣gions, they came along the shores of Euxinus, and filled the North part of Europe, contayning Russia, Lituania, and Polonia. From thence they crost thwart the Land, and peopled Illyria, desirous (sayth Melanchton ) of a warmer soile of fruit and Wine. These Heneti or Veneti, whom Melanchton taketh to be one people, filled al that Land Melanch in Cation. betweene the Baltick and Adriaticke Sea; and to this day the name of the Gulfe Vene∣dicus is found in Russia. This Nation, after they were possest of Lituania and Polonia, disturbed the plantation of the Boij and Hermondurij. Therefore, it seemeth to mee, that of Riphath came the Riphei, afterward Heneti; and so thinketh Arias Montanus, first seated in Paphlagonia, but in course of time Lords of Sarmatia, and those other parts before remembred, chiefly betweene the Riuers of Vistula and Albis. The name (saith Melanchton ) signifieth wandering or Wanderers, or Nomades: a people which liued by White-meates and fruits, as (indeed) all Nations did in the first Ages. Of the third sonne of Gomer, Togorma, I haue spoken alreadie; now therefore of Iauans children, which were foure: Elisa, Tharsis, Cethim, Dodanim. §. IX. Of the foure Sonnes of IAVAN: and of the double signification of Tharsis, either for a proper name or for the Sea. OF Elisa or Elipha, came the Aeoles: and of this Elisa all the Greekes were called Hellenes, sayth Montanus. Melanchton makes Elisa the Father of the Aeoles in Asia side: others of Elis in Peloponnesus, or of both. And seeing the Greekes were descended in generall of Iauan, it is pro∣bable that the Aeoles and the Elei, tooke name of Elisa, his eldest Sonne. Ezechiel in the 27. speaking of Tyre, nameth the Isles of Elisa. Hyacynthus . . & purpur a de insulis Elisae facta sunt operimentum tuum: Blue Silke and Purple, brought from the Isles of Elisa, was thy couering: The Chaldaeans for Elisa write Italia: but the Vulgar, the Tigurine, the Geneua, and Iunius, keepe the word Elisa: and so I thinke they might doe with reason. For there was not found any such Purple Dye in Italie in those dayes nor since, that I can read of: but those Isles of Elisa, were by a better coniecture the Isles of Greece; and the best Purple was found afterward at Tyre it selfee and before that, among the Cyclades, and on the Coast of Getulia. Tharsis, the second Sonne of Iauan, inhabited Cilicia, of which Tharsis is the Metro∣polis. Montanus for Tharsis in Cilicia, vnderstands Carthage in Africa; but (reseruing the respect due to so learned a man) he was much mistaken in that coniecture. The Chaldaean Paraphrast puts Carthage for Tharsis, but it hath no authoritie, nor warrant of reason therein. So likewise, where it is written, that the Ships of Salomon went euery three yeeres to Tharsis, and brought thence Gold, Siluer, Elephants teeth, &c. the Chaldaean Paraphrast translates Tharsis (Africa.) But Salomons Ships were pre∣pared in the Red Sea at Esion Gaber, in the Bay of Elana, neere vnto Madian, where Iethro (Moses Father in Law) inhabited; a Prouince of Arabia Petraea, Idumaea, or of the Chusites; and they sayled to the higher part of the East India. For it had beene a strange Nauigation to haue spent three yeers in the passage betweene Iudaea and Car∣thage, or any other part of Africa, which might haue beene sayled in six or ten daies. And if so great riches might haue beene found within the bounds of the Mediterran Sea, all other neighbouring Princes would soone haue entertained that Trade also. But this enterprize of Salomon is in this sort written of in the first of Kings: Also King SALOMON Made a Nauie of Ships in Esion Gaber, which is beside Elath and the brinke of the Red Sea in the Land of Edom: and HYRAM sent with the Nauie his seruants, that were Mariners, and had knowledge of the Sea, with the seruants of SALOMON: and they came to Ophir, and fet from thence 420. Talents of Gold, &c. But as the Nations about Pontus thought no Sea in the World like vnto their owne, and doubted whether there were any other Sea but that only: (whereof it came, that Pontus was a word vsed for the Sea in generall) so, because the Israelites and the Phoenicians knew no o∣ther Sea then that of the Mediterran in the beginning; and that the people of Thar∣sis had the greatest Ships, and were the first Nauigators in those parts with such Ves∣sels, they were therefore called men of the Sea: and the word Tharsis vsed often for the Sea. And whereas it is said that the Ships of Salomon went euery three yeeres to Tharsis, that phrase is not strange at all; for we vse it ordinarily wheresoeuer wee na∣uigate, (namely) that the Kings Ships are gone to the Sea, or that they are set out e∣uery yeere, or euery three yeere to the Sea, and therefore Tharsis was not therein named, eyther for Carthage, Africa, or India, but vsed for the Sea it selfe. But in this place Tharsis is truly taken for Tharsis, the chiefe Citie in Cilicia, founded by Tharsis the second sonne of Iauan, or by his Successours in memorie of their first parent. To this Citie arriued Alex. Macedon, before he gaue the first ouerthrow to Darius, and casting himselfe into the Riuer to bathe and wash his bodie, he fell into an extreme Feuer, and great danger of death: and in this Citie of Tharsis was Saint Paul borne. Now this agreeth with the reason and nature of a Plantation. For ( Gomer and his other sonnes inhabiting Asia the lesse, and that part of Syria adioyning) Iauan, who was to passe ouer the Sea into Greece, tooke the edge of the same Coast, and first planted the Iones on that shore: gaue the Islands betweene Asia the lesse and Greece, to Elisa, and left Tharsis vpon the Sea-side in Cilicia; of whom that Citie tooke name. The third sonne of Iauan was Cethim, of whom were the Romans and Italians, saith , but I allow better of Melanchtons opinion, who makes Cethim the Fa∣ther of the Macedonians. Cethim is a voice plurall (saith he) and signifieth percusso∣res, though in that respect it may be meant by either. But it seemeth more probable, that the place of Esai. 23. (according to Melanchton ) had relation to Alexander and the Macedonians: Hac calamitas ab ESAI praedicta est, quicapite vicessimo tertio inquit, esse euersores Tyriex terra Cittim, This calamitie (sayth MELANCHTON) was foreshewed by ESAI the Prophet, who in the three and twentieth Chapter pronounced, that the Destroyers of Tyre were to come out of Cittim. And although the children of Israel esteemed all men Islanders, which came vnto them by Sea, and separate from that Continent; (and so also Cittim might be taken for Italie, saith Beroaldus ) yet wee must take the first performance of the former Prophesie, which tooke effect with the destruction of the Tyrians by Alexander, who after seuen Moneths siege entred that proud Citie, and cut in pieces 7000. principall Citizens; strangled 2000. and changed the freedome of 13000. others into bondage and slauerie. Now, that Ma∣cedon was taken for Cethim, it appeareth plainly in the first of the Maccabees, in these wordes. After that ALEXANDER the Macedonian, the Sonne of PHILIP, went forth of the Land of Cethim, and slew DARIVS King of the Persians and Medes. IOSEPHVS sets Cethim in the Isle of Cyprus, in which (sayth hee) there remaineth the Citie Ci∣tium, the Countrey of Zeno the Philosopher (witnesse Laertius ) which Citie Pintus vpon Ezechiel affirmeth, that it stood in Saint Hicromes time. So it may be that all the Islands in ancient times by the Hebrewes were called the Islands of Cethim: and in that sense might Cyprus bee so called also; and yet because Tharsis was the very next Port to Cyprus, and directly ouer against it, it is also very probable, that Cethim dwelt by his brother Tharsis: and finding that Island too streight for his people after they were increased, and that the rest of the Coasts, both on Asia side and Greece, were in∣habited by his Father and Brothers, he sent Colonies ouer the Aegaean Sea, and inha∣bited Macedonia. Dodanim the fourth sonne of Iauan, and the youngest Brother (by the most opi∣nions) sate downe at Rhodes, as neere Cethim, Tharsis, and Elisa, as he could. For Do∣danim and Rhodanim are vsed indifferently by many Translators: the Hebrew (D) and the Hebrew (R) are so like, as the one may easily bee taken for the other, as all Hebricians affirme. There is also found in Epirus the Citie of Dodona, in the Pro∣uince of Molossia. And as Cethim, when he wanted soile in Cyprus: so Dodanim (sea∣ted in a farre lesse Island) did of necessitie send his people farther off; and keeping a∣longst the Coast, and finding Peloponnesus in the possession of Elisa, hee passed a little farther on the Westward, and planted in Epirus. And though the Citie of Dodona was not then built, or (perchance) not so ancient as Dodanim himselfe, yet his Poste∣ritie might giue it that name in memorie of their first parent, as it happened all the World ouer. For names were giuen to Cities, Mountaines, Riuers, and Prouinces, after the names of Noahs children, and grand-children; not in all places by them∣selues, but by their successours many yeeres after: euery of their Families being de∣sirous to retaine among them by those memories, out of what branch themselues were taken, and grafted elsewhere. And because great Kingdomes were often by new Conquerers newly named, and the greatest Cities often fired and demolished: therefore those that hoped better to perpetuate their memories, gaue their owne names, or the names of their Ancestors, to Mountaines and Riuers, as to things (af∣ter their iudgements) freest from any alteration. Thus then did Iauan settle himselfe and his children, in the edge and frontier of Asia the lesse, towards the Sea-shore: and afterward in Greece, and the Islands, and neighbour Prouinces thereof, as Iapheth their Father had done in the body of the lesser Asia, together with Iauans brethren, Gomer, Magog, Madai, Tubal, Mesech, and the rest round about him. And in like sort did (the sonne of Cham ) people Ba∣hylonia, Chaldaea, and the borders thereof towards the West and Southwest: and the sonnes of Chush (all but Nimrod, who held Babylonia it selfe) trauailed Southward in Arabia foelix, and Southwestward into Arabia petraea: the rest of his children holding the Regions adioyning to Nimrod. Mizraim the brother of Chush in like manner tooke the way of Aegypt: and his brother Canaan the Region of Palestina adioyning. The Sonnes of Canaan had their portions in Canaan, of whom all those Nations came, which were afterward the Enemies both to the Hebrewes, and to those of the sonnes of Shem, which spred themselues towards the West, and the borders of the Mediterran Sea: of which I shall speake hereafter. But first of the sonnes of Cham or Ham, which were foure: Chush, Mizraim, Phut, and Canaan. §. X. That the seate of CHVSH the eldest sonne of HAM, was in Arabia, not in Aethiopia: and of strange Fables, and Translations of Scripture, grounded vpon the mistaking of this point. †. I. Of IOSEPHVS his Tale of an Aethiopesse wife to MOSES, grounded on the mistaking of the seate of CVSH. THat Ham was the Father of the Egyptians, it is made manifest in many Scriptures, as in the 105. Psalme verse 51. Then ISRAEL came to E∣gypt, and IACOB was a stranger in the land of HAM: and in the 78. Psalme, Hee slew all the first-borne in Egypt, euen the beginning of their strength, in the Tabernacles of HAM. There is also found a great Citie in Thebaida, called Cheramis: (as it were the Citie of Ham ) of which name Herod. in . also dicouers an Iland in the same Region. But because Chush is the elder sonne of Ham, it agreeth with order to speake first of him. Now though I haue already in the description of Paradise handled this question, and (I hope) prooued that Chush could not be Aethiopia: yet seeing it commeth now to his turne to speake for him∣selfe, I will adde some farther proofe to the former. For the manifestation hereof sets many things straight, which had otherwise very crooked constructions, and senselesse Interpretations. Surely, how soeuer the Septuagint and Iosephus haue here∣in failed, yet it is manifest that Chush could not be Aethiopia, but Arabia: (to wit) both that Arabia called Petraea, and a part of Arabia the Happie and the Desart: which Regions Chush and the Chusites presently planted, after they left Babylonia to Nimrod, wherein they first sate downe altogether. And there is nothing which so well cleereth this Controuersie, as the true interpretation of the place, Num. 12. v. 1. where Moses his Wife is called a Chusite; together with some places which speake of Nabuchodonosors Conquests. For whereas Iosephus and the Septuagint in the place, Num. 12. v. 1. as also elsewhere, vnderstand Chush for Aethiopia, we must giue credit to Moses himselfe herein; and then it will appeare that Iosephus was grosly mistaken, or vainely led by his owne inuention. For Iosephus presuming that Chush was Aethiopia, and therefore that the Wise of Moses (which in Scripture, Num. 12. verse 1. is called a woman of Cush ) was a woman of the land of Aethiopia, faineth that Tharbis the Daughter of the King of Aethiopia, fell in loue with the person and fame of Mo∣ses, while he besieged Saba her Fathers Citie; and to the end, to obtaine Moses for her Husband, shee practised to betray both her Parents, Countrie, and friends, with the Citie it selfe, and to deliuer it into Moses hands. The Tale (if it bee worth the reciting) lyeth thus in Iosephus. After hee had described the strength of the Aethio∣pian Citie Meroe, which he saith at length Cambyses called so from the name of his Sister, (the olde name being Saba ) he goeth on in these wordes: Hic cùm MOSES de∣sidere Antiq. l. 2. c. 5. exercitum aegrè ferret, hoste non audente manus , tale quiddam acci∣dit. Erat Regi , nomine THARBIS, &c. which Tale hath this sense in English: When MOSES was that his Armie lay idle, because the Enemie besieged, durst not sally and come to handy strokes, there happened this accident in the meane while. The Aethiopian King had a Daughter called THARBIS, who at some giuen beheld the person of MOSES, and withall admired his valour. And knowing that MOSES had not only vp-held and restored the falling estate of the Egyptians, but had also brought the conquering to the very brinke of subuersion: these things working in her thoughts, together with her owne affection, which daily increased, shee made meanes to send vnto him by one of her trustiest seruants to offer her selfe vnto him, and become his Wife; Which MOSES on this condition entertained, that shee should first deliuer the Citie into his possession: where unto shee , and MOSES hauing taken oath to performe contract, both the one and the other were instantly performed. †. II. A dispute against the Tale of IOSEPHVS. THis Tale (whereof Moses hath not a word) hath Iosephus fashioned, and therein also vtterly mistaken himselfe, in naming a Citie of Arabia for a Citie of Ae∣thiopia: as he names Aethiopia it selfe to haue beene the Countrie of Moses his Wife, when (indeed) it was Arabia. For Saba is not in Aethiopia, but in Arabia, as both Strabo and all other Geographers, ancient and moderne teach vs, saying that the Sabaeans are Arabians and not Aethiopians; except Iosephus can perswade vs, that the Queene of Saba which came from the South to heare the wisedome of Salomon, were a Negro, or Blacke-Moore. And though Damianus à Goes speake of certaine Let∣ters to the King of Portugall from Prester Iohn, of the Abissines: wherein that Aethio∣pian King would perswade the Portugals that hee was descended of the Queene of Saba, and of Salomon; yet it doth no where appeare in the Scriptures, that Salomon had any Sonne by that great Princesse: which had it beene true, it is likely that when Sishac King of Egypt inuaded Roboam, and sackt Hierusalem, his Brother (the Sonne of Saba and Salomon ) who ioyned vpon Egypt, would both haue impeached that enterprize, as also giuen aide and succour to Roboam against Ieroboam, who drew from him tenne of the twelue Tribes to his owne obedience. Neyther is it any thing against our opinion of Moses his Wife, to haue beene an Arabian, that the Scriptures teach vs, that Moses married the daughter of Iethro Priest of Midian or Madian: which standing on the North Coast of the Red Sea, ouer against the bodie of Egypt, and neere Esion Gaber, where Salomon prouided his Fleet for India, in the Regi∣on of Edom, may well bee reckoned as a part of Arabia, as the Red Sea is called Si∣nus Arabicus. For Edumaea ioyneth to the Tribe of Iuda by the North, to Arabia Pe∣traea by the East, to the Mediterran by the West, and to the Red Sea by the South∣east. And if wee marke the way which Moses tooke when he left Egypt, and condu∣cted Israel thence, it will appeare that hee was no stranger in Arabia: in the border whereof, and in Arabia it selfe, hee had formerly liued fortie yeeres; where it see∣meth, that besides his carefull bringing vp in Egypt, hee was instructed by Iethro in the Egyptians learning. For Iosephus confesseth, and Saint Stephen confirmeth, that he was learned in all the wisedome of the Egyptians. But on the other side this Text makes much against Iosephus, where it is written in Exodus the second, Therefore V. 15. MOSES fled from PHARAO, and dwelt in the Land of Madian or Midian, and not in Aethiopia. And in the third Chapter it is as plaine as wordes can expresse, in what Region Madian was, where it is written, When MOSES kept the sheepe of IETHRO his Father in Law, Priest of Madian, and draue the Flocke to the Desart, and came to the Mountaine of GOD in . Now that Mount Horeb is not in Aethiopia, euery Infant knoweth. And if wee may beleeue Moses himselfe, then was not the Wife of Moses purchased in that manner which Iosephus reporteth (which was for betraying her Countrie and Friends) neither had shee the name of Tharbis, but of Sippora, or Zippora: neither was shee a Negro, but a Madianitish. And as God worketh the greatest things by the simplest meanes: so it pleased him from a Sepherd to call Moses, and after him Dauid, and by them to deliuer his people first and last. For Mo∣ses sitting by a Well (as disconsolate and a stranger) defended the daughters of Re∣guel Exod. . from the other shepherds, and drew them Water to water their sheepe: vpon which occasion (by God ordayned) he was entertayned by , whose Daughter he marryed: and not for any betraying of Townes or Countries. From hence also came Iethro to Moses at , not farre from Idumaea, and fin∣ding the insupportable gouernement of such a multitude, he aduised him to distri∣bute this waightie charge, and to make Gouernours and Iudges of euery Tribe and Familie. And if Iethro had beene an Aethiopian, it had beene a farre progresse for him to haue passed through all Egypt with the Wife and Children of Moses, and to haue found Moses in the border of : the Egyptians hating Moses and all that fauoured him. But the passing of Moses through Arabia Petraea (which ioyneth to Madian ) proueth that Moses was well acquainted in those parts: in which the se∣cond time he wandred fortie yeeres, and did by these late trauailes of his, seeke to instruct the children of Israel in the knowledge of one true God, before he brought them to the Land of plentie and rest. For he found them nourished vp with the milke of Idolatrie, and obstinate in the Religion of the Heathen, and finding that those stiffe plants could not be bowed or declined, either by perswasion or by miracle, he ware them out in the Desarts, as God directed, and grasted their branches a new, that from those he might receiue fruit, agreeable to his owne desire, and Gods Com∣mandements. Lastly, this opinion of Iosephus is condemned by Augustinus Chrisamensis, where also he reprehendeth Apollinaris, who auowed that Moses had marryed both Thar∣bis and Sephora: His owne wordes haue this beginning: Mentitur ettam APOLLI∣NARIS Sixt. . Bibl. duas vxores habuisse MOSEN, &c. APOLLINARIS also lyeth in affirming that MOSES had two wiues: and who doth not perceiue these things fayned by them? for it is that the wife of MOSES was ZEPHORA, Daughter to the Priest or President of Madian: and that Madian cannot be taken for Aethiopia beyond Egypt; being the same that ioyneth to Arabia: so farre Chrisamensis. †. III. Chush ill expounded for Aethiopia, EZECH. 29. 10. NOw as Chush is by the Septuagint conuerted Aethiopia, and the wife of Moses called Aethiopissa: so in the conquest of Nabuchodonosor is Aethiopia written for Arabia. For by the wordes of Ezechiel it is manifest that Nabuchodonosor Ezech. . 10. was neuer in Aethiopia. Behold (saith Ezechiel, speaking of the person of this great Assyrian) I come vpon thee and vpon thy Riuers, and I will make the Land of Egypt vtter∣ly waste and desolate, from the Towre of Seueneh, euen to the borders of the Black-moores: which last wordes should haue beene thus conuerted: From the Towre of Seueneh to the borders of the Chusites or Arabians: betweene which two is situated all Egypt. For to say, from the borders of Seueneh to the Aethiopians, hath no sense at all. Seue∣neh it selfe being the border of Egypt, confronting and ioyning to Aethiopia, or the Land of the black-Moores. So as if Nabuchodonosors conquest had beene but between Seueneh and the border of Aethiopia, it were as much to say, and did expresse no o∣ther victorie then the conquest of all that Land and Countrie, lying between Middle∣sex and Buckingham, where both the Countries ioyne together; or all the North parts of England, betweene Barwick and Scotland: for this hath the same sense with the former, if any man sought to expresse by these two bounds, the Conquest of England: Barwick being the North border of England, as Seueneh or Syene is the South bound of Aegypt, seated in Thebaida which toucheth Aethiopia. But by the wordes of Ezechiel it appeareth, that Nabuchodonosor neuer entred into any part of Aethiopia, although the Septuagint, the Vulgar, the Geneua, and all other (in effect) haue written Aethiopia for Chush. †. IIII. Another place of EZECHIEL, cap. 30. vers. 9. in like manner mistaken. ANd as the former, so is this place of Ezechiel mistaken, by being in this sort conuerted: In dieilla nuncij à facie mea in trieribus ad Ae∣thiopiae confidentiam: Which place is thus turned in English by the Geneuans: In that day shall there Messengers goe forth from me in ships to make the carelesse Moores afraid. Now the Latine for (ships) hath the Greeke word Trieres for Triremes which are Gallyes of three bankes, and not ships. But that in this place the Translation should haue beene (as in the former) amended by vsing the word Chush, or Arabia for Aethiopia or the blacke Moores, euery man may see which meanely vnderstandeth the Geographie of the World, knowing, that to passe out of Aegypt into Aethiopia there neede no Gal∣leys nor ships, no more then to passe out of Northampton into Leicestershire: Aethio∣pia being the conterminate Region with Aegypt, and not diuided so much as by a Riuer. Therefore in this place of Ezechiel it was meant, that from Aegypt Nabucho∣donosor should send Galleyes alongst the coast of the Red Sea, by which an Armie might be transported into Arabia the Happy and the Stony (sparing the long weari∣some march ouer all Aegypt, and the Desarts of Pharan ) which Armie might there∣by surprise them vnawares in their securitie and confidence. For when Nabuchodono∣sor was at Seueneh within a mile of Aethiopia, he needed neither Galley nor Ship to passe into it: being all one large and firme Land with Aegypt, and no otherwise par∣ted from it, then one In-land shire is parted from another; and if he had a fancie to haue rowed vp the Riuer but for pleasure, he could not haue done it: for the fall of Nilus (tumbling ouer high and steepie Mountaynes) called Catadupae Nili, were at hand. Lastly, as I haue alreadie obserued, the sonnes of euery father seated themselues as neere together as possibly they could, Gomer and his sonnes in Asia the lesse; Iauan and his sonnes in Greece, and the Ilands adioyning; Shem in Persia and Eastward. So the Sonnes and Grand-children of Chush from the Riuer of Gehon (their Fathers first seat) inhabited vpon the same, or vpon some other contiguat vnto it, as Nimrod and on the one side, and Saba, Sheba, and Sabtecha (with the rest) did on the other side. And to conclude in a word, the Hebrewes had neuer any acquaintance or fel∣lowship, any warre, treatie of peace, or other intelligence with the Aethiopian blacke Moores, as is alreadie remembred in the Chapter of Paradise. †. V. A place, ESAY 18. v. 1. in like manner corrupted, by taking Chush for Aethiopia. ANd as in these places before remembred, so in diuers other is the word Aethio∣pia put for Arabia or Chush, which puts the storie (where it is so vnderstood) quite out of square; one Kingdome thereby being taken for another. For what sense hath this part of Scripture Esay 18. Vae terrae Cymbalorum alarum quae est trans flumina Aethiopiae, or according to the Septuagint in these wordes: Vae terrae nauium alarum est trans Aethiopiae? Wo to the land shaddowing with wings, which is beyond the Riuers of Aethiopia, sending Ambassadors by sea, euen in vessels of reeds vpon the waters. Vae terrae ; Woe to the Land of the shadie coast, saith Iunius. The former Translators vnderstand it in this sense. That the waters are shaddowed with the sailes, which are significatiuely called the wings of the ships, the other, that the Coast of the Sea was shaddowed by the height of the Land. But to the purpose: That this Land here spoken of by the Prophet Esay, is Egypt, no Interpreter hath doubted. For they were the Egyptians that sent this message to the Israelites which Esay repeateth, and by the former translation euery man may see the transposition of Kingdomes: for hereby Egypt is transported vnto the other side of Aethiopia, and Aethiopia set next vnto Iudaea, when it is the Land of Chush and Arabia indeed that lyeth betweene and Egypt, and not Aethiopia, which is sea∣ted vnder the Equinoctiall line. And of this Beroaldus asketh a materiall question, (to wit) what Region that should be, of which the Prophet speaketh, and placeth it beyond the Riuers of AETHIOPIA: Nam de ignotaagi regione dici nequit; For it can∣not be said that he treateth of an vnknowne Region. Now if Aethiopia it selfe be vnder the Equinoctiall line, with whom the Iewes had neuer any acquaintance, why should any man dreame that they had knowledge of Nations farre beyond it againe, and beyond the Riuers of Aethiopia? except we shall impiously thinke that the Prophet spake he knew not what, or vsed an impertinent discourse of those Nations, which were not discouered in 2000. yeeres after, inhabiting as farre South as the Cape of good Hope, commonly knowne by the name of Bona esperanza. †. VI. That vpon the like mistaking, both TERRHAKA in the storie of SENA∣CHERIB, and ZERA in the storie of ASA are vn∣aduisedly made Aethiopians. ANd by this translation is the storie of Senacherib vtterly mistaken in the cause of his retrait. For Senacherib was first repulsed at Pelusium, at the very entrance of Egypt from Iudaea: when hauing certayne knowledge that , (which all the Interpreters call King of Aethiopia ) was on the way to set on him, he began to Ioseph. l. 10. 6. 3. with-draw himselfe: and fearing to leaue his Armie in two parts, he sent threatning Messengers to Ezechia King of Iuda, perswading him to submit himselfe: the Tenor whereof is set downe in the second of Kings in these wordes: Haue any of the gods of the Nations deliuered his Land out of the hands of the King of ? Where is the god of Hamah? &c. By which proud Ambassage, if he had obtayned entrance into Hieru∣salem, he then meant to haue vnited that great Armie before Hierusalem, commanded by Rabsekeh, with the other which lay before Pelusium, a great Citie vpon the branch of Nilus next Arabia. For Senacherib had alreadie mastered the most part of all those Kings 2. 19. Cities in Iudaea and Beniamin with a third Armie, (which himselfe commanded) be∣ing then at the siege of . But vpon the rumor of that Arabian Armie led by their King Thirrbakeh (whom Iosephus calls ) Rabsakeh hasted from the siege Antiq. l. 10. of Hierusalem, and found Senacherib departed from Lachis & set downe before Lebna, Kings 2. 19. which was afterwards called Eleuthoropolis, as some haue supposed. But while he had ill successe at Pelusium and feared Thirrbakeh, God himselfe whom he least fea∣red, strooke his Armie before Hierusalem by the Angell of his power, so as 185000. were found dead in the place, as in the life of Ezechias is hereafter more largely writ∣ten. And that this Armie of Tirrakeh was from Arabia, Iosephus himselfe makes it plaine. For he confesseth in the tenth Booke the first Chapter of the Iewes Antiqui∣ties, that it was come to Senacheribs knowledge, that the Armie which was afoote (both to releeue the Aegyptians and the Iewes ) marched towards him by the way of the Desart: Now the Desart which lay indifferent betweene Hierusalem and , Lib. 10. cap. 1. was that of Pharan or Sur, which also toucheth on the three Arabiaes, to wit, the , of which it is a part: the Desart, and the Happy; and by no other way could the Arabians come on to succour either Pelusium or Hierusalem. But, that there is any Desart betweene Pelusium and the South part of Egypt, hath neuer yet beene heard of, or described by any Cosmographer or Historian. So then this Scrip∣ture of the second of Kings, Verse the ninth, hath the same mistaking as the rest. For here the word (Chush) is also translated Aethsopia; and in this sense haue all the Interpreters, (but Iunius ) expressed the beginning of the ninth Verse: He heard also men say of THIRRHAKEH King of Aethiopia, &c. whereas it should haue beene thus conuerted with IVNIVS: Audiens autem de THIRRHAKEH Rege Chushi; Hee heard also of THIRRHAKEH King of the Chushites. For they were the Chusites and Arabians, whose Houses and Cities were next the fire, and vpon whom the very smoke of Iuda flaming was blowne, being their neerest Neighbours: and so were not the Aethiopian blacke-Moores vnder the Equinoctiall, whom neither warre nor peace (which discouereth all Regions) euer found out, saith . For this King . l. 5. c. 9. was no more King of Aethiopia then Zerah was, who inuaded Asa King of Iuda, with an Armie of a Million and three thousand Charriots. Indeed, how such an Ar∣mie . 2 c. 14. and those Charriouts should passe through all Egypt, (the Kings of Egypt being mightie Kings) let all men that know how these Regions are seated, and how farre distant, iudge. For Princes doe not easily permit Armies of a Million to runne through them; neither was there euer any such strength of Black-Moores heard of in that part of the World, or else where. Neither are these Aethiopians such trauai∣lers or Conquerors; and yet is this King Zerah also called King of Aethiopia. But the word Chush being first so conuerted for AEthiopia, the rest of the Interpreters (not looking into the seates of Kingdomes, or the possibilities of attempts, or inuasions) followed one another in the former mistakings. †. VII. A farther exposition of the place, ESAY 18. 1. COncerning these wordes in that eighteenth Chapter of ESAY, Nauium alarum; Winged ships, (so the turne it) or Cymbalo alarum (according to the La∣tine ) sayles whistling in the windes, or terr aevmbrosae orae (after IVNIVS) the Land of a shaddowed coast, or the Land shaddowing with wings, as our English Geneua hath it. The two first interpretations of the Septuagint and S. Hierome haue one sense in effect. For the sailes are commonly called the wings of a ship; and we vse to say ordinarily when our ships saile slowly, that shee wanteth wings: (that is) when her sailes are either worne or too narrow; and we also vse the same phrase of the winde whistling in the sailes. And it may be that the Egyptians employed so many of those small ships, as their sailes were said to giue a shaddow ouer the Red Sea. But to make both inter∣pretations good, Pintus (vpon Esay ) affirmeth, that the word (Sabal) doth signifie both to shaddow and to gingle (which is) to make a kinde of Cymbaline sound: so as the meaning of this place (saith Pintus ) is this: Woe to thee, O Egypt, which doest pro∣mise to others safegard, vnder the shaddow of thy wings, which (indeede) seemeth to a∣gree with the argument of the eighteenth Chapter of Esay: and this phrase is often else where vsed, as in the sixteenth Psalme: Sub vmbra alarum tuarum protege me; De∣fend me vnder the shaddow of thy wings. The Boates of reede spoken of are of two kindes; either of basket-willow couered with hides (as anciently in ) or a Tree made hollow in the bottome, and built vpon both sides with Canes. Of the one sort I haue seene in Ireland, of the other in the Indies. §. XI. Of the plantation and antiquities of Egypt. †. I. That MIZRAIM the chiefe planter of Egypt, and the rest of the sonnes of HAM, were seated in order, one by another. THe second sonne of Ham was Mizraim, who (according to the place of a second brother) was sent somewhat farther off to inhabite. For Chush first possest Chaldaea on the West side of Gehon chiefly: and from thence, as he increased in people, so he entred Arabia, and by time came to the border of the Red Sea, and to the South-east-side of . Mizraim his brother (with Phut ) past ouer into Africa. Mizraim held Egypt: and Phut (as a third brother) was thrust farther off into Mauritania. Canaan tooke the Sea-coast, and held the side of Palestina: and these foure brothers possest all that Tract of Land, from Gehon in Chaldaea, as farre to the West as the Mediterrane Sea: comprehending all Arabia Deserta, and Petraea, all Canaan which embraceth , Samaria, and ; with the two Egypts, whereof the nether is bounded by Memphis on the South, and by the Mediterrane Sea on the North: and Thebaida (called the vpper Egypt ) stretcheth it selfe toward the South as farre as Syene, the border of the Aethiopians or black- Moores. All the rest of the coast of Africa West∣ward Phut peopled; which brothers had not any other Nation or Familie that dwelt betweene them. And in the same manner did all their sonnes againe, and all the sonnes of the rest of Noahs children, sort themselues. †. II. Of the time about which the name of Egypt began to be knowne: and of the Egyptians Lunarie yeeres, which made their antiquities seeme the more fabulous. THis flourishing Kingdome possest by Mizraim, changed her ancient name, and became Egypt, at such time as Aegyptus (otherwise Ramesses, as some thinke) the sonne of Belus, chased thence his elder brother Danaus, shifting him into that part of Greece now called Morea, by whom the Argiues were made Danai, abando∣ning their proper names: which happened 877. yeeres after the floud, in the time of Iosua, as S. Augustine coniectureth out of Euscbius. But in Homers Odysses it ap∣peareth that the Egyptians were so called at the time of the Troian Warre. And be∣fore this, Egypt was knowne by diuers other names, as Oceana, Aria, Osiriana, &c. And Manethon (whom Iosephus citeth in his first booke against Appion ) numbreth all the Kings of Egypt after Moses departure, who consumed 393. yeeres. By which other men coniecture, that the Egyptians tooke on them that name 330. yeeres after Iosua, and about 1000. yeeres after the floud. But where Iosephus in the same booke taketh Israel to be those Hycsos, which he also calleth Pastores or Shepherds, which are said to haue reigned in Egypt 511. yeeres: whom also he calleth his Ancesters, (meaning the Ancesters of the Iewes ) in this I am sure he was grosly deceiued, or that he vainely boasted: for the had no such Dominion as Manethon fayneth: abode in Egypt so long a time by many yeeres. Of the Egyptian Antiquities there are many fancies in Trogus, Herodotus, Plato, Diod. Siculus, Mela, and others. For they affirme (saith Pomp. Mela ) that there had reigned in Egypt 330. Kings before Amasis, who was contemporarie with Cyrus; and that they had memorie and storie of 13000. yeeres; and that the Starres had foure times changed their course, and the Sunne twice set in the East. These Riddles are also rife among the and Arcadians, who dare affirme, that they are more ancient then Iupiter and the Moone, whereof Ouid: Ante IOVEM genitum terr as feruntur De Fast. l. 1. Arcades: & LVNA gens prior illa fuit. The Arcadians the earth inhabited Ere yet the MOONE did shine, or IOVE was bred. But for those 13000. yeeres it may well be true: seeing it is certayne that the Ae∣gyptians reckon their yeeres by Moneths, which makes after that account not aboue 1000. or 1100. yeeres, whether we take their Moneths or yeeres to haue beene of the first kinde of 27. dayes and eight houres; or otherwise 29. dayes and twelue houres; or after any other of those siue diuersities of their Lunarie yeeres. †. III. Of certayne vaine assertions of the Antiquitie of the Aegyptians. GERARDVS MERCATOR in his Chronologie, reasoneth for the Aegyptians An∣tiquitie in this manner: That the sixteenth Dynastie (where begins to reckon the Aegyptians times) had beginning with the generall floud: and that there∣fore the first of the other fifteene reached the Creation, or soone after it. To which coniecture of Mercator, Pererius maketh this answere. That therein Mercator was first deceiued, because he taketh it for granted, that the beginning of the sixteenth Dynastie was at once with the generall floud: which Eusebius maketh 292. yeeres af∣ter, and in the time of Abraham. Secondly, Mercator maketh the beginning of the shepherds Dynastia (being in number the 17.) in the time of their first King, Saltis, to haue beene in the yeere of the World 1846. which Eusebius findeth in the Worlds age 2140. For the 16. Dynastia was begunne but in the 292. yeere after the floud, as they account, and continued 190. yeeres. Thirdly, whereas Mercator ma∣keth euery Dynastia to endure 115. yeeres, Eusebius reckoneth many of them at lesse then 100. yeeres: for the 28. had but sixe yeeres; the 29. but 20. and the 30. but 18. yeeres. Now Annius in his Supplement of Manethon affirmeth, That all these 15. Dyna∣sties lasted but 162. yeeres: and that the first of the 15. beganne but in the 131. yeere after the floud: so as where Mercator makes all the 15. to precede the floud, and the 16. to haue beene then in being at the time of the floud, Annius makes them all after it. But the contrarietie of falshood cannot be hidden, though disguised. For Annius had forgotten his former Opinion and Assertion, that it was in the 131. yeere that Nimrod with the sonnes of came into the Valley of Shinaar: so he forgets the time which was consumed in the building of Babel: and that before the confusion of Speech there was no dispersion, nor farre-off plantation at all. And though he hastily conueyed Gomer into Italie, and Tubal into Spaine, in the yeere of Nimrods reigne: (which was ten yeeres after his arriuall into Babylonia ) yet herein he is more vnaduised. For he makes Aegypt possest, and a gouernement established in the very first veere of the arriuall of Nimrod into Shinaar, before all partition, or any expedition farre off or neere in question: for from (that is, from Babel ) did the Lord scatter them vpon all the earth. †. IIII. Against PERERIVS: that it is not vnlikely, but that Aegypt was peopled within 200. yeeres after the Creation; at least, that both it, and the most parts of the World were peopled before the Floud. BVT whereas Pererius seeketh to ouerthrow this Antiquitie of the Aegyptians touching their , (which Eusebius doth not altogether destroy, but lessen) I doe not find any great strength in this opinion of Pererius; (to wit) that it was ey∣ther vnlikely or impossible that Aegypt should be peopled within 100. or 200. yeeres after Adam, in the first Age. And whereas he supposeth that it was not inhabited at all before the generall Floud, I doe verily beleeue the contrarie: and that not only of Aegypt, but the better part of all the World was then peopled: Pererius his words are these: primos mundi ducentos, vel etiam centum annos ADAMI proles multiplicari potuit, vt ad Aegyptum habitandum & propagata sit, &c. For how could the children of ADAM bee so multiplied in the two hundred, or in the first hundred yeeres of the World, and so propagated as to and fill Aegypt? for allowing this (saith Pererius ) wee must also confesse, that there were then both the Assyrians, and other Nations. Now seeing that the Scriptures are silent herein, and that it is no point of our sa∣uing , it is lawfull for euery man to bee guided in this and the like questions by the best reason, circumstance, and likelihood; and herein, as in the rest, I protest that I doe not gainsay any mans opinion out of any crossing or cauelling humour: for I thinke it the part of euery Christian, rather to reconcile differences, where there is possibilitie of vnion, then out of froward subtletie, and preiudicate resoluednesse, to maintaine factions needlesse, and dangerous contentions. First therefore, to this opinion, that Aegypt was not planted so soone after Adam, no, not at all before the Floud, I say that there is no reason why wee should giue a lesse increase to the sonnes of Adam, then to the sonnes of . For their length of life, which exceeded those which came after the floud double; & (after a few yeeres) treble, is an infallible proofe of their strength and abilitie, to beget many Children: and at that time they no degrees of kindred, nor consanguinitie. And that there was a speedie increase of people, and in great numbers, it may in some sort appeare by this, that Cain, who (being fearefull that the death of Abel would haue beene reuenged on him) withdrew himselfe from the rest, which were after∣ward begotten, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, and there, by the helpe of his owne issues built a Citie, (called Enoch ) after the name of his first . Now if it bee ga∣thered that came into the Valley of Shinaar with so many multitudes, as suf∣ficed to build the Citie and Towre of Babel: and that to this increase there was gi∣uen but 130. yeeres by Berosus, and after the account of the Scriptures (reckoning, as it is commonly vnderstood, by the birth of , Selah, , and Phalegh ) but one hundred and one yeere: I see no cause to doubt, but that in the infancie of the first age, when the bodies of men were most perfect, euen within 130. yeeres, the same (if not a greater) number might be increased; and so within 70. yeeres af∣ter (that is, by such time as the World had stood 200. yeeres) aswell Assyria, , and Aegypt might be possest before the Floud, as they were within the same or time after it. Neyther doth it agree with the circumstance or true Storie of the and Assyrian Empire, that all those people, which were increased in the first hundred or 130. yeeres after the Floud, came into Shinaar and Babylonia. For that e∣uer Noah himselfe came out of the East, as there is no Scripture or Authoritie to prooue it, so all probable coniecture and reason it selfe denies it. Againe, those mul∣titudes and powerfull numbers, which Semiramis (but the third from Nimrod ) found in India, considered with her owne Armie of three Millions, (and shee left not all her Kingdomes emptie) doe well prooue, that if the World had such plentie of people in so few yeeres after the Floud, it might also bee as plentifully filled in like time before it. For after their owne account Ninus gouerned Babylonia and Assyria but 292. yeeres after the Floud of Noah. And these Troupes of Semiramis were ga∣thered out of all those Easterne Kingdomes, from Media to the Mediterran Sea; when there had now past from the Floud to the time of this her inuasion, somewhat lesse or more then 360. yeeres: for much more time the true Chronologie cannot al∣low; though I confesse, that in respect of the strange greatnesse of Semiramis Armie, and the incredible multitudes gathered, this is as short a time as can well bee giuen. And if but the one halfe be true of that which is said, That her Armie consisted of 1300000. Footmen, and 500000. Horsemen, it must needes bee, that long before Semiramis Raigne, the greatest part of Asia (whence her huge Armie was gathered) was full of people: yea Arabia it selfe (much part whereof is barren) must long be∣fore this time of Semiramis haue beene plentifully peopled; when Ninus hauing a determination to make himselfe Master of all Nations, entred (notwithstanding) in League with the King thereof: whom therefore he eyther feared, or sought his assi∣stance. And if Arabia were then so well replenished, I see no cause but Aegypt might also be peopled. Now if we may beleeue Trogus Pompeius (Epitomiz'd by Iu∣stine) Aegypt was a most flourishing and magnificent Nation before Ninus was borne. For these be his owne wordes, speaking of NINVS. Fuêre quidem tempori∣bus Iustin. l. 1. antiquioribus VEXORIS Rex Aegypti, &c. But there were in times more ancient VEXORIS King of Aegypt, and TANAIS King of the Scythians: of which the one in∣uaded Pontus, the other Aegypt. And how full of people all that part of the World was, the Conquests of Ninus witnesse, who subdued with no small force the Arme∣nians, the Medes, and afterwards the Bactrians; yea, all that whole bodie of Asia on this side India. For Diodorus out of Ctesias numbreth the Armie, wherewith Ninus inuaded Zoroaster, at 1700000. Footmen, and 200000. Horsemen: and the Stories generally shew, that though Zoroasters Armie was farre short of this, yet it was grea∣ter then any that those parts of the World euer since beheld. But to what end should I seeke for forraine authoritie? for no man doubteth but that Aegypt was possest by Mizraim, the sonne of Ham; and that it was an established Kingdome, filled with many Cities in Abrahams time, the Scriptures tell vs. And sure to prepare and cul∣tiue a desolate and ouergrowne ground, to beautifie it with many Cities, Lawes, and Policies, cannot be esteemed a labour of a few dayes: and therefore it must bee inhabited in a lesse time then 200. yeeres after the Floud; and in the same time (if not in a shorter) before the Floud. For if so many Millions of men were found with∣in 300. yeeres after the generall Floud; so as not only Babylon, and Assyria, Bactria, Armenia, Media, Arabia, Aegypt, Palaestina, yea the farre-off Lybia on the one side, and India on the other, and Scythia (inferiour to neyther) were all filled: into what small corners could then all those Nations be comprest, which 1656. yeeres brought forth before the Floud? euen necessitie, which cannot be resisted, cast the abundance of mens bodies into all parts of the knowne World; especially, where Death for∣bare the Father, and made no place for the Sonne, till he had beheld liuing Nations of his owne bodie. †. V. Of some other reasons against the opinion of PERERIVS. FOR what a strange increase did the long liues of the first Age make, when they continued 800. or 900. yeeres. Surely, we haue reason to doubt, that the World could not containe them, rather then that they were not spred ouer the World. For let vs now reckon the date of our liues in this Age of the World: wherein if one ex∣ceed 50. yeeres, tenne for one are cut off in that passage, and yet wee find no want of people; nay, wee know the multitude such, as if by warres or pestilence they were not sometimes taken off by many thousands, the earth with all the industrie of man could not giue them food. What strange heapes then of soules had the first Ages, who enioyed 800. or 900. yeeres, as aforesaid? These numbers, I say, cannot bee counted nor conceiued. For it would come to the same reckoning in effect, as if all those which haue beene borne in Brittaine since 3. or 4. hundred yeeres before the Norman Conquest (sauing such as by accident or by violence were cut off) were now aliue; and if to these there were added as many as by Polygamie might haue beene increased. For (to omit, that the Giants and mightie ones of the first Age obserued no law of Matrimony) it is to be thought that those Louers of the world and of plea∣sure, when they knew the long and liberall time which Nature had giuen them, would not willingly or hastily present themselues to any danger which they could flye from or eschew. For what humane argument hath better perswasion to make men carelesse of life, and fearelesse of death, then the little time which keepes them asunder, and that short time also accompanied with so many paines and diseases, which this enuious olde Age of the World mingleth together, and soweth with the seeds of Mankind? Now if that Berosus or Annius may be alleaged for sufficient Authours, whom Pe∣rerius himselfe in this question citeth, then is it by them affirmed, and by Iosephus confirmed, that the Citie of Enoch was seated neere Lybanus in Syria: and if other parts of Syria were peopled in Cains time, I see no cause why Palaestina (which is also a Prouince of Syria ) and Aegypt (which neighboureth it) could bee left desolate both all the life time of Cain, and all those times betweene his death and the Floud, which were by estimation 700. or 800. yeeres. And sure though this Fragment of Berosus with Annius his Comment bee very ridiculous in many places (the ancient Copies being corrupted or lost) yet all things in Berosus are not to bee reiected. Therefore Saint Hierome for such Authours giues a good rule. Bona eorum eligamus, vitemus contraria; Let vs choose what is good in them, and reiect the rest. And certainly in the very beginning of the first Booke, Berosus agreeth (in effect) with Moses, touch∣ing the generall Floud: and in that first part Berosus affirmeth, that those mightie men and Giants which inhabited Enoch, commanded ouer all Nations, and subiected the vniuersall World: and though that phrase ( of all the World ) bee often vsed in the Scriptures for a part thereof; as in the second of the Acts, That there were dwelling at Hierusalem Iewes: men that feared God of euery Nation vnder Heauen: yet by wordes which follow in Berosus, it is plaine that his words and sense were the same: for hee addeth from the Sunnes rising to the Sunnes setting, which cannot be taken for any small part thereof. Againe, wee may safely coniecture, that Noah did not part and proportion the World among his sonnes at aduenture, or left them as Discouerers, but directed them to those Regions which he formerly knew had beene inhabited. And it cannot be denyed that the earth was more passable and easie to trauaile ouer before the Floud, then after it. For Pererius himselfe confesseth, that Attica (by rea∣son of mudde and slime which the water left vpon the Earth) was vninhabited 200. yeeres after Ogyges Floud, whereby wee may gather that there was no great pleasure in passing into farre Countries after the generall Deluge, when the earth lay (as it were) incopsed for 100. or 130. yeeres together. And therefore was the face there∣of in all coniecture more beautifull, and lesse cumbersome to walke ouer, in the first Age then after the generall ouerflowing. †. VI. Of the words of MOSES, GEN. 10. V. vltimo, whereupon PERERIVS grounded his opinion. LAstly, whereas Pererius drawes this Argument out of the last Verse of the tenth of Genesis, And out of these were the Nations diuided after the Floud: Quo significatur talem diuisionem non fuisse ante diluuium, By which it appeareth (sayth Pererius) that there was no such diuision before the Floud; which hee also seeketh to confirme out of the e∣leuenth of Genesis, because the diuision of tongues was cause of the dispersion of the people. This consequence, quo significatur, &c. seemeth to me very weake: the Text it selfe rather teaching the contrarie: for out of these (sayth MOSES) were the Nations diuided in the earth after the Floud; inferring, that before the Floud the Nations were diuided out of others, though after the Floud out of these only. But whatsoeuer sense may be gathered from this place, yet it can no way bee drawne to the times be∣fore the Floud, or to any Plantation or diuision in that Age: for if there were none else among whom the earth could bee diuided after the Floud, but Noahs Sonnes, wherein doth that necessarie diuision controule the planting of the World before it? And whereas it is alleaged that the confusion of speech was the cause of this disper∣sion, it is true, that it was so for that present; but if Babel had neuer beene built, nor any confusion of Languages at all, yet increase of people and time would haue en∣forced a farther-off and generall Plantation: as Berosus sayes well, that when Man∣kind Lib. 3. were exceedingly multiplyed, Ad comparandas nouas sedes necessitas compellebat, They were driuen by necessitie to seeke new Habitations. For we find (as is before said) that within 300. yeeres after the Floud, there were gathered together into two Armies, such multitudes as the Valley about Babylon could not haue sustained those numbers with their increase for any long time: all Asia the greater and the lesser; all Scythia, Arabia, Palaestina, and Aegypt, with Greece, and the Islands thereof; Mauritania and Lybia being also at that time fully peopled. And if we beleeue Berosus, then not on∣ly those parts of the World, but (within 140. yeeres after the Floud) Spaine, Italie and France were also planted: much more then may wee thinke, that within 1656. yeeres before the Floud, in the time of the chiefe strength of Mankind, they were re∣plenished with people. And certainly seeing all the World was ouerflowne, there were people in all the World which offended. †. VII. A conclusion, resoluing of that which is most likely, touching the Aegyptian An∣tiquities: with somewhat of PHVT (another Sonne of HAM) which peopled Lybia. THerefore, for the Antiquitie of the Aegyptians, as I doe not agree with Merca∣tor, nor iudge with the Vulgar, which giue too much credit to the Aegyptians Antiquities: so I doe not thinke the report of their Antiquities so fabulous, as either Pererius or other men conceiue it. But I rather incline to this, That Aegypt being peopled before the Floud, and 200. or 300. yeeres, more or lesse after Adam, there might remaine vnto the Sonnes of Mizraim some Monuments in Pillers or Altars of stone or metall) of their former Kings or Gouernours: which the Aegyptians ha∣uing added to the list and Roll of their Kings after the Floud, in succeeding time (out of the vanitie of glory or by some corruption in their Priests) something beyond the truth might be inserted. And that the memorie of Antiquitie was in such sort pre∣serued, Berosus affirmeth it of the Chaldaeans, and so doth Epigenes. For they both write that the vse of Letters and the Art of Astronomie was knowne to the Babylo∣nians 3634. yeeres before Alexanders Conquest: and this report Annius findeth to agree and reach to the time of Enosh, who was borne 1034. yeeres before the Floud, and wrote of the Worlds destruction, both by Water and Fire; as also of Christ his comming in iudgement, as Saint Iude hath witnessed. But leauing these Antiquities to other mens iudgements, and euery man to his owne reason, I will conclude this Plantation of Aegypt. It is agreed by all, that it was peopled by Mizraim, and that it tooke the name of Aegypt from Aegyptus the sonne of Belus, as aforesaid. Being diuided into two Regions, that part from Memphis or Nicopolis to the Mediterran Sea, was called the inferiour Aegypt; surnamed also Delta: because the seuerall branches of Nilus breaking asunder from one bodie of the Riuer, gaue it the forme of the Greeke letter Delta, which is the forme of a Triangle. That branch, which ranne toward the North-east and imbraced the Sea, next vnto the Desarts of Sur and , had on it the Citie of Pelusium, where was repulsed: The other branch, which yeelded it selfe to the Salt-water towards the North-west, is beautified by that famous Citie of Alexandria: The vpper part of Aegypt is bounded btweene Memphis and Syene neere Aethiopia, and had the name of Thebaida, of that ancient Citie of Thebes, which (according to Homer ) was adorned with 100. Gates: and therefore called Ciuitas as contum portarum; and by the Greekes Diospolis; in the Scriptures No-hamon, which signifieth multitudes of Inhabitants, exceeding beliefe. Iosephus cals Aegypt Mersin of Mizraim: and Herodotus affirmes that it had Ios. l. 1. Ant. c. 7. Herod. Enterpc. once the name of Thebais. Phut the third sonne of Ham tooke the next portion of Land to his other Miz∣raim, and inhabited Lybia: whose people were anciently called Phutei; (sayth Iose∣pbus ) and Plinie mentioneth the Riuer Fut in Mauritania: which Riuer from the L. 5. c. 1. Mountaine Atlas (knowne to the Inhabitants by the name of Dyris ) hee maketh to bee distant the space of two hundred miles. It also appeareth in the thirtieth Chap∣ter of Ezechiel, that Phut, Chush and Lud were contermini and Associates with the Aegyptians. §. XII. Of the eleuen sonnes of CANAAN, the fourth sonne of HAM. †. I. Of the bounds of the Land of Canaan: with the names of his eleuen sonnes. CANAAN (the fourth sonne of Ham ) possest all that Region called by the Romanes Palaestina; in the Scriptures , Samaria, and Iudaea; in the latter times knowne by the name of the Holy Land and Iurie: the limits whereof are precisely set downe by MOSES, Genesis the tenth, Then the border of the Canaanites was from Zidon as thou goest to Gerar vntill Azzah, and as thou goest vnto Sodome and Gomorha, and Admah, and Ze∣boim, euen vnto Lasha. Now howsoeuer these words of the Hebrew Text ( as thou goest ) be conuerted, Moses meaning was that Gerar was the South bound of Canaan and Zidon the North; Sodome and Gomorha the East, and the other Cities named stood on the Frontiers thereof. For Gerar standeth in a right Line from Gaza in the way of Aegypt, the vttermost Territorie of Canaan Southward: and this was properly the Land of Canaan. Now the sonnes of Canaan which possest this Countrie, and inhabited some part of the borders thereof, were in number eleuen: 1. Zidon. 2. Heth or Chethus. 3. Iebusi or Iebusaeus. 4. Emori or Emoreus, or Amoreus. 5. Girgeshi or Girgeseus. 6. Heui or Chiueus. 7. Arki or Harkeus. 8. Seni or Sinaeus. 9. Araadi or Aruadaeus. 10. Zemari or Samareus, or Tzemareus. 11. Hamathi or Hamatheus, or Chamaethaeus. Of which the most renowned were the Hethites, Gergesites, Amorites, Heuites, Iebusites, and Perizzites: which Perizzites were descended of Zemari or Samareus, or from some of his. †. II. Of the portions of ZIDON and HETH. ZIDON the first borne of Canaan, built the famous Citie of Zidon in Phaenicia, which afterward fell in partition to the Tribe of Asser: for Asser, Zabulon, and Nephtali had a great part of the ancient Phoenicia distributed among them; but the Asserites could neuer obtaine Zidon it selfe. The second sonne of Canaan was Heth or Cethus: of whom came the Hethites, or Hittites, one of those seuen principall Nations (Commanders of Canaan ) appointed by God to bee rooted out; namely, the Gergesites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, and Heuites, and the Iebusites. The Hittites inhabited about Bersabe, and towards Hebron neere the Torrent Besor, and about Gerar, which Moses maketh Gen. 10. v. 19. the vttermost limit of Canaan, hauing the Desart of Pharan to the South: for about Bersabe (otherwise Puteus iuramenti ) foure miles from Gaza dwelt Heth and his Po∣steritie, Gen. 23. as farre to the Northeast as Hebron, and Mamre; and of Ephraim the Hittite Gen. 27. v. 46. did Abraham buy the field of Sarahs buriall. Of which Nation Rebecca bewailed her selfe to Isaac, saying, That shee was wearie of her life for the Daughters of HETH. The Giants Anakim were of these Hittites, a strong and fierce Nation, whose enter∣tainment by the Kings of Israel against them the Syrians greatly feared: as in the 4. Kings e. 7. v. 6 fourth of the Kings; Israel hath hired against vs the Kings of the Hittites. †. III. Of the Iebusites and Amorites. IENVSAEVS, the third sonne of Canaan, of whom came the Iebusites, and whose principall seat was Iebus, (afterward Hierusalem ) were also a valiant and stubborne Nation, and held their Citie and the Countrie neere it, till such time as Dauid by Gods assistance recouered both: yet were not the Iebusites extinguished, but were Tributaries to Salomon. Amoreus was the fourth sonne of Canaan, of whom the Amorites tooke name, who inhabited that Land to the East of Iordan below the Sea of Galilee, hauing Ar∣non and the Mountaines of Galaad on the East, and Iordan on the West: of whom Og (King of Basan ) and Sihon (ouerthrowne by Moses ) were Princes. The had also many other habitations dispersed within the bounds of Canaan: as behind Libanus in the edge of Caelesyria, or Syria Libanica. They had also their being in the Mountaynes of Iuda, and in Idumaea neere the Metropolis thereof, Deut. 1. Num. 13. called Duma. And hereof it came that all the Canaanites were sometime called Amo∣rites: as in Genesis the fifteenth: For the wickednesse of the Amorites is not yet full. And that this was also a powerfull Nation, we finde in the Prophet AMOS: Yet de∣stroyed Amos 2. I the Amorite before them, whose heighth was like the heighth of a Cedar, and he was strong as the Okes. †. IIII. Of the Gergesites, Heuites, and Harkites. THe fift sonne of Canaan was Gergeseus or Gergesion, (otherwise Girgasi ) who in∣habited on the East side of the Lake of Tiberias, or the Sea of Galilee, where Ptolemie sets the Citie Gerasa, which Iosephus calls Gesera in the Territorie of Decapo∣lis. Here it was that CHRIST dispossest the possessed with Deuills; and the Gerge∣sites desired him to depart their Coasts: because their Swine filled with the euill spi∣rits, drowned themselues in the Sea of . Gergeseus also built Berytas (some∣time Geris ) afterward Foelix Iulia, three miles from the Riuer Adonis in Phoenicia: in which the Romanes held a Garrison: and to which Augustus gaue many large priuiledges. the sixth sonne; and Father of the Heuites, inhabited vnder Libanus neere Emath. These , howsoeuer the Caphthorim expelled a good part of them (as in Deuteronomie the second is remembred) yet many of them remayned all the warre of Iosua, and afterward to the time of Salomon. For God was not pleased vtterly to roote out these Nations, but they were sometimes made Tributaries to the Israelites, and at other times serued (in their falling away from the true worship of God) to afflict them: for as it is written, Iudges the third: They remayned to proue ISRAEL by them, whether they would obey the Commandements of God. The seuenth sonne was Araccus or Harki, who betweene the foote of Libanus and the Mediterran Sea, (ouer against Tripolis ) built the Citie of Archas, Arce, or Arca, afterwards Arachis. †. V. Of SINI and ARVADI. SINEVS the eighth sonne, Hierosolymitanus sets at Caparorsa, which Ptolemie findes in Iudaea, not farre from Iebus; to the South thereof, saith Iunius. But it is more probable, that Sineus founded Sin, which S. Hierome calls Sim; Ptolemie, Simyra: Me∣la and Plinte, Simyrus: Brochard, Sycon, (called Synochis ) neere Arca. Pererius thinkes that Sineus inhabited the Desarts of Sinai or thereabout; but hereof there is no o∣ther certaintie then the report of Brochard, who tooke view of all these places, affir∣ming, that Sineus built Synochis, as Zidon built Zidon. There is also another Nation of Cini (written with the letter C. otherwise Kenaei ) who descended of Hobab the sonne of Raguel the Madianite, who assisted the Israelites in their conduction through the Wildernesse of Pharan. But these Cinaei were admitted among the Israelites, and had a portion of Land with the Nephtalims, beside their habitations with the Iudg. 4. Amalekites: against these Cinaei, Balaam prophecied, that they should be destroyed by 19. 33. the Assyrians. The ninth sonne was Aradeus or , who in the Ile of Aradus built the Gul. Tyr. Vitria. Citie Arados: opposite against which Iland on the Maine of Phoenicia, they foun∣ded another Citie of that name, which for opposition was afterwards called Anta∣radus. To this Citie came S. Peter (saith Clement ) and in this Ile preached the Go∣spell, and founded a Church in honor of our Lady: but we finde no such worke of his in the Acts of the Apostles. Both these two were very famous, and places of skilfull Sea-men: whom Ezechiel remembreth in his prophecies against the Tyrians. The Inhabitants of Zidon and were thy Mariners. Cap. 7. v. 8. †. VI. Of ZEMARI. OF Samareus, or Zemari, the tenth sonne, there are diuers opinions. Some thinke that he first inhabited in Coelesyria at Edessa, and founded Samaraim, which in Iosua is placed in the Tribe of Beniamin. There is also Samaraijm (of the same Orthographie) vpon the Mountaynes of Ephraim (saith Beroaldus ) mentioned . in . lib. 4. in the second of Chronicles c. 13. v. 4. which the Latine conuerteth amisse (saith he) by Semeron. The Hierosolymitan Paraphrast makes Samareus (of whom were the Perizzites ) the parent of the Emissani, which Plinie calls the Hemisceni, in Coelesyria; and it may be that it was their first habitation, and that they afterwards inhabited those other places before remembred. But that they founded Samaria, both the He∣brew Orthographie, and this place in the first of Kings (speaking of Omri ) dispro∣ueth: And he bought the Mountayne Samaria or Shemeron of one SHEMER, for two talents 1. Kings 16. 28. of siluer, and built in the Mountayne: and called the name of the Citie which he built, after the name of SHEMER, Lord of the Mountayne Samaria. But of all these places I shall speake more at large in the conquest of the holy Land, by the children of Israel. Of whomsoeuer the Samaritanes were descended, sure I am, that they were euer a per∣fidious Nation, and base: for as long as the state of the Iewes stood vp, they alwayes called themselues Iewes: when it suffered or sanke, they then vtterly denyed to be of that Nation or Familie; for at such time as they were returned from their first cap∣tiuitie, they became a mixt Nation; partly of the Colonies of the Assyrians; and partly of the naturalls. †. VII. Of HAMATHI. THe last of Canaans sonnes was Hamatheus, or (according to the Hebrew ) Hama∣thi, of Hamath: (saith Beroaldus ) of which (the aspiration taken away) the same is pronounced Emath, whereof Hamatheus was parent. Iosephus and S. Hierome confound Emath with Antioch, not that Antioch which standeth on the Riuer Oron∣tes, on the frontier of Comagena, betweene the Mountayne Cassius and the Pro∣uince of Pieria, and Seleucis, of which S. Peter was Bishop, and in which S. Luke and Ignatius were borne: but Antioch, surnamed Epiphania, as Beroaldus supposeth, which standeth betweene Apamea and Emesa in Cassiotis. Yet, indeede, Emath can∣not be taken for either: for both that Antioch vpon Orontes, and that which neigh∣boureth Emesa, are farther off seated from Canaan, then euer any of those Nations straggled. And whereas S. Hierome setteth Emath, which he confoundeth with E∣piphania, in the Tribe of Nephtali; it is manifest, that Epiphania, which standeth to the North of Emesa, hath all the Prouince of Laodicea, betweene it and any part of the Land diuided. And if Libanon it selfe were not shared among the Tribes, then could not Epiphania belong vnto them: for both the Prouinces Laodicea and Libani∣ca, are betweene Epiphania and any part of the holy Land: and therefore Emath so taken could not be a part of Nephtali, as in the thirteenth of Iosua is directly proued. For Iosua counting the lands that remayned vnpossest, reckoneth all Mount Libanon towards the Sunne-rising, from Baalgad vnder mount Hermon, vntill we come to Ha∣math. And this reason (among others) is vsed, that Emath was not in Nephtalim, or any way belonging to the children of Israel: because Dauid accepted the presents of 2. Sam 8. 9. Tohu King of Emath, and (therewithall) conditions of peace: which he would not haue done, if that Territorie had euer belonged to the children of Israel, but would haue recouered it without composition, and by strong hand, as he did the rest. But this Argument (as I take it) hath no great waight. For if the promise which God made, be considered, as it is written in Deuteronomie, then might Emath be compre∣hended, Cap. 11. v. 24. though seated altogether without the bounds of the Land promised, ac∣cording to the description of Moses and Iosua: for Emath is indeede situate on the o∣ther side of the Mountayne of Hermon, which ioyneth to Libanus: and is otherwise called Iturea. But whereas Hamath is named in Iosua the 19. v. 35. and written in the Latine conuersion Emath, therein (saith Beroaldus ) was S. Hierome mistaken. Emath or Iturea is that ouer the Mountaynes, and the Citie in Nephtalim should be written Hamath: and so the Septuagint (vnderstanding the difference) write it Ammath and not Emath, the same which indeede belonged to the Nephtalims, seated on the South side of Libanus, to the East of Assedim: which Citie S. Hierome writes Emath; Iose∣phus, Hamath; others, Emathin, or Amatheos, and the people Amathein; of which (as I take it) Rabsakeh vaunteth in the second of KINGS: Where is the god of Hamath? Cap. 18. & 19. §. XIII. Of the sonnes of CHVSH ( excepting NIMROD) of whom hereafter. The sonnes of Chush were, Seba, Hauila, Sabta, Raama, And the sonnes of Raama were, Sheba, and Dedan. Sabteca, Nimrod. †. I. That the most of the Sonnes of CHVSH were seated in Arabia the Happy: and of the Sabaeans that robbed IOB: and of the Queene that came to SALOMON. SEBA or Saba was the eldest sonne of Chush, the eldest sonne of Ham, to make a difference betweene Him and his Nephew Sheba, the sonne of his brother Raama, or Regma (or Ragma after Montanus ) his name is written with a single (S) Samech, and Sheba the sonne of Regma with an (S) asperate, which is the Hebrew Schin. Seba the eldest sonne of Chush, Regma his brother, and Sheba the sonne of Regma possest-both the shores of Arabia Foelix. Saba tooke that part toward the Red Sea, as neerest his Father Chush, and the Land of the Chusites: Regma and Sheba the East coast of the same Ara∣bia, which looketh into the Gulfe of Persia; of which PLINIE: Sabaei Arabum populi propter thura clarissimi ad vtra{que} maria porrect is gentibus habitant; The Sabaeans people of Arabia, famous for their Frankincense, extending their Nations, dwell along both the Seas, (to wit) the Persian, and the Arabian, or Red Sea. This Countrie was afterwards cal∣led Arabia, à populi mixtione, saith Postellus. To this agreeth Ptolemie, who setteth the Citie of Saba towards the Arabian or Red Sea, and the Citie Rhegama towards the Persian, with whom also we may leaue Sabta: for so much Montanus gathereth out of Ptolemie, because he remembreth a Nation (called Stabaei ) neere the Persian Sea; and Massabathae which descended of them. But Montanus hath sent Regma, or (as he calls him Rahma ) into Carmania, for which I see no reason. Iosephus, who on∣ly attended his owne fancies, hath banished Saba or Seba to the border of Aethiopia. But Beroaldus thinkes it strange, that the Sabaei, which stole away Iobs Cattle, should runne through all Egypt, and all Arabia Petraea, and finde out Iob in Traconitis, be∣tweene Palaestina and Coelesyria 1200. miles off. Now, as this coniecture was more then ridiculous, so doe I thinke, that neither the Sabaei on the Red Sea, nor those to∣ward the Persian Sea, could by any meanes execute the stealth vpon Iob, which soe∣uer Beroaldus shall take for neerest. But these were the Sabaei of Arabia the Desart, where Guilandinus Melchior affirmeth out of his owne experience, that the Cittie Sa∣ba is seated: the same which Ptolomie calls Saue, now Semiscasac: and from this Saba in Arabia the Desart, came those Magi or Wisemen which worshipped Christ, saith Melchior, whose wordes are these: The Magi came neither out of Mesopotamia (as Chrysostome, Hierome, and Ambrose supposed) nor out of Arabia the Happie, as many wise men doe beleeue, but out of Saba in Arabia the Desart: which Citie when my selfe was there, was (as I iudged it) called Semiscasac. And to approue this opinion of Guilandinus, it appeareth that these Shabaei were neighbours to Iob, and lay fit to inuade and rob him. For both the other Nations (aswell those on the Persian Sea, as those on the Red Sea) are so disioyned with large Desarts, as there is no possibilitie for strangers to passe them, especially with any numbers of Cattle, both in respect of the moun∣taines, of the sands, and of the extreme want of water in those parts: Vbi nec homines, nec bestiae videntur, nec aues, nec arbores, nec germen aliquod, sed non nisimontes saxosi, altissimi, asperrimi; Where there are found neither men, nor beasts, no not so much as birds, or trees, nor any pasture or grasse, but onely sharpe, and high stonie, and craggie mountaines. Beroaldus and Pererius conceiue, that the Queene of Saba which came to visite Salo∣mon, was of the Sabaei on the East side of Arabia Foelix; but the contrarie seemeth more probable, and that shee was Queene of Saba towardes the Red Sea: for Salomon at that time commanding all that part of Arabia Petraea, twixt Idumaea and the Red Sea, as farre downe as Midian or Madian, and Ezion Gaber: and this Queene of Saba which inhabited the West part of Arabia Foelix, being his neighbour, might without any farre trauaile enter his Territories, free from all danger of surprise by any other Prince or Nation. But to auoid tediousnesse, it is manifest that Seba or Saba, Sabta, Raama, or Regma, with his Sonnes Sheba and Dedan, and Sabteca, were all the possessors of Arabia the Happie, and the Desart: onely Hauilah and Nimrod dwelt together on the East side Chush, who held Arabia Petraea. Now for Sabta, there is found of his name the Cittie of Sabbatha or Sabota in the same Arabia: of which both Plinie and Ptolomie; Plin. l. 12. c. . who withall nameth Sabotale, within the walls whereof there were sometimes found . tab. 6. . sixtie Temples. Ezechiel ioyneth the Father and the Sonne together, The Mer∣chants Ezech. 27. 22. of Sheba and Raama were thy Merchants. And that they were the Easterne A∣rabians their merchandise witnesseth, formerly repeated in the Chapter of Paradise. For Iosephus his fancies, that Saba was the parent of the Aethiopians about Meroe, and Sabta of the Aethiopians Astabari, they bee not worthie any farther answere then hath already beene giuen: especially seeing these Citties preseruing the memorie of the names of Saba, and of Sabta in Arabia were yet remaining in Ptolomtes time, though in some letters changed. As also in the coastes adioyning, the names of other of the brethren of the familie of Cush, with little alterations are preserued. In Arabia the Desart is found the Cittie Saba or Saue, (now Semiscasac ) with the Cittie of Rhegana for Rhegma; and the Nation by Ptolomie himselfe called Raabeni of Raamah. In A∣rabia the Happie is found the Cittie of Rhegama, and Rabana; which also keepeth the sound of Rhegma, the Cittie of Saptha or Saptah, not far from the East coast of Arabia; as also the Metropolis and chiefe Cittie in the body of the South part of Arabia, called without difference or alteration Sabatha; and to the West of Sabatha towards the Red Sea the great Cittie of Saba; and the Nation adioyning, Sabaei: & to the South thereof againe toward the streight entrance of the Red Sea, the Region of Sabe. To all these his Brothers and Nephewes which were seated on the East side of Arabia, Hauilah by the passage of Tigris was a neighbour, to whom he might passe by Boate euen vnto Rhegma the Citie of Raama, or Rhegma, set neere the Riuer of Lar towards the mouth of the Persian Sea, which stood in Ptolemies time. †. II. IOSEPHVS his opinion of DEDAN, one of the issue of CHVSH to haue beene seated in the West Aethiopia, disproued out of EZECH: and HIEREMIE. ANd whereas Iosephus (whom in this S. Hierome followeth, as not curious here∣in) sent Dedan the sonne of Raamah into West Aethiopia, it is strange that Eze∣thiel should couple Sheba, Raamah, and Dedan together; Dedan in the 15. Verse, and Sheba, and Raamah in the 22. Verses to be the Merchants of Tyre, if Dedan had dwelt in West Aethiopia, which is distant from Raamah and Sheba (the habitation of his fa∣ther and brother) aboue 4000. miles. Besides which the merchandise that the Deda∣nites brought to Tyre doth not make them naked Black-mores. For they of Dedan (saith Ezechiel ) were thy Merchants in precious clothes for thy Charriots; and these Westerne Aethiopians neuer saw cloth, till the Portugals seeking those Coasts traded with them: the merchandise of the Countrie being Hides, Elephants teeth, some Gold and Amber, Ciuet Cats, and Rice, but nothing at all of any manufacture: and all these they exchanged for linnen, or yron chiefly. But in those dayes the West part of Africa within the body of the land was known onely by imagination: and, being vnder the burnt Zone was held vninhabitable. And therefore that the Negros of the West Aethiopia, which inhabite about Serra Liona, or Niger, could either passe by Sea or Land to Tyre in the bottome of the Me∣diterran Sea, were a strange, or rather a foolish fancie. Now to put it out of dispute that Dedan also dwelt by the rest of the children of Chush, which seates they held by that name in the time of Hieremie the Prophet, let vs heare Hieremie his owne words: Fly, yee Inhabitants of Dedan, for I haue brought the destruction of ESAV vpon him. Hereby it appeareth that Dedan was a Neighbour to the Idumaeans: and Idumaea is a Prouince of Arabia Petraea: and Dedan which dwelt on the North part of Arabia Foelix, ioyned in that part to Petraea, the seat of his Grand-father Chush; which neigh∣bourhood and fellowship of Dedan and the Idumaeans, is also confirmed by Ezechiel: Ezech. cap. 15. vers. 15. I will stretch outmine hand vpon Edom, and destroy Man and Beast out of it, and I will make it desolate from Teman: and they of Dedan shall sall by the sword. §. XIIII. Of the issue of MIZRAIM: and of the place of HIEREMIE, Chap. 9. Vers. 7. AFter Chush it followeth to speake of Mizraims sonnes, whose names (saith Saint Augustine ) were plurall, to signifie the Nations, which The termina∣tion in the Hebrew, is commonly a signe of the plurall num∣ber, as aim of the dual. came of them. Ludim, the eldest sonne of Mizraim, was the father of the Lybians in Africa: and the rest of his brothers dispersed themselues in∣to all Regions adioyning. Among the sonnes of Shem there is also Lud; but he is difference from Lud the sonne of Mizraim by the singular number: the sonne of Shem being written Lud, the sonne of Mizraim, Ludim: and yet these Names and Nations are often confounded, notwithstanding the apparent difference both of Names and Nations. For that Ludim the sonne of Mizraim was the parent of the Lybians in Africa, and that he was seated not farre from Mizraim his father, ap∣peareth by the Prophet Hieremie, who ioyneth them in this sort together: Come vp ye Cap. 46. vers. 9. Horses, and rage ye Charriots, and let the valiant men come forth, the Black-moores, and the Lybians which beare the shield: for those Nations assisted the Aegyptians being of one parent descended. And in Ezechiel, Phut and Lud are ioyned together. Aethio∣pia (or Chush ) saith Ezechiel c. 30. v. 3. And PHVT and LVD, and all the common people, and the men of the Land that are in league shall fall with them by the sword: which is as much to say, as the sonnes of Chush; (which were the Chusites ) the sonnes of Mizraim, which were the Aegyptians ) and the Lybians (descended of his sonne Lud ) with other the inhabitants of Aegypt and Africa shall fall together. Hierosoly∣mitanus findes also in Africa a Nation of the Lydians. And I beleeue it: because Hiere∣mie ioyneth the Lybians and Lydians together in the place before remembred. But Lybia in Africa is by the Hebrewes called Ludim (saith Arias Montanus ) though 2. Chron. 12. 3. they seeme to be called Lubim or Lubaei, a name somewhat neerer the word Lybies, and by which it may seeme that the truer writing is, not Libyes, but Ly∣bies. Neither is it here to be omitted, that Pintus (vpon the thirtieth of Ezechiel ) vnderstandeth that which is spoken in the third Verse of Lud, not to be meant of the Libyans at all: for he will haue this threatning to be meant against the people of Ly∣di, a Citie (saith he) betweene Aegypt and Palaestina, which opinion I could not mis∣like if the Citie of Lyda were so seated. But Lyda (which should be written Lydda with a double D, and is the same Citie which was afterward Diospolis, in which S. Peter cured Aeneas of the palsey) standeth neere the Torrent , not farre from Ioppe the Port of Hierusalem. Yet it is not impossible but that this Citie might haue Lud for the Founder. For there are many Cities of one name founded in all the Regions of the World, and farre asunder; as after the names of Alexander, Seleucus, and Antiochus, many Cities called Alexandria, Seleucia, and Antiochia, so of diuers others. S. Hierome maketh Lehabim to be the Father of Libya, who was the third sonne of Mizraim: and so doth Postellus; and either opinion may be true. The rest of Mizraims sonnes haue no proper Countries giuen them in the Scrip∣tures, sauing and Caphtorim, of whom came the Philistims, whom the Scrip∣tures call Peleset: These inhabited Cassiotis, a Region lying in the entrance of Aegypt from Palaestina, in which the Lake Sirbonis, and the Mountayne Cassius are found: not farre from whence Pompey was buried. Caphtorim seated neere Cosluhim in that Tract of Aegypt called Sethroitis, not farre from Pelusium. Strabo calls it Sethroitis; Stephanus and Plinie, Sethroites, of the Citie Sethron: which Ortelius takes to be the same which calls Hercules parua. Of the Casluhim and Caphtorim came the Philistims, which are called by the Septuagint Allophyli (which is) Alienigenae, Strangers, or of a strange kindred. These Philistims inhabited the South part of the holy Land towards Aegypt, of whom Palaestina tooke name. For the Hebrewes (saith Isidore ) doe not vse the letter ( P ) but in stead of it ( ph. ) Their principall Cities were Gaza, Ascalon, Azotus, Geth, and Accaron: and the people of them called Gasaei, Ascalonitae, Azotij, Gethaei, and Accaronitae. Isi∣dore affirmes, that Ascalon was first called Philistim: and of that Citie the Countrie adioyning. But where Isidore had it, I know not. The first knowne King of the Philistims was that Abimelech, who had a liking to Abrahams wife; with whom Abraham made a couenant and league. This Abime∣lech dwelt indeede at this time in Gerar; but it is written that he was also King of the Philistims, in these wordes: Wherefore ISAAC went to ABIMELECH King of the Basil vpon the 33. Psalme. Hierome vpon the 29. of E∣zechiel. Philistims vnto Gerar. Now in regard that this or some ancienter Abimelech gouerned the commonwealth greatly to his glorie, the rest of his successors called themselues by the same name. The Philistims commanded that Tract of land vpon the Mediter∣ran Sea to the Northward, from the Castle of Pilgrims (otherwise Caesarea Palaestinae, or Stratons Towre) which was the South-border of Phoenicia, to Gasa, or to the Ri∣uer of Aegypt. The Anakims or strong Gyants were of these Philistims: and Goliah was of Geth one of the fiue Cities aboue named. They had sometimes fiue Kings, saith Lyranus. They mastered the Israelites at seuerall times aboue 150. yeeres, and kept them Tributaries, till they were weakened by Sampson and Samuel, but in the end this yoke was taken off by Dauid, and laid on themselues. It is obiected, that because these Cities and the Countries adioyning, were held by the sonnes of Mizraim, therefore did the Israelites dispossesse the sonnes of Miz∣raim, and not of Canaan, by forcing those places. To this saith Pererius, that although the Palaestines or Philistims held it in the time of Iosua, yet at the time of the promise it was possest by the Canaanites; as in the se∣cond of Deuteronomie. The Heuites dwelt in the Villages vnto Gaza. And what maruaile, if (the Canaanites being the greater part) the denomination were from them? For that the Philistims were of Caphtor, and so of Mizraim and not of Canaan, besides Moses the Prophet Hieremie witnesseth: The Lord will destroy the Philistims, Hierem. 47. 4. the remnant of the issue of Caphtor: and in like manner in the ninth of Amos, the Phi∣listims are said to be the reliques of Caphtorim; Haue not I brought vp ISRAEL out Amos c. 9. v. 7. of the Land of Aegypt, and the Philistims from Caphtor, and ARAM from Kir? so I reade this place with diuers of the learned. For whereas the Vulgar hath, & Palae∣stinos de Cappadocia, & Syros de Cyrene, this conuersion Beroaldus condemneth; where Caphtor is taken for Cappadocia, and Cyrene for Kir. For Cyrene is a Citie di∣rectly West from Aegypt, betweene Ptolemais or Barce and Apollonia: but Kir in A∣sia vnder the Assyrians: hath it Kir, and not Cyrene: and so hath the Geneua. But Pererius cals Caphtorim Cappadocia, according to the Vulgar translation, to which he is bound: and yet it is not altogether improbable if he meane Cappadocia in Palae∣stina and not that Cappadocia by the Sea Pontus in the North of Asia the lesse. For Of which see in the second Booke, Chap. 7 §. 3. †. 5. whether they inhabited , or Cappadocia of Palaestina, it is not certainely knowne. And sure in this manner he may expound Cappadocia to be ambiguous, as well as he doth Cyrene: taking it here not for Cyrene in Africa, but for a place in Media. For it is written in the second of Kings, that Teglatphalasser King of the As∣syrians Cap. 16. v. 9. carryed away the Inhabitants of Damascus into Kir: and so Iosephus seemes to vnderstand this Kir, for Cyrene in Media, calling this Cyrene, Media superior: for it was the manner and policie of the Assyrians to transplant the people conquered by them, as they did the Samarians or Israelites, and other Nations. And hereof it came that Kir was called Syro-Media: because the Syrians by the Assyrians were therein captiued. §. XV. Of the issue of SEM. †. I. Of ELAM, ASSVR, ARPHAXAD, and LVD. It remayneth lastly to speake of the Sonnes of Sem, who were these: 1. Alam, or Elam, 2. Ashur, 3. Arphaxad, 4. Lud, and 5. Aram. THe posteritie of Sem, Moses recounteth after the rest: because from them he proceedeth in order with the Genealogie and Storie of the Hebrewes: For of Sem was Abraham descended. Of these fiue sonnes the Scriptures remember the length of the life of Arphaxad only, and only the children of him and Aram, the rest are barely spoken of by rehearsal of their names, sauing that it may be gathered, that Assur (who was supposed to found Niniueh ) was also said to be the Father of the Assyrians, whose issues, and the issues of Cham, instantly contended for the Em∣pire of the East: which sometimes the Assyrians, sometimes the Babylonians obtay∣ned, according to the vertue of their Princes. This is the common opinion, which also teacheth vs, that all the East parts of the World were peopled by Assur, Elam, and (sauing India ) which I beleeue Noah himselfe first inhabited: and to whom Ophir and Hauilah the sonnes of Ioctan afterward repayred. Hij filij SEM ab Euphrate partem Asiae vs{que}, ad Oceanum Indicum tenuerunt; These sonnes of SEM (saith S. HIEROME) held all those Regions from Euphrates to the Indian Ocean. Of Elam came the Elamites, remembred Acts 2. vers. 9. and the Princes of Persia; Ios. Ant. l. 1. c. 7. which name then began to be out of vse and lost, when the Persians became Masters of Babylonia: the East Monarchie being established in them. Some prophane Wri∣ters distinguish Elam from Persia, and make the Elamites a people apart. But susa (which the Scriptures call Susan) in Elam was the Kings seate of Persia (witnesse DANIEL:) And I saw (saith he) in a vision, and when I saw it, I was in the Palace of Su∣san, Cap. 8. vers. 2. which is in the Prouince of Elam. This Citie is embraced by the Riuer Eulaeus (ac∣cording to Ptolemie ) in Daniel, Vlai: and seated in the border of Susiana. . . . 5. Dan. 8. 2. Ashur (as most Historians beleeue) the second sonne of Sem, was Father of the Assyrians, who disdayning the pride of Nimrod, parted from Babel, and built Niniue, of equall beautie and magnitude with Babylon, or exceeding it. But we shall in due place disproue that opinion. Euery mans hand hath beene in this Storie, and there∣fore I shall not neede herein to speake much: for the Assyrians so often inuaded and spoyled the Israelites, destroyed their Cities, and led them Captiues, as both in Diuine and Humane letters there is large and often mention of this Nation. But howsoeuer Herodotus and D Siculus extend this Empire, and honor this Na∣tion with ample Dominion; yet was not the state of the Assyrians of any such power, after such time as Sardanapalus lost the Empire. For Senacherib who was one of the powerfullest Princes among them, had yet the Mountayne Tanrus for the vtmost of his Dominion toward the North-east, and Syria bounded him toward the West, notwithstanding those vaunts of Senacherib in Esay the 37. Haue the gods of the Na∣tions Vers. 11. deliuered them whom my Fathers haue destroyed? as GOZAN, and HARAN, and RESEPH, and the Children of EDEN which were at Telassar. Where is the King of Ha∣math, and the King of Arphad, and the King of the Citie Sepharuaim, Hena and Iuah? All these were indeede but pettie Kings of Cities, and small Countries; as Haran in Mesopotamia: Reseph in Palmyrena: Hamath or Emath in Ituraea, vnder Libanus: the Ile of Eden: Sepher, and others of this sort. Yea, Nabuchodonosor, who was most powerfull, before the conquest of Aegypt had but Chaldaea, Mesopotamia, and Syria, with Palaestina and Phoenicia parts thereof. But in this question of Assur, I will speake my opinion freely when I come to Nimrod, whose plantation I haue omitted among the rest of the Chusites, because he established the first Empire: from whom the most memorable storie of the World taketh beginning. Of Arphaxad came the Chaldaeans, saith S. Hierome, and Iosephus, but it must be those Chaldaeans about Vr: for the sonnes of Cham possest the rest. It is true that he was the Father of the Hebrewes: for Arphaxad begat Shela; and Shela, Heber; of whom hereafter. And that Lud, the fourth Sonne of Shem, gaue name to the Lydians in Asia the lesse, is the common opinion, taken from Iosephus and S. Hierome; but I see not by what reason he was moued to straggle thither from his friends. †. II. Of ARAM, and his Sonnes. ARAM the fift and last Sonne of Shem was the parent of the Syrians: of which Damascus was head. Their name was changed from Aram or Aramites by Sy∣rus 7. v. 8. (sayth Eusebius out of Iosephus ) which Syrus liued before Moses was borne; the Euscb. p. 10. 6. same which others call the sonne of Apollo. Mesopotamia also being but a Prouince of Syria had the name of Aram , which is as much to say, as Syria duorum fluuiorum, Syria compassed with two Riuers: (to wit) Tigris and Euphrates. The Scrip∣tures call it Mesopotamia, Syria, and Padan Aram: and the Greekes Mesopotamia simply. Arise and get thee to Padan Aram (sayth Isaac to Iacob) to the house of BETHVEL Gen. 28. 2. See Gen. 25. . Also Deut. 23. 4. Iudg. 3. Paral. 1. 19. Psal. 59. Strabo. l. 1. thy mothers father, and thence take thee a wise. Strabo also remembreth it by the ancient name of Aram or Aramea, as these his owne words conuerted witnesse: Quos nos Sy∣ros vocamus, ipsi Syri Aramenios & Arameos vocant; Those which we call Syrians (sayth hee) themselues call Aramenians and Arameans. Against this opinion, that Aram the sonne of Sem was the Father and Denomina∣tor of the Syrians in generall; (and not only of those in Syria, Inter-amnis, which is Mesopotamia ) some reade, Genes. 22. 21. Kemuel, the Father of the Syrians: where o∣ther out of the originall read Kemuel, the sonne of Aram. Neither is it any inconue∣nience for vs to vnderstand the word (Aram) here, not for the Nation, but for the name of some one of note; the rather, because in the Historie of Abraham and Isaac (which was in time long before Kemuels Posteritie could bee famous) wee find Mesopotamia called Aram; and that with an addition: sometimes with Naharaijm, and sometimes of Padan, to distinguish it from another Aram, which (as it seemes) then also was called Aram. For whereas Iunius thinkes in his note vpon Genes. 25. 20. that Padan Aram ought to bee restrained to some part of Mesopotamia, (to wit) to that part which Ptolomie cals Ancobaritis (so called from the Riuer Chaboras, which diuiding it runneth into Euphrates) the promiscuous vse of Padan Aram, and Aram Naharaijm (which latter appellation qhestionlesse comprehends the whole Mesopo∣tamia) may seeme to refute this opinion: especially seeing the signification of this appellation agreeth with the whole Region. For it signifieth as much as the yoke of Syria, which name agrees with this Region: because the two Riuers, (as it were) yoked together goe along it. The Reliques of the name Padan appeare in the name of two Cities in Ptolomie, called Aphadana: (as Iunius hath well noted) the one vpon Chaboras, the other vpon Euphrates. The Sonnes of Aram were, Vz or Hus, Hul, Gether, and Mesch or Mes. Vz or Hus inhabited about Damascus, and built that Citie, saith Iosephus and Saint Hierome. But Tostatus mistaking this opinion, both in them and in Lyra, who also Hieron. in trad. Hebraic. followeth Iosephus, affirmeth that Abrahams Steward Eliezer was the Founder there∣of; though it were likely that Hus the eldest sonne of Aram dwelt neere vnto his fa∣ther, who inhabited the bodie of Syria. For Hus was a Region of the same, adioyning to Arabia the Desart, and to Batanea or Traconitis: whereof the Prophet Hieremie: Reioyce and be glad O Daughter of Edom that dwellest in the Land of Hus. Hus therefore . . cap. 4. ver. 21. is seated beyond Iordan, in the East Region of Traconitis, adioyning to Basan, hauing Batanea Gaulonitis, and the Mountaine Seir to the East, Edrai to the South, Damascus North, and Iordan West: hauing in it many Cities and people, as may also bee ga∣thered out of HIEREMY: And all sorts of people: and all the Kings of the Land of Hus. C. 25. v. 20. In this Region dwelt Iob, descended of Hus, the sonne of Nahor, the brother of A∣braham (sayth Saint Hierome ) and married Dina the Daughter of Iacob, sayth Philo. Hul the second sonne of Aram, Saint Hierome makes the Father of the Armenians: and Gether the third sonne, parent to the Arcananians or Carians: which opinion, (because I find not where to set him) I doe not disprooue, though I see no reason why Gether should leaue the fellowship of his owne brethren, and dwell among Strangers in Asia the lesse. Iunius giues Hul (whom hee writes Chul) the Desart of Palmyrena, as farre as Euphrates, where Ptolomie setteth the Citie of Gindareni. Gether (sayth Iosephus ) founded the Bactrians: but Iosephus gaue all Noahs children feathers, to carrie them farre away in all haste. For mine owne opinion I alwayes keepe the rule of Neighbour-hood, and thinke with Iunius: (to wit) That Gether seated himselfe neere his brothers, in the bodie of Syria, and in the Prouince of Cas∣siotis, and Seleucis, where Ptolomie placeth Gindarus, and the Nation by Plinie called Gindareni. Iunius also giueth to Mes or Mesch the North part of Syria, betweene Cilicia and Mesopotamia, neere the Mountaine Masius. The certaintie of those Plantations can no otherwise be knowne then by this probabilitie, that Aram the father (of whom that great Region tooke name) planted his sonnes in the same Land about him: for hee wanted no scope of Territorie for himselfe and them; neyther then when the World was newly planted, nor in many hundred yeeres after: and therefore there is no reason to cast them in the Desart parts of the World, so farre asunder. And as necessitie and policie held them together for a while: so Ambition (which began to∣gether with Angels and Men) inhabiting the hearts of their children, set them a∣sunder. For although these sonnes of Aram, and the sonnes of the rest of Noahs chil∣dren, kept themselues within the bounds of some one large Kingdome; yet therein euery one also sought a Prouince apart, and to themselues; giuing to the Cities there∣in built their owne names, thereby to leaue their memorie to their Posteritie: the vse of Letters being then rare, and knowne to few. In this sort did the pride of the Spaniards in America cast them into so many Pro∣uinces: euery one emulating and disdayning the greatnesse of other, as they are thereby to this day subiect to inuasion, expulsion, and destruction: so as ( Noua Hi∣spania and Peru excepted, because those Countries are vnaccessable to Strangers) an easie force will cast them out of all the rest. Mes the fourth sonne is made the parent of the Moeonians: of whom something hath beene spoken alreadie. Arphaxad the third sonne of Shem, begat Shelah, and Chap. 8. §. 7. Heber. Heber had two sonnes, Phaleg and Ioctan: and in Phalegs time was the Earth diuided. †. III. Of the diuision of the Earth in the time of PHALEG, one of the sonnes of HEBER, of the issue of SEM. THE many people which at the diuision (at Phaleghs birth) were then liuing, and the through Plantation of all the East part of the World (at his death) hath made a doubt, whether the Earth were diuided at eyther. The Hebrewes (sayth Pererius out of Sedar Holam, one of their Chronicles) affirme that this partition hap∣pened at the death of Phaleg: and Phaleg was borne in the yeere after the Floud 101. and liued in all 239. yeeres, which numbers added makes 340. And therefore was it so many yeeres after the Floud, ere the children of Noah seuered themselues. But to this opinion of the Hebrewes, and the doubt they make how in so few yeeres as 101. (the time of Phalegs birth) so many people could bee increased, giues this answere, that if 70 persons of the Family of Iacob increased to 600000. fighting men in 215. yeeres, (besides women, children, and impotent persons) how much more is it likely, that so soone after the Floud the children of Noah might in a shor∣ter time bring forth many multitudes, hauing receiued the blessing of God, Increase and multiply, and fill the Earth? What strength this answere hath, let others iudge: for the children of Israel were 70. and had 215. yeeres time: and the sonnes of Noah were but three, and had but 101. yeeres of time, to the birth of Phalegh. Others conceiue that Phalegh tooke that name after the diuision, in memorie thereof: as Iosephus and Saint Augustine, who reason in this manner. If the diuision Ioseph. l. 1. Ant. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 16. c. 11. were at Phaleghs death (which happened in the yeere, which is commonly held to be the 48. of Abraham, but was by more likely computation 12. yeeres before his birth) then was the diuision 38. yeeres after Ninus, who gouerned 52. yeeres: in the 43. yeere of whose raigne Abraham was borne. But when Ninus began to rule the Assyrians, 80 Perer. in Gen. li. 15. c. 10. yeeres before this diuision (as this diuision is placed by the Hebrewes, Hiercme and Chrysostome ) then was the earth so peopled in all the East and Northerne parts, as greater numbers haue not beene found at any time since. For Ninus associating to himselfe Ariaeus King of Arabia, a people who at that time (sayth DIOD. SICVLVS) plurimum opibus at{que} armis praestabant, Exceeded both in riches and bodies of men, sub∣dued many Cities in Armenia; receiued Barzanis into grace; then inuaded Media, and crucified Pharnus the King thereof, with his Wife and seuen Children; vanqui∣shed all those Regions betweene Nilus and Tanais, the Aegyptians, Phoenicians, the Kingdomes of Syria, and all the Nations of Persia, to the Hyrcanian Sea. For the numbers which followed Ninus (alreadie remembred out of Ctesias ) against Zoro∣after and others: and Zoroaster on the other side, who made resistance with foure hundred thousand, prooue it sufficiently, that if the diuision had not happened be∣fore the death of Phaleg, there had needed no diuision at that time at all. For some of them were so ill satisfied with their partitions, as they sought to be Masters of all; and greater Armies were there neuer gathered then by Ninus and Semiramis: wherefore in this opinion there is little appearance of the truth. But for that conceit that if the diuision had beene made at the birth of Phaleg, there were not then sufficient numbers borne to fill the earth: It was neuer meant that the earth could bee filled euery where at the instant, but by times and degrees: And surely whatsoeuer mens opinions haue beene herein, yet it is certaine, that the diuision of tongues and of men must goe neere together with the ceasing of the worke at Babel: and that the enterprize of Babel was left off instantly vpon the confu∣sion of Languages, where followed the execution of the diuision; and so neyther at the birth nor death of Phaleg: for Phaleg was borne in the yeere 101. after the Floud, which was the yeere that Nimrod came into Shinaar, or 10. yeeres after hee arriued, sayth Berosus. Now if it bee obiected that Phaleg (the Etymologie of whose name signifieth di∣uision) must haue liued without a name, except the name had beene giuen him at the time of this confusion and partition: to this obiection it may be answered, That the change of names vpon diuers accidents is not rare in the Scriptures: for Iacob was called Israel after he had wrestled with the Angell; Abraham was first Abram; and E∣dom Esau; and that Phaleg being a principall man in this diuision had his first name vpon this accident changed, it is most probable. And lastly, whereas the Hebrewes, Saint Hierome and Chrysostome account Heber a great Prophet, if that by giuing his sonne the name of Phaleg, hee foretold the diui∣sion which followed: to this I say, I doe not find that Heber deserued any such ho∣nour, if he had thereupon so called his sonne: for diuision and dispersion followeth increase of people of necessitie; and this Prophesie (if any such had beene) might also haue reference to the diuision, which afterwards fell among the Hebrewes them∣selues. But if we giue a reasonable time to the building of the Towre and Citie of Babel, by which time many people (by reason and by demonstratiue proofe) might bee in∣creased: and that vpon the fall thereof the confusion and diuision followed (where∣vpon Phaleg tooke name) then in this opinion there is nothing either curious or monstrous. †. IIII. Of the sonnes of IOCTAN, the other sonne of HEBER. The sonnes of Ioctan were 1. Elmodad. 2. Saleph, or Selep, or Sheleph. 3. Asamath, or Chatzar. 4. Iare, or Iarahh, or Ierath. 5. Hadoram. 6. Vzal, or Vxal. 7. Dicklach, or Dicla. 8. Obal, or Ebal, or Hobal. 9. Abimael. 10. Sheba, or Seba. 11. Ophir, or Opir. 12. Hauila, or Chauila, and 13. Iobab. ALL those sonnes of Ioctan (according to Saint Hierome) dwelled in the East parts of the World, or India, euen from the Riuer Cophe or Choas, which is one of the branches or heads of Indus. But the certaine places of those thirteene Sonnes cannot bee gathered out of the Scriptures, the words of Moses being generall. And their dwelling was from Mesha Gen. c. 10. v. 30. as thou goest vnto Sephar a Mount in the East. Of all these thirteene Sonnes, there were only three memorable, (to wit) Sheba, Ophir, and Hauilah. Concerning whose names, to auoide confusion it is to bee obserued, that among the Sonnes of Chush, two of them had also the names of Seba and Hauilah. Abraham had also a third Saba or Sheba, his grand-child by his wife Ketura. But Seba the sonne of Chush, and Sheba the sonne of Rhegma his Nephew, wee haue left in Arabia Foelix: and Hauilah the sonne of Chush vpon Tigris. Saba the grand-childe of Abraham was (as some haue thought (the Father of the Sabaeans in Persia: of which Nations Dionysius de Orbis si∣tu, maketh mention. Primùm Sabaei; post hos sunt Passagardae; prope verò hos sunt Tasci, Gen. 25. v. 6. The first are Sabaeans: after these be Passagardae; and neere these the Tasci. And whereas it is written: But vnto the Sonnes of the Concubines which ABRAHAM had, ABRAHAM gaue gifts, and sent them away from ISAAC his sonne (while hee yet lined) Eastward to the East-Countrey: hereupon it is supposed, that this Saba the sonne of Abraham wan∣dered into Persia: for Persia was accounted the furthermost East-Countrey in respect of Iudaea; which also Ouid setteth vnder the Sun-rising. Yet seeing the rest of Abra∣hams Metam. lib. 1. sonnes seated themselues on the borders of Iudaea, I rather choose to leaue Saba the sonne of Abraham in Arabia the Desart, where Ptolomie setteth a Citie of that name. But Saba the sonne of Ioctan, the sonne of Heber, (as I conceiue) inhabited India it selfe. For Dionysius Afer in his Periegesis, (or description of the World) which hee wrote in Greeke Verse, among the Regions of India findeth a Nation called the Sa∣baei. Taxilus hos inter medios habitat{que} Sabaeus: In the middest of these dwell the Sabaei, and the Taxili, sayth this Dionysius. †. V. Of OPHIR one of IOCTANS sonnes, and of Peru, and of that voyage of SALOMON. OPHIR also was an Inhabitant of the East India, and (as S. Hierome vnderstands it) in one of the Ilands plentifull of gold, which are now knowne by the name of Moluccae. Iosephus vnderstands Ophir to be one of those great head-lands in India, which by a generall name are called Chersonesi, or Peninsulae: of which there are two very notorious; Callecut, and Malacca. Pererius takes it rightly for an Iland, as Saint Hierome doth, but he sets it at the head-land of Malacca. But Ophir is found among the Molucces farther East. Arias Montanus out of the second of Chronicles, the third Chapter and sixt Verse, gathers that Ophir was Peru in America, looking into the West Ocean, commonly called Mare del Sur, or the South Sea; by others Mare pacificum. The wordes in the second of the Chronicles are these: And be ouerlayed the house with precious stones for beautie; and the gold was gold of Paruaim. IVNIVS takes this gold to be the gold of Hauilah, remembred by Moses in the description of Paradise: And the gold of that Gen 2. 11. & 12 Plin. lib. 6. c. 28. Land is good: finding a Towne in a Prouince of Susiana called Barbatia; so called (as he thinkes) by corruption for Paruaim: from whence those Kings sub∣iected by Dauid brought this gold, with which they presented him; and which Da∣uid preserued for the enriching of the Temple. But this fancie of Peru hath deceiued many men, before Montanus, and Plessis, who also tooke Ophir for Peru. And that this question may be a subiect of no farther di∣spute; it is very true, that there is no Region in the World of that name: sure I am that at least America hath none, no not any Citie, Village, or Mountayne so called. But when Francis Pisarro first discouered those Lands to the South of Panama, arri∣uing in that Region which commanded (a Prince of magnificence, Riches and Dominion inferior to none) some of the Spaniards vtterly ignorant of that lan∣guage, demanding by signes (as they could) the name of the Countrie, and poin∣ting with their hand athwart a Riuer, or Torrent, or Brooke that ranne by, the In∣dians answered Peru, which was either the name of that Brooke, or of water in ge∣nerall. The Spaniards thereupon conceiuing that the people had rightly vnderstood them, set it downe in the Diurnall of their enterprise, and so in the first description made, and sent ouer to Charles the Emperor, all that West part of America to the South of Panama had the name of Peru, which hath continued euer since as diuers Spaniards in the Indies assured me; which also Acosta the Iesuite in his naturall and morall Historie of the Indies confirmeth. And whereas Montanus also findeth, that a part of the Indies (called ) tooke that name of Ioctan, who as he sup∣poseth nauigated from the vtmost East of India to America: it is most true, that Iu∣catan is nothing else in the language of that Countrie, but [ What is that ] or [ What say you? ] For when the Spaniards asked the name of that place (no man conceiuing their meaning) one of the Saluages answered Iucatan (which is) What aske you, or What say you? The like hapned touching Paria, a mountaynous Countrie on the South side of Trinidado and Margarita: for when the Spaniards inquiring (as all men doe) the names of those new Regions which they discouered, pointed to the Hills afarre off, one of the people answered, Paria, which is as much to say; as high Hills or Moun∣taynes. For at Paria begins that maruailous ledge of Mountaynes, which from thence are continued to the Strait of Magellan: from eight degrees of North lati∣tude to 52. of South; and so hath that Countrie euer since retayned the name of Paria. The same hapned among the English, which I sent vnder Sir Richard Greeneuile to inhabite Virginia. For when some of my people asked the name of that Countrie, one of the Saluages answered, Wingandacon, which is as much to say, as, You weare good clothes, or gay clothes. The same hapned to the Spaniard in asking the name of the Iland Trinidado: for a Spaniard demanding the name of that selfe place which the Sea incompassed, they answered, Caeri, which signifieth an Iland. And in this manner haue many places newly discouered beene intituled, of which Peru is one. And therefore we must leaue Ophir among the Moluccas, whereabout such an Iland is credibly affirmed to be. Now although there may be found gold in Arabia it selfe (towards Persia ) in Ha∣uilah, now Sufiana, and all alongst that East Indian shore; yet the greatest plentie is taken vp at the Philippines, certayne Ilands planted by the Spaniards, from the West India. And by the length of the passage which Salomons ships made from the Red Sea, (which was three yeeres in going and comming) it seemeth they went to the vttermost East, as the Moluceas or Philippines. Indeede these that now goe from Por∣tugal, or from hence, finish that nauigation in two yeere, and sometimes lesse: and Salomons ships went not aboue a tenth part of this our course from hence. But we must consider, that they euermore kept the coast, and crept by the shores, which made the way exceeding long. For before the vse of the Compasse was knowne, it was impossible to nauigate athwart the Ocean; and therefore Salomons ships could not finde Peru in America. Neither was it needfull for the Spaniards themselues (had it not beene for the plentie of gold in the East India Ilands, farre aboue the mines of any one place of America ) to saile euery yeere from the West part of America thi∣ther, and there to haue strongly planted, and inhabited the richest of those Ilands: wherein they haue built a Citie called Manilia, Salomon therefore needed not to haue gone farther off then Ophir in the East, to haue sped worse: neither could he nauigate from the East to the West in those dayes, whereas he had no coast to haue guided him. Tostatus also gathereth a fantasticall opinion out of Rabanus, who makes Ophir to be a Countrie, whose Mountaynes of gold are kept by Griffins: which Mountaynes Solinus affirmeth to be in Scythia Asiatica, in these wordes: Nam cùm auro & gemmis affluant, Griphes tenent vniuersa, alites ferocissimae, Arimaspi cum his dimicant, &c. For whereas these Countries abound in gold, and rich stone, the Griffins defend the one and the other: a kinde of Fowle the fiercest of all other; with which Griffins a Nation of people cal∣led Arimaspi make warre. These Arimaspi are said to haue been men with one eye only, like vnto the Cyclopes of Sicilia: of which Cyclopes, Herodotus and Aristeus make men∣tion: and so doth Lucan in his third Booke: and Valerius Flaccus: and D. Siculus in the Flaccus, lib. 6. storie of Alexander Macedon. But (for mine owne opinion) I beleeue none of them. Diod. Sicul. l. 16. And for these Arimaspi, I take it that this name signifying One-eyed, was first giuen them by reason that they vsed to weare a vizzard of defence, with one sight in the middle to serue both eyes; and not that they had by nature any such defect. But Solinus borroweth these things out of Plinie, who speakes of such a Nation in the extreme North, at a place called Gisolitron, or the Caue of the Northeast winde. For the rest, as all fables were commonly grounded vpon some true stories or other things done: so might these tales of the Griffins receiue this Morall. That if those men which fight against so many dangerous passages for gold, or other riches of this World, had their perfect senses, and were not depriued of halfe their eye-sight (at least of the eye of right reason and vnderstanding) they would content themselues with a quiet and moderate estate; and not subiect themselues to famine, corrupt aire, violent heate, and cold, and to all sorts of miserable diseases. And though this fable be fayned in this place, yet if such a tale were told of some other places of the World, where wild Beasts or Serpents defend Mountaines of gold, it might be auow∣ed. For there are in many places of the world, especially in America, many high and impassable Mountaynes which are very rich and full of gold, inhabited only with Tygres, Lyons, and other rauenous and cruell beasts: into which if any man ascend (except his strength be very great) he shall be sure to finde the same warre, which the Arimaspi make against the Griffins: not that the one or other had any sense of gold, or seeke to defend that metall, but being disquieted, or made afraide of them∣selues or their yong-ones, they grow inraged and aduenturous. In like sort it may be said that the Alegartos, (which the Aegyptians call the Crocadyles) defend those Pearles which lye in the Lakes of the Inland: for many times the poore Indians are eaten vp by them, when they diue for the pearle. And though the Alegartos know not the pearle, yet they finde sauour in the flesh and bloud of the Indians, whom they deuoure. †. VI. Of HAVILAH the sonne of IOCTAN, who also passed into the East Indies: and of MESHA and SEPHER named in the bordering of the Families of IOCTAN: with a Conclusion of this discourse touching the plantation of the World. OF Hauilah the sonne of Ioctan, there is nothing else to be said, but that the ge∣nerall opinion is, that he also inhabited in the East India in the Continent, from which Ophir past into the Ilands adioyning. And whereas Ganges is said to water Hauilah, it is meant by Hauilah in the East India, which tooke name of Hauilah the sonne of Ioctan: but , which Pison compasseth, was so called of Hauilah, the sonne of Chush, as is formerly proued by this place of Scripture: SAVL smote the 1. Sam. 15. 7. Amalekites from Hauilah, as thou commest to Shur, which is before Aegypt. But that Saul euer made Warre in the East India, no man hath suspected. For an end we may conclude, that of the thirteene sonnes of Ioctan, these three, Saba, Hauilah, and Ophir; though at the first seated by their brethren about the hill Masius or Mesh, GEN. 10. 30 (to wit) betweene Cilicia and Mesopotamia; yet at length either themselues or their issues remoued into East India, leauing the other Families of Ioctan, to fill the Countries of their first plantation, which the Scripture defines to haue beene from Mesh vnto Sephar. And although S. Hierome take Mesh to be a Region of the East India, and Sephar a Mountaine of the same (which Mountaine, Montanus would haue to be the Andes in America) those fancies are farre beyond my vnderstanding. For the word (East) in the Scriptures, where it hath reference to Iudaea, is neuer farther extended then into Persia. But Mesch is that part of the Mountaynes of Masius in the North of Mesopotamia, out of which the Riuer Chaboras springeth which run∣neth by Charran: and in the same Region we also finde for Sephar (remembred by Moses ) Sipphara by Ptolemie, standing to the East of the Mountaynes Masius; from whence Ioctan hauing many sonnes, some of them might passe into India, hearing of the beautie and riches thereof. But this was in processe of time. The other fashion of planting I vnderstand not, being grounded but vpon mens imaginations, contrarie to reason and possibilitie. And that this Mountayne in the East was no farther off then in those Regions before remembred, it appeareth by many places of the Scripture where the same phrase is vsed: as in Numbers 23. BA∣LAC Vers. 7. the King of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the Mountayne of the East; which was from the East part of Mesopotamia. For Balac brought Balaam out of Me∣sopotamia, (witnesse this place of DEVTERONOMIE:) Because they hyred BALAAM Cap. 23. vers. the sonne of BEOR, of Pethor in Aram Naharaijm, to curse thee: for Aram Naharaijm was Syria fluniorum, which is Mesopotamia, as aforesaid. This plantation of the World after the floud doth best agree (as to me it seemes) with all the places of Scripture compared together. And these be the reports of Reason and probable coniecture; the Guides which I haue followed herein, and which I haue chosen to goe after, making no valuation of the opinions of men, con∣ducted by their owne fancies, be they ancient or moderne. Neither haue I any end herein, priuate, or publike, other then the discouerie of truth. For as the partialitie of man to himselfe hath disguised all things: so the factious and hireling Historians of all Ages (especially of these latter times) haue by their many Volumes of vntrue reports left Honor without a Monument, and Vertue without Memorie: and (in stead thereof) haue erected Statues and Trophies to those, whom the darkest forget∣fulnesse ought to haue buryed, and couered ouer for euermore. And although the length and dissoluing Nature of Time, hath worne out or changed the Names and memorie of the Worlds first planters after the floud (I meane the greatest number and most part of them) yet all the foot-steps of Antiquitie (as appeares by that which hath beene spoken) are not quite worne out nor ouer-growne: for Babylon hath to this day the sound of Babel; Phoenicia hath Zidon, to which Citie the eldest Sonne of Canaan gaue name; so hath Cilicia Tharsis; and the Armenians, Medes, Hiberians, Cappadocians, Phrygians, the Syrians, Idumaeans, Libyans, Moores, and other Nations, haue preserued from the death of forgetfulnesse some signes of their first Founders and true Parents. CHAP. IX. Of the beginning and establishing of Gouernement. §. I. Of the proceeding from the first Gouernement vnder the eldest of Families to Regall, and from Regall absolute, to Regall tempered with Lawes. IT followeth now to entreate how the World beganne to receiue Rule and Gouernement, which (while it had scarcitie of People) vnder-went no other Domi∣nion then Paternitie and Eldership. For the Fathers of Nations were then as Kings, and the eldest of Fa∣milies as Princes. Hereof it came, that the word (Elder) was alwayes vsed both for the Magistrate, & for those of Age and Grauitie: the same bearing one significa∣tion almost in all languages. For in the eleuenth of Numbers God commanded Moses to gather together 70. of the Elders of the people, and Gouernors ouer them: the Hebrew bearing the same sense, which the Latine word Senes or Seniores doth. So it is written in SVSANNA, Then the Assembly beleeued them as those that were the Elders and Iudges of the People. And so in the words of those false Iudges and wit∣nesses to DANIEL, Shew it vnto vs, seeing God hath giuen thee the office of an Elder. DE∣MOSTHENES vseth the same word for the Magistrate among the Graecians. Cicero in Cato giueth two other reasons for this appellation: Apud Lacedaemonios qui amplissi∣mum Magistratum gerunt, vt sunt, sic etiam appellantur Senes; Among the Lacedaemo∣nians the chiefe Magistrates, as they are, so are they called Eldermen: and againe, Ratio & prudentia nisi essent in senibus, non summum Concilium Maiores nostri appellâssent Sena∣tum; If reason and aduisement were not in old men, our Ancesters had neuer called the high∣est Councell by the name of a Senate. But though these reasons may well be giuen, yet we doubt not but in this name of (Elders) for Gouernours or Counsailers of State, there is a signe that the first Gouernors were the Fathers of Families; and vnder them the eldest Sonnes. And from thence did the French, Italian, and Spaniard take the word (Signor) and out of it (Seignourie) for Lordship and Dominion: signifying (according to Loyseau ) puissance in proprietie, or proper power. The kinds of this Seignourie, Seneca makes two: the one, aut imperium; Power or command: the other, Proprietas aut dominium; Proprietie or Mastership: the correlatiue of the one is the subiect, of the other the slaue. Ad Caesarem (saith he) potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas; Caesar hath power ouer all; and euery man proprietie in his owne: and againe, Caesar omnia imperio possidet, singuli dominio; Caesar holdeth all in his power, and euery man possesseth his owne. But as men and vice beganne abundantly to increase: so obedience, (the fruit of naturall reuerence, which but from excellent seede sel∣dome ripeneth) being exceedingly ouershadowed with pride, and ill examples vt∣terly withered and fell away. And the soft weapons of paternall perswasions (after mankinde beganne to neglect and forget the originall and first giuer of life) became in all ouer-weake, either to resist the first inclination of euill, or after when it be∣came habituall) to constraine it. So that now, when the hearts of men were onely guided and steered by their owne fancies, and tost to and fro on the tempestuous Seas of the world, while wisedome was seuered from power, and strength from charitie: Necessitie (which bindeth euery nature but the immortall) made both the Necessitasest iudicium, & immutabilis po∣testas. Wise and Foolish vnderstand at once, that the estate of reasonable men would be∣come farre more miserable then that of beasts, and that a generall floud of confusion would a second time ouer flow them, did they not by a generall obedience to order and dominion preuent it. For the Mightie, who trusted in their owne strengths, found others againe (by interchange of times) more mightie then themselues: the feeble fell vnder the forcible; and the equall from equall receiued equall harmes. In so much that licentious disorder (which seemed to promise a libertie vpon the first acquaintance) proued vpon a better tryall, no lesse perilous then an vnindurable bondage. Arguments by Necessitie propounded, and by Reason maintained and confirmed perswaded all Nations which the Heauens couer, to subiect themselues to a Master, and to Magistracie in some degree. Vnder which Gouernment, as the change (which brought with it lesse euill, then the former mischiefes) was generally : so time (making all men wise that obserue it) found some imperfection and corrosiue in this cure. And therefore the same Necessitie which inuented, and the same Reason which approued soueraigne power, bethought it selfe of certaine equall rules, in which Dominion (in the beginning boundlesse) might also discerne her owne limits. For before the inuention of Lawes, priuate affections in supreme Rulers made their owne fancies both their Treasurers and Hangmen: measuring by this yard, and waighing in this ballance both good and euill. For as wisedome in Eldership preceded the rule of Kings; so the will of Kings fore-went the inuentions of Lawes. Populus nullis legibus tenebatur: arbitria princi∣pum pro legibus erant; The people were not gouerned by any other lawes then the willes of Princes: Heereof it sollowed, that when Kings left to bee good, neither did those mens value them which were not fancied by their Kings, nor those mens vices deforme them that were. Amor interdum nimis videt, interdum nihil videt, Loue sees one while too much, another while starke nothing. Hence it came to passe, that after a few yeeres (for direction and restraint of Royall power) Lawes were esta∣blished: and that gouernment which had this mixture of equalitie (holding in an euen ballance supreme power and common right) acquired the title of Regall: the other (which had it not) was knowne for Tyrannicall: the one God established in fauour of his people: the other he permitted for their affliction. In the infancie of this Regall authoritie, Princes as they were chosen for their vertues only so did they measure their powers by a great deale of moderation. And (saith Fabius Pictor) Principes, quia iusti erant, & religionibus dediti, iure habiti De aureo , part. 1. Dij & ; Princes, because they were iust and religious, were rightly accounted and called Gods. And though (speaking humanely) the beginning of Empire may be ascribed to Reason and Necessitie; yet it was God himselfe that first kindled this light in the mindes of men, whereby they saw that they could not liue and be preserued with∣out a Ruler and Conducter: God himselfe by his eternall prouidence hauing or∣dayned Kings; and the law of Nature Leaders, and Rulers ouer others. For the ve∣ry Bees haue their Prince; the Deere their Leaders; and Cranes (by order impo∣sed) watch for their owne safetie. The most High beareth rule ouer the Kingdomes of . 5. 21. Men; and appointeth ouer it whomsoeuer he pleaseth. By me (saith Wisedome, spoken by Prouerb. 8. v. 15. the Sonne of God) Kings reigne; By me Princes rule, and it is God (saith DANIEL) . 19. v. . that setteth vp Kings, and taketh away Kings: and that this power is giuen from God, CHRIST himselfe witnesseth, speaking to PILATE: Thou couldest haue no power at all . 19. v. . against me, except it were giuen thee from aboue. It was therefore by a threefold Iustice that the world hath beene gouerned from the beginning, (to wit) by a Iustice naturall: by which the Parents and Elders of fa∣milies gouerned their Children, and Nephewes, and Families, in which gouernment the Obedience was called naturall Pietie: Againe, by a Iustice diuine, drawne from the Lawes and Ordinances of God: and the Obedience hereunto was called Con∣science: And lastly, by a Iustice ciuill, begotten by both the former: and the Obe∣dience to this we call Dutie. That by these three those of the eldest times were com∣manded: and that the rule in generall was Paternall, it is most euident: for Adam being Lord ouer his owne Children, instructed them in the seruice of God his Crea∣tor; as we reade, Cain and Abel brought Oblations before God, as they had beene taught by their Parent, the Father of mankinde. §. II. Of the three commendable sorts of Gouernement with their opposites: and of the degrees of humane societie. WHat other Policie was exercised, or State founded after such time as mankinde was greatly multiplyed before the floud, it cannot be cer∣tainly knowne, though it seeme by probable coniecture, that the same was not without Kings in that first age: it being possible that many Princes of the Aegyptians (remembred among their antiquities) were before the generall floud; and very likely, that the cruell Oppressions in that Age proceeded from some tyrannie in Gouernement, or from some rougher forme of Rule, then the Paternall. Berosus ascribeth the rule of the World in those dayes to the Gyants of Libanus, Beros. lib 1. who mastred (saith he) all Nations from the Sunne-rising to the Sunne-set. But in the second Age of the World, and after such time as the rule of Eldership fayled, three seuerall sorts of Gouernement were in seuerall times established among men, according to the diuers natures of Places and People. The first, the most ancient, most generall, and most approued, was the Gouerne∣ment of one, ruling by iust Lawes, called Monarchie: to which Tyrannie is opposed, being also a sole and absolute Rule, exercised according to the will of the Comman∣der, without respect or obseruation of the Lawes of God, or Men. For a lawfull Prince or Magistrate (saith Aristotle ) is the Keeper of Right and Equitie: and of this condition ought euery Magistrate to be, according to the rule of Gods word: Iudges and Officers shalt thou make thee in thy Cities: And these shall iudge the people with . 16. v. 18. iudgement. The second Gouernement is of diuers principall Persons established by order, and ruling by Lawes, called Aristocracie, or Optimatum potestas; to which Oligarchia (or the particular faction and vsurpation of a few great-ones) is opposed: as the Decemviri, or , and the like. The third is a State popular, (or Gouernment of the people) called Democratia, to which is opposed Ochlocratia, or the turbulent vniust ruling of the confused mul∣titude, seditiously swaying the State, contrarie to their owne Lawes and Ordinances. These three kinds of Gouernment are briefly exprest by Tholosanus; Vnius, paucorum, & multorum, Of one, of few, of many. Now as touching the beginning and order of policie since the second increase of Mankind, the same grew in this sort: First of all, euery Father, or eldest of the Fami∣ly, gaue Lawes to his owne issues, and to the people from him and them increased. These as they were multiplyed into many Housholds (man by nature louing socie∣tie) ioyned their Cottages together in one common Field or Village, which the La∣tines call Vicus; of the Greeke , which signifieth a House, or of the word (Via) be∣cause it hath diuers wayes and paths leading to it. And as the first House grew into a Village, so the Village into that which is called Pagus, (being a societie of diuers Villages) so called of the Greeke , which signifieth a Fountaine: because many people (hauing their habitations not farre asunder) dranke of one Spring or Streame of water. To this word the English Hundreds, or (as some thinke) Shires answereth not vnfitly. But as men and impietie beganne to gather strength, and as emulation and pride betweene the Races of the one and the other daily increased: so both to defend themselues from outrage, and to preserue such goods as they had gathered, they beganne to ioyne and set together diuers of their Villages, inuironing them first with bankes and ditches, and afterwards with wals: which being so compassed were then called Oppida; eyther ab opponendo se hostibus, Because wals were opposed against E∣nemies, or ab opibus, because thither they gathered their riches for safetie and defence: as also they were called Vrbes, ab orbe; because when they were to build a Citie, they made a Circle with a Plough (sayth Varro ) therewith measuring and compassing the ground which they went to inclose or fortifie. And although Vrbs and Ciuitas bee often confounded, yet the difference was anciently in this, that Vrbs signified no o∣ther then the very wals and buildings, and Ciuitas was taken for the Citizens, inha∣biting therein: so called of Ciuis; and that, ab eo quòd multitudo coiuit, of comming to∣gether. But all inhabitants within these wals are not properly Citizens, but only such as are called Free-men: who bearing proportionably the charge of the Citie, may by turnes become Officers and Magistrates thereof: the rest goe vnder the name of Subiects, though Citizens by the same generall name of Subiects are also knowne. For euery Citizen is also a subiect, but not euery Subiect a Citizen: perhaps also some Citizen (as the chiefe Magistrate, if hee bee to bee termed one of the Citizens) is no subiect; but of this wee need not stand to inquire. The word (Magistrate) is taken à , from a Master, and the word (Master) from the Aduerbe Magis (as also Magisteria, Precepts of Art ) or else from the Greeke word (Megistos:) and so the Greekes call them Megistanes, whom the Latines call Magnates, or Magi∣stratus. The office and dutie of euery Magistrate Aristotle hath written in few wordes. Ethic 5. A Magistrate or Prince (sayth hee) is the keeper of right and equitie; but the same is best taught by Saint Paul, who expresseth both the cause efficient, and finall, (that is) by whom Magistrates and Princes are ordained, together with their duties and of∣fices. A Magistrate is the Minister of God for thy wealth; but if thou doe euill, feare: for . 13. 4. he beareth not the sword for nought. For hee is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that doth euill. He also teacheth in the same place; That euery soule ought to bee V. 1. subiect to the higher powers, because they are by God ordained; and that whosoeuer resisteth 2. that power, resisteth God, the giuer and fountaine thereof: and shall not only be there∣fore subiect to the iudgement and condemnation of Man, but of God: For yee must Ibid. v. be subiect (saith he) not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake. The examples are not to be numbred of Gods punishments vpon those that haue resisted Authoritie, by God ordained and established. Neyther ought any subiect therefore to resist the power of Kings, because they may be taxed with iniustice or crueltie: for it pleaseth God sometimes to punish his people by a tyrannous hand: and the Commandement of obedience is without distinction. The Prophets and Christ himselfe subiected themselues to the power of Magistracie. Christ comman∣ded that all due to Caesar should be giuen vnto him: and he payed Tribute for him∣selfe and Peter. Hieremie commanded the Israelites (euen those that were Captiues Hierem. 29. v. 7. vnder Heathen Kings) to pray for them, and for the peace of Babylon. So Abraham prayed for Abimelech; and Iacob blessed the King of Aegypt: And it is acceptable in the Gen 20. v. 17. . v. 10. sight of our Sauiour (sayth PAVL) that yec make Supplications and Prayers for Kings, and for all that are in authoritie: and if for such Kings as were Idolatrous, much more for Christian Kings and Magistrates. And so much did Saint Chrysostome in his Homily to the people preferre Monarchicall Gouernment, as hee rather commended the rule of Kings (though Tyrants) then that they should be wanting: Praestat Regem tyran∣num habere, quàm nullum; Better a tyrannous King, then no King: to which also Tacitus subscribeth: Praestat (sayth Tacitus in the first of his Historie) sub malo Principe esse quàm nullo; It is better to haue a bad Prince then none at all. And bee they good Kings (which is generally presupposed) then is there no libertie more safe, then to serue them: Ne{que} enim libertas tutior vlla est (sayth CLAVDIAN) quàm Domino seruire bo∣no: No libertie (sayth hee) more safe for vs then to be seruants to the vertuous. And cer∣tainly howsoeuer it may be disputed, yet is it safer to liue vnder one Tyrant, then vn∣der 100000. Tyrants: vnder a wise man that is cruell, then vnder the foolish and barbarous crueltie of the multitude. For as Agesilaus answered a Citizen of that desired an alteration of the Gouernment, That kind of rule which a man would disdaine in his owne house, were very vnfit to gouerne great Regions by. Lastly, as many Fathers erected many Cottages for their many children: and as (for the reason before remembred) many Housholds ioyned themselues together, and made Villages; many Villages made Cities: so when these Cities and Citizens ioyned together, and established Lawes by consent, associating themselues vnder one Gouernour and Gouernment, they so ioyned were called a Commonwealth: the same being sometimes gouerned by Kings; sometimes by Magistrates; sometimes by the people themselues. §. III. Of the good Gouernment of the first Kings. NOw this first Age after the Floud, and after such time as the people were increased, and the Families became strong and dispersed into se∣uerall parts of the World, was by ancient Historians called Golden: Ambition and Couetousnesse being as then but greene, and newly growne vp, the seeds and effects wherof were as yet but potential, and in the blowth and bud. For while the Law of Nature was the rule of mans life, they then sought for no larger Territorie then themselues could compasse and manure: they erected no other magnificent buildings, then sufficient to desend them from cold and tempest: they cared for no other delicacie of fare, or curiositie of dyet, then to maintaine life: nor for any other apparell then to couer them from the cold, the Raine and the Sunne. And sure if wee vnderstand by that Age (which was called Golden) the ancient simplicitie of our Fore-fathers, this name may then truely be cast vpon those elder times: but if it be taken otherwise, then, whether the same may bee attributed more to any one time then to another, (I meane to one limited time and none else) it may bee doubted. For good and Golden Kings make good and Golden Ages: and all times haue brought forth of both sorts. And as the infancie of Empirie, (when Princes played their Prizes, and did then only woo men to obedience) might bee called the Golden Age: so may the beginning of all Princes times bee truely called Golden. For be it that men affect honour, it is then best purchased; or if honour af∣fect men, it is then that good deseruings haue commonly the least impediments: and if euer Liberalitie ouerflow her bankes and bounds, the same is then best war∣ranted both by policie and example. But Age and Time doe not only harden and shrinke the openest and most Iouiall hearts, but the experience which it bringeth with it, layeth Princes torne estates before their eyes, and (withall) perswadeth them to compassionate themselues. And although there bee no Kings vnder the Sunne whose meanes are answerable vnto other mens desires; yet such as value all things by their owne respects, doe no sooner find their appetites vnanswered, but they com∣plaine of alteration, and account the times iniurious and yron. And as this fal∣leth out in the Raigne of euery King, so doth it in the life of euery man, if his dayes be many: for our yonger yeeres are our Golden Age; which being eaten vp by time, we praise those seasons which our youth accompanied: and (indeed) the grieuous al∣terations in our selues, and the paines and diseases which neuer part from vs but at the graue, make the times seeme so differing and displeasing: especially the qualitie of mans nature being also such, as it adoreth and extolleth the passages of the former, and condemneth the present state how iust soeuer: Fit malignitatis vitio, vt Tacit. in Dial. de Orat. semper vetera in laude, praesentia in fastidio sint; It comes to passe (sayth TACITVS) by the vice of our malignitie, that we alwayes extoll the time past, and hold the present fastidious: For it is one of the errours of wayward Age: Quod sint laudatores temporis acti; That they are praysers of fore-passed times, forgetting this aduice of SALOMON: Say not then, Eccles. 3. Why is it that the former dayes were better then these? for thou dost not inquire wisely of this thing: to which purpose SENECA; Maiores nostri questi sunt, & nos querimur, posteri querentur, euersos esse mores, regnare nequitiam, in deterius res hominum & in omne nefas labi: Our Ancesters haue complained, wee doe complaine, our children will complaine, that good manners are gone, that wickednesse doth raigne, and all things grow worse and worse, and fall into all euill. These are the vsuall discourses of Age and misfortune. But here∣of what can we adde to this of ARNOBIVS? Nouares quando{que} vetus fict, & vetus tem∣poribus Arnob. lib. 2. quibus coepit noua fuit & repentina: Whatsoeuer is new, in time shall be made old: and the ancientest things when they tooke beginning were also new and sodaine. Wherefore not to stand in much admiration of these first times, which the discontentments of pre∣sent times haue made Golden, this wee may set downe for certaine, That as it was the vertue of the first Kings, which (after God) gaue them Crownes: so the loue of their people thereby purchased, held the same Crownes on their heads. And as God gaue the obedience of Subiects to : so (relatiuely) hee gaue the care and iu∣stice of Kings to the Subjects; hauing respect, not only to the Kings themselues, but euen to the meanest of his Creatures: Nunquàm particulari bono seruit omne bo∣num; Wisd. 6. 7. The infinite goodnesse of God doth not attend any one only: for hee that made the small and great, careth for all alike: and it is the care which Kings haue of all theirs, which makes them beloued of all theirs; and by a generall loue it is, that Princes hold a generall obedience: For Potest as humana radicatur in voluntatibus hominum: All humane power is rooted in the will or dispositions of men. §. IIII. Of the beginning of Nobilitie: and of the vaine vaunt thereof without vertue. AND with this Supreme Rule and Kingly authoritie beganne also other degrees and differences among Subiects. For Princes made election of others by the same Rule, by which themselues were chosen; vnto whom they gaue place, trust, and power. From which imployments and Offices sprung those Titles, and those degrees of Honour, which haue continued from Age to Age to these dayes. But this Nobilitie, or difference Verus nobilis nō sed fit. from the Vulgar, was not in the beginning giuen to the Succession of Bloud, but to Succession of Vertue, as hereafter may bee prooued. Though at length it was suffi∣cient for those whose Parents were aduanced, to bee knowne for the Sonnes of such Fathers: and so there needed then no endeuour of well-doing at all, or any conten∣tion for them to excell, vpon whom glorie or worldly Nobilitie necessarily des∣cended. Yet hereof had Nobilitie denomination in the beginning, That such as ex∣celled others in vertue, were so called: Hinc dictus Nobilis, quasi virtute proe alijs nota∣bilis. But after such time as the deserued Honour of the Father was giuen in reward to his Posteritie, Saint Hierome iudged of the Succession in this manner: Nihil a∣liud video in Nobilitate appetendum, nisi quod Nobiles quadam necessitate constringantur, ne ab antiquorum probitate degenerent; I see no other thing to bee affected in Nobilitie, then that Noblemen are by a kind of necessitie bound, not to degenerate from the vertue of their Ancesters. For if Nobilitie be Virtus & antiquae diuitiae; Vertue and ancient riches, then to excced in all those things which are extra hominem, asriches, power, glo∣rie, and the like, doe no otherwise define Nobilitie, then the word ( animal ) alone doth define a reasonable man. Or if honour (according to L. Viues ) bee a witnesse of vertue and well-doing: and Nobilitie (after Plutarch ) the continuance of vertue in a Race or Linage: then are those in whom Vertue is extinguished, but like vnto painted and printed Papers, which ignorant men worship in stead of Christ, our Ladie, and other Saints: men, in whom there remaine but the dregges and vices of ancient Vertue: Flowers, and Herbes, which by change of soile and want of manu∣ring are turned to Weeds. For what is found prayse-worthy in those waters, which had their beginning out of pure Fountaines, if in all the rest of their course they runne foule, filthie, and defiled? Ex terra fertili producitur aliquando venenosa, Pint. in Ezech. & ex terra sterili pretiosum aurum; Out of fruitfull ground ariseth sometimes poysoning Henbane: and out of barren soile precious Gold. For as all things consist of matter and forme, so doth Charron (in his Chapter of Nobilitie) call the Race and Linage but the matter of Nobilitie: the forme (which giues life and perfect being) he maketh to be Vertue, and Qualitie, profitable to the Commonweale. For he is truly and entire∣ly Noble, who maketh a singular profession of publike Vertue, seruing his Prince and Countrie, and being descended of Parents and Ancesters that haue done the like. And although that Nobilitie, which the same Authour calleth personall, (the same which our selues acquire by our Vertue and well deseruings) cannot bee ballanced with that which is both naturall by Descent, and also personall; yet if Vertue bee wanting to the naturall, then is the personall and acquired Nobilitie by many de∣grees to be preferred: For (sayth this Charron ) this Honour (to wit) by Descent, may light vpon such a one, as in his owne nature is a true Villaine. There is also a third Nobilitie which hee calleth Nobilitie in Parchment, bought with Siluer or fauour: and these bee indeed but Honours of affection, which Kings with the change of their fancies wish they knew well how to wipe off againe. But surely, if wee had as much sense of our degenerating in worthinesse, as we haue of vanitie in deriuing our selues of such and such Parents, wee should rather know such Nobilitie (without Vertue) to bee shame and dishonour, then Noblenesse, and glorie to vaunt thereof. What calamitie is wanting (sayth ) to him that is borne in sinne, of a Potshare Bernard. l. 2. Consider. ad Eu∣gen. Pap. bodie and barren minde? for (according to the same Father:) Dele fucum fugacis hono∣ris huius, & male coronatae nitorem gloria, &c. Wipe away the painting of this fleeting ho∣nour, and the glittering of the ill-crowned glorie, that then thou maiest consider thy selfe : for camest naked out of thy Mothers wombe. Camest thou thence with thy My∣tre, or glissening with Iewels, or garnished with Silkes, or adorned with Feathers, or stuffed with Gold? If thou scatter and blow away all these by thy consideration as certaine morning cloudes, which doe or will soone passe ouer, thou shalt meet with a naked, and poore, and wret∣ched, and miserable man, and blushing, because he is naked, and weeping because hee is borne, and repining because he is borne to labour, and not to honour. For, as touching the matter of all men, there is no difference betweene it and dust: which if thou doest not beleeue (saith Saint CHRYSOSTOME) looke into the Sepulchres Chrysost. bomil. 2. de incomposita Dei natura. con. 5. and Monuments of thy Ancesters, and they shall easily perswade thee by their owne example, that thou art dust and dirt: so that if man seeme more Noble and beautifull then dust, this proceedeth not from the diuersitie of his Nature, but from the cunning of his Creatour. For true Nobilitie standeth in the Trade . Of vertuous life; not in the fleshly Line: For bloud is brute, but Gentrie is Diuine. And howsoeuer the custome of the World haue made it good, that Honours be cast by birth vpon vnworthy Issues: yet Salomon (as wise as any King) reprehendeth the same in his Fellow-Princes: There is an euill (sayth hee) that I haue seene vnder the Sun, Eccles. 10. as an errour that proceedeth from the face of him that ruleth. Folly is set in great excellencie. CHAP. X. Of NIMROD, BELVS, and NINVS: and of memora∣ble things about those times. §. I. That NIMROD was the first after the Floud that raigned like Soueraigne Lord: and that his beginning seemeth to haue beene of iust authoritie. THE first of all that raigned as Soueraigne Lord after the Floud was Nimrod, the Sonne of Cush, distinguished by Moses from the rest (according to Saint Augustine ) in one of these two respects: eyther for his eminencie, and because hee was the first of fame, and that tooke on him to command others: or else in that hee was be∣gotten by Chush, after his other children were also be∣come Fathers; and of a later time then some of his Grand-children and Nephewes. Howsoeuer, seeing Moses in expresse wordes calleth Nimrod the Sonne of Chush, other mens coniectures to the contrarie ought to haue no respect. This Empirie of Nimrod, both the Fathers and many later Writers call tyrannicall: the same beginning in Babel, (which is) confusion. But it seemeth to mee that Melanchton conceiued not amisse hereof: the same expo∣sition being also made by the Authour of that worke called Onomasticum Theologi∣cum, who affirmes that Nimrod was therefore called Amarus Dominator, A bitter or seuere Gouernour, because his forme of rule seemed at first farre more terrible then Paternall authoritie. And therefore is he in this respect also called a mightie Hunter; because he tooke and destroyed both Beasts and Theeues. But Saint Augustine vnder∣stands it otherwise, and conuerts the word (ante) by (contra) affirming therein, that Nimrod was a mightie Hunter against God: Sic ergo intelligendus est Gigas ille, Venator contra Dominum; So is that Giant to be vnderstood, a Hunter against the Lord. But how∣soeuer this word (a mightie Hunter) bee vnderstood; yet it rather appeareth, that as Nimrod had the command of all those, which went with him from the East into Shi∣naar: so, this charge was rather giuen him, then by him vsurped. For it is no where found, that Noah himselfe, or any of the Sonnes of his owne bodie came with this troupe into Babylonia: no mention at all being made of Noah (the yeeres of his life excepted) in the succeeding Storie of the Hebrewes: nor that Sem was in this disobe∣dient Troupe, or among the builders of Babel. The same is also confirmed by diuers ancient Historians, that Nimrod, Suphne, and were the Captaines and Leaders of all those which came from the East. And though Sem came not himselfe so farre West as Shinaar (his lot being cast on the East parts) yet from his Sonnes Nephew Heber, the name and Nation of the He∣brewes (according to the generall opinion) tooke beginning, who inhabited the Southermost parts of Chaldoea about the Citie of Vr; from whence Abraham was by God called into Charran, and thence into Canaan. And because those of the Race of Sem which came into , were no partners in the vnbeleeuing worke of the Towre: therefore (as many of the Fathers con∣iecture) did they retaine the first and most ancient language, which the Fathers of the first Age had left to Noah; and Noah to Sem and his Issues: In familia HEBER reman∣sit lingua; In the Family of HEBER this Language remained (saith Saint Augustine Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 6. c. II. out of Epiphanius; ) and this Language Abraham vsed: yea it was anciently and be∣fore the Floud the generall speech: and therefore first called (saith Coelestinus) lingus humana: the humane tongue. We know that Becanus following Theodoret, Rabbi Moses, , Ver∣gara, and others, is of another opinion; but howsoeuer we determine of this point, we may with good probablitie resolue, that none of the godly seed of Sem were the chiefe Leaders of this presumptuous multitude. And seeing it is not likely but that some one was by order appointed for this charge, we may imagine that Nimrod ra∣ther had it by iust authoritie, then by violence of vsurpation. §. II. That NIMROD, BELVS, and NINVS were three distinct persons. BENZO, and out of him Nauclerus with others make many Nimrods. Eusebius confounds him with Belus; and so doth Saint Hierome vpon Ose: and these wordes of S. Augustine seeme to make him of the same De Ciuit. Dei. opinion: Ibi autem NINVS regnabat post mortem patris sui BELI, qui primus illie regnauer at 65. annos; There did NINVS raigne after the death of his Father BELVS, who first gouerned in Babylon sixtie fiue yeeres. But it could not bee vnknowne to Saint Augustine, that Nimrod was the Establisher of that Empire: Moses being plaine and direct therein. For the beginning of NIMRODS Kingdome (saith he) was Babel, Erec, Accad, and Chalne, in the Land of : Wherefore Nimrod was the first King of Babel. And certainly it best agreeth with reason, that Ninus was the third, and not one with Nimrod, as Mercator (led by Clement) suppo∣sed: for in Ninus time the World was maruailously replenished. And if S. had vndoubtedly taken Belus for Nimrod, he would haue giuen him the name which the Scriptures giue him, rather then haue borrowed any thing out of prophane Au∣thors. And for those wordes of S. AVGVSTINE (qui primus illic regnauerat; Who was the first that reigned there) supposed to be meant by Belus: those wordes doe not dis∣proue that Nimrod was the Founder of the Babylonian Empire. For although Iulius Caesar ouerthrew the libertie of the Romane Commonwealth, making himselfe a per∣petuall Dictator, yet Augustus was the first established Emperor: and the first that reigned absolutely by soueraigne authoritie ouer the Romanes, as an Emperor. The like may be said of Nimrod, that he first brake the rule of Eldership and Paternitie, laying the foundation of soueraigne Rule, as Caesar did; and yet Belus was the first, who peaceably, and with a generall allowance exercised such a power. Pererius is of opinion, that Belus and Nimrod were the same, because many things are said of them both agreeing in time: for it was about 200. yeeres after the floud (as they ac∣count) that Belus reigned: but such agreement of times proues it not. For so Edward the Third, and his grand-child Richard the Second, were Kings both in one yeere: the one dyed; the other in the same yeere was crowned King. And yet the opinion (that Nimrod and Belus were one) is farre more probable then that of Mercator, who makes Ninus and Nimrod to be the same. For it is plaine that the beginning of Nimrods Kingdome was Babel, and the Townes adioyning: but the first and most famous worke of Ninus was the Citie of . Now whereas D. Siculus affirmeth, that Ninus ouercame and supprest the Babylo∣nians, the same rather proueth the contrarie, then that Ninus and Nimrod were one person. For Ninus established the seate of his Empire at Niniue in , whence the Babylonians might (perchance) in disdayne thereof fall from his obedience, whom he recouered againe by strong hand; which was easie: Babylon being not walled till Semiramis time. — altam Coctilibus SEMIRAMIS . SEMIRAMIS with walls of bricke the Citie did inclose. Further, where it is alleaged, that as the Scriptures call Nimrod mightie: so Iustine hath the same of Ninus, which is one of Mercators arguments; It may be answered, that such an addition might haue beene giuen to many other Kings aswell. For if we may beleeue Iustine; then were Vexoris King of Aegypt, and of Scythia mightie Kings before Ninus was borne. And if we may compare the wordes of Mo∣ses (touching Nimrod ) with the vndertakings of Ninus, there will be found great dif∣ference betweene them. For whereas Mercator conceiueth, that it was too early for any that liued about the time of the confusion of languages, to haue inuaded and mastered those Cities so farre remoued from Babel, namely, Erec, Accad, and Chalne: which worke he therefore ascribeth to Ninus, as a man of the greatest vndertaking; and consequently would haue Nimrod to haue beene long after the time, in which we suppose he flourished; and both those names of Nimrod and Ninus to belong to one person, to wit, to Ninus: to these things to make some answere. First, I doe not finde that supposition true, That euer Nimrod inuaded any of these Cities; but that hee founded them and built them from the ground, being the first after the floud, that conducted the children of Noah into those parts: and therefore had no∣thing built or erected to his hands. Besides, whereas these Cities in many mens opinions are found to stand farre a∣way from Babylon, I finde no reason to bring me to that beliefe. The Citie of Ac∣cad which the Septuagint calls Archard, and Epiphanius, Arphal; takes to be Ni∣sibis in Mesopotamia for the Region thereabout the Cosmographers (saith he) call Accabene for Accadene, Others vnderstand Nisibis and Niniue to be one Citie: so doe Strabo and Stephanus confound it with Charran; but all mistaken. For Nisibis, Accad, and Charran are distinct places. Though I cannot denie Accedene to be a Re∣gion of Mesopotamia, the same which Arias Montanus out of S. Hierome cals Achad: and so doe the Hebrewes also call Nisibis, which seemeth to be the cause of this mi∣staking. As for the Citie of Erec, which the Septuagint call Orech; S. Augustine, Oreg; and Pagninus, Erec; this place Iunius vnderstands for Aracca in Susiana: but there is also a Citie in Comagena called Arace: and indeede likelihood of name is no certaine proofe, without the assistance of other circumstances. Concerning the third Citie (called Chalneh ) some take it for Calinisis: of which Am. Marcellinus. S. Hierome takes it for Seleucia; Hierosolymitanus for Ctesiphon: others Lib. 23. doe thinke it to be the Agrani vpon Euphrates, destroyed and razed by the Persians. But let Moses be the Moderator and Iudge of this dispute, who teacheth vs directly, that these Cities are not seated in so diuers and distant Regions; for these be his wordes: And the beginning of his Kingdome (speaking of NIMROD) was Babel, Erech, Accad, and Chalneh, in the land of Shinaar: so as in this Valley of Shinaar, or Babylonia, or Chaldaea (being all one) we must finde them. And therefore I could (rather of the two) thinke with Viterbiensis, that these foure made but one Babylon, then that they were Cities farre remoued, and in seuerall Prouinces, did not the Prophet Amos precisely distinguish Chalne from Babylon. Goe you (saith AMOS) to Chalne, and from Cap. 6. vers. 2. thence goe you to Hamath, and then to Gath of the Philistims. The Geneua translation fa∣uouring the former opinion, to set these Cities out of Shinaar, hath a marginall note expressing that Shinaar was here named: not that all these Cities were therein seated, but to distinguish Babylon of Chaldaea, from Babylon in Aegypt; but I finde little sub∣stance in that conceit. For sure I am, that in the beginning of Nimrods Empire there was no such Babylon, nor any Citie at all to be found in Aegypt: Babylon of Aegypt being all one with the great Citie of Cairo, which was built long after, not farre from the place where stood Memphis the ancient Citie, but not so ancient as Babylon vpon Eupbrates. Now that Chalne is situate in the Valley of Shinaar, it hath beene formerly proued in the Chapter of Paradise. So as for any argument that may be brought to the contrarie, from the remote situation of these three Cities from Babylon, we may continue in our opinion, That Nimrod, Belus, and Ninus, were distinct and succes∣siue Kings. §. III. That NIMROD, not ASSVR, built Niniue: and that it is probable out of ESAY 23. 13. that ASSVR built Vr of the Chaldees. NOW as of Nimrod: so are the opinions of Writers different touching Assur, and touching the beginning of that great state of Babylon and Assyria: a controuersie wearisomely disputed without any direct proofe, conclusion, or certaintie. But to me (of whom, where the Scriptures are silent, the voyce of Reason hath the best hearing) the interpretation of Iunius is most agreeable; who besides all necessarie consequence doth not disioyne the sense of the Scriptures therein, nor confuse the vnderstanding thereof. For in this sort he conuerteth the Hebrew Text: Erat enim principium re∣gni eius Babel, & Erech, & Accad, & Chalneh, in terra Shinaar is; è terra hac in Assyriam vbi aedificauit Niniuen; (which is) For the beginning of this Kingdome was Ba∣bel, and Erech, and Accad, and Chalneb, in the land of : and he went forth of this land into Assyria, and built Niniue. So as Iunius takes Assur in this place, not for any person, but for the Region of Assyria: the land being so called in Moses time, and be∣fore it. For certainely, the other construction, (where the word (Assur) is taken for Assur the sonne of Sem ) doth not answer the order which Moses obserueth through all the Bookes of Genesis, but is quite contrarie vnto it. For in the beginning of the tenth Chapter he setteth downe the sonnes of Noah, in these wordes: Now these are the Generations of the sonnes of NOAH: SEM, HAM, and IAPHETH, vnto whom sonnes were borne after the floud: then it followeth immediately: The sonnes of IA∣PHETH were GOMER, &c. so as Iapheth is last named among Noahs sonnes, be he eldest or yongest: because he was first to be spoken of: with whom (hauing last named him) he proceedes and sets downe his issue, and then the issue of his sonnes: first, the issue of Gomer, Iapheths eldest sonne; and then speakes of and his sonnes: for of the rest of that Familie hee is silent. Anon after hee numbreth the sonnes of Ham, of which Cush was the eldest: and then the sonnes of Cush and Miz∣raim; and afterward of Canaan; leauing Shem for the last, because he would not dis∣ioyne the Storie of the Hebrewes. But after he beginneth with Sem, he continueth from thence by Arphaxad, Shela, and Heber, vnto Abraham, and so to Iacob, and the Fathers of that Nation. But to haue brought in one of the sonnes of Shem in the middle of the generations of Ham, had beene against order; neither would Moses haue past ouer so slightly the erection of the Assyrian Empire, in one of the sonnes of Shem, if he had had any such meaning: it being the storie of Shems sonnes which he most attended. For he nameth Nimrod apart, after the rest of the sonnes of Cush, because he founded the Babylonian and Assyrian Empire: and in the eleuenth Chapter he returnes to speake of the building of Babel in particular, hauing formerly named it in the tenth Chapter, with those other Cities which Nimrod founded in Shinaar. And as he did in the tenth Chapter, so also in the eleuenth he maketh no report of Shem, till such time as he had finished so much of Nimrod as he meant to touch: and then he beginneth with the issue of Shem, which he continueth to Abraham and Is∣rael. And of Iunius opinion touching Assur, was Caluin: to which I conceiue that P. Comestor, in historia Scholastica, gaue an entrance, who after he had deliuered this place in some other sense, he vseth these wordes: Vel intelligendum non est de ASSVR filio SEM, &c. sed ASSVR (id est) Regnum Assyriorum inde egressum est, quod tempore SARVG proaui ABRAHAMI factum est, (which is) Or else it is not to be vnderstood of ASSVR the sonne of SEM, &c. but ASSVR (that is, the Kingdome of the Assyrians) came from thence (videlicet, from Babylon) or was made out of it: which happened in the time of SARVG the great grand-father of ABRAHAM. After which he reconcileth the differences in this sort: If you take the ancient Belus (meaning Nimrod ) to be the first Erecter of the Assyrian Empire, or the first Founder thereof, it is true, Quan∣tum ad initium; Respecting the beginning; but others conceiue that it had beginning from Ninus, which is also true, Quantum ad regni ampliationem; Regarding the enlarge∣ment of the Empire. To this I may adde the opinion of Epiphanius, confirmed by Cedrenus, who takes Assur to be the sonne of Nimrod: and so doth Methodius, and , S. Hierome, and Cyrillus, and now lastly Torniellus: who saith he tooke Torniell. Annal. sacr. in Gen. 10. vpon him that name of Assur after he had beaten the Assyrians, as Scipio did of A∣fricanus, after his conquest in Africa: and that Assur was a common name to the Kings of Assyria, as it appeareth by many Scriptures, as Psalme 81. Esay 10. Ose 5. &c. but to helpe the matter, he makes Nimrod of the race of Shem, and the sonne of Irari. But Rabanus Maurus, who was Arch-Bishop of Mentz in the yeere of Christ 854. an ancient and learned Writer, vnderstands this place with Commestor, or Commestor with him, agreeing in substance with that translation of Iunius: to which wordes of Moses he giueth this sense: De hac terra Assyriorum imperium, qui ex nomine NINI, BELI filij, Ninum condiderunt, vrbem magnam, &c. Out of this land grew the Empire of the Assyrians, who built Ninus the great Citie, so named of NINVS the sonne of BELVS. On the contrarie Caluin obiecteth this place of ESAY: Behold the land of 23. . the Chaldaeans, this was no people, ASSVR founded it by the inhabitants of the Wildernesse; then which there is no one place in the Scriptures, that hath a greater diuersitie in the translation and vnderstanding; insomuch as Michael de Palatio vpon Esay (though in all else very diligent) passeth it ouer. But Caluin seemeth hereby to in∣ferre, that because Assur founded the state of the Chaldaeans, therefore also Assur ra∣ther then Nimrod established the Assyrian Empire, and built Niniue: contrarie to the former translation of Iunius, and to his owne opinion. Now out of the Vulgar (cal∣led Hieromes translation) it may be gathered that Assur both founded and ruined this Estate or Citie of the Chaldoeans, by Esay remembred: vnto which Citie, People, or State, he plainely telleth the Tyrians that they cannot trust, or hope for reliefe thence. Or rather it may be taken, that the Prophet maketh this Citie of Chaldaea, and that Estate, an example vnto those Phoenicians, whom in this place he fore-tel∣leth of their ruine: which Citie of Chaldaea being of strength, and carefully defen∣ded, was (notwithstanding) by the Assyrians vtterly wasted and destroyed: where∣by he giueth them knowledge, and foretelleth them, that their owne Citie of Tyre, (inuincible, as themselues thought) should also soone after be ouer-turned by the same Assyrians: as (indeede) it was by Nabuchodonosor. And these be the wordes af∣ter HIEROME: Ecce terra Chaldoeorum, talis populus non fuit, fundauit eam, in captiuitatem traduxerunt robustos eius, suffoderunt domos eius, posuerunt eam in ruinam, (which is) Behold the Land of the Chaldoeans, such a people there were not (or, this was no people, after the Geneua ) ASSVR (or the Assyrians) founded it, they carried away their strong men captiue, they vndermined their houses, and ruined their Citie. The Septuagint expresse it but in a part of another Verse, in these wordes: Et in terra Chaldoeorum, & hoec desolata est ab Assyrijs, quoniam murus eius corruit, making the sense perfect by the preceding Verse, which all together may be thus vnderstood: If thou goe ouer to Chit∣tim (which is Macedon or Greece) yet thou shalt haue no rest (speaking to the Tyrians) neither in the Land of the Chaldoeans, for this is made desolate by the Assyrians, because their walls fell together to the ground. PAGNINVS and VATABLVS conuert it thus: Ecce terra Chasdijm, iste populus non erat illic olim; nam ASSVR sundauit eam nauibus, erexerunt arces illius; contriuerunt oedes eius, posuit eam in ruinam: which may be thus Englished: Behold the Land of the Chaldoeans, this people was not once therein inhabiting: for ASSVR built it a harbour for ships, they erected the Towers thereof, and againe brake downe the houses thereof, and ruinated it. IVNIVS in the place of ships sets the word (pro Barbaris) that is, for the Barbarians: and the Geneua, by the Barbarians. But this is vndoubted that the Prophet Esay (as may be gathered by all the sense of the Chap∣ter) did therein assure the Tyrians of their future destruction, which (accordingly) fell on them: wherein (for the more terror) he maketh choice to note the calamities of those Places, Cities, and Regions, by whose Trade the state and greatnesse of the Tyrians was maintayned; as by the Cilicians from Tharsis; from the , and other Groecians vnder the name of Cittim; also by the Aegyptians, the Chaldoeans, and the rest. For Tyre was then the Mart Towne of the World most renowned. And (as it appeares in our discourse of Paradise ) not the least part of her chiefe mer∣chandize came in by the Citie Vr or Vrchoa in Chaldoea, where the body or chiefe streame of Euphrates (euen that streame which runneth through Babylon and Otris, which now falleth into Tigris ) had his passage into the Persian : though now it be stopped vp. For (as we haue heretofore noted) the Arabians (that descended from Sheba and Raamah ) dwelling on the East bankes of the Persian Gulfe, trading with the Tyrians (as those of Eden, Charran, and Chalne did) transported their mer∣chandise by the mouth of Tigris, that is, from Teredon and of Euphrates, that is, from Vr or Vrchoa: and then by Babylon, and thence by Riuer and ouer Land they conuey∣ed it into Syria, and so to Tyre: as they doe this day to Aleppo. So then Vr of the Chaldees was a Port Towne, and one of those Cities which had Intelligence, Trade, and Exchange with the Tyrians: for it stood by the great Lakes of Chaldoea, through which that part of Euphrates ranne, which passage is now stopt vp. cursum vetu∣stas aboleuit (saith Niger. ) And PLINIE, Locus vbi Euphratis oftium fuit, flumen salsum; Time hath worne away the channell of Euphrates: and the place where the mouth there of was, is a Bay of salt water. These things being thus, certainely (not without good proba∣bilitie) we may expound the Citie of the Chaldees, whose calamities Esay here no∣teth for terror of the Tyrians, to be the Citie anciently called Vr; and (by Hecatoeus) Camerina; by Ptolemie, Vrchoa: and by the Greekes, Chaldoeopolis, The Citie of Chaldoea: which the sonnes of Shem, vntill Abrahams time, inhabited. And whereas in all the Translations it is said, that Assur both founded it and ruined it: it may be vn∣derstood, that Assur the Founder was the sonne of Shem; and Assur the destroyers were the Assyrians, by whom those that inhabited Vr of Chaldoea, were at length op∣pressed and brought to ruine: which thing God fore-seeing commanded Abraham thence to Charran, and so into Canaan. And if the Hebrew word by Vatablus and Pagninus conuerted ( by ships ) doe beare that sense, the same may be the better ap∣proued; because it was a Port Towne: and the Riuer so farre vp as this Citie of Vr was in ancient time nauigable, as both by Plinie and Niger appeareth. And if the word (for the Barbarians) or (by the Barbarians) be also in the Hebrew Text, it is no lesse manifest, that the most barbarous Arabians of the Desart were and are the confronting, and next people of all other vnto it. For Chaldoea is now called Ara∣chaldar, which signifieth desart Lands, because it ioyneth to that part of Arabia so called: and Cicero (calling those Arabians by the name of Ituraeans ) addeth, that they are of all other people the most saluage; calling them, Homines omnium maxime barbaros. So as this place of , which breedeth some doubt in Caluin, proueth in no∣thing the contrarie opinion, nor in any part weakeneth the former translation of , nor the interpretation of Comestor and Rabanus. For though other men haue not conceiued (for any thing that I haue read) that Assur is in this place diuersly ta∣ken (as for the sonne of Sem, when he is spoken of as a Builder of Vr; and when as a Destroyer thereof, then for the Assyrian Nation) yet certainely the euidence of the truth, and agreement of circumstances seeme to enforce it. And so this Founding of the Citie of the Chaldees by Assur (into which the most of the posteritie of Sem that came into Shinaar, and were separate for the Idolatrie of the Chusites and Nim∣rodians, retyred themselues) hath nothing in it to proue that the same Assur built Ni∣niue, or that the same Assur was all one with Ninus; except wee will make Assur, who was the sonne of Shem, both an Idolater, and the sonne of Belus. For (out of doubt) Ninus was the first Sacrificer to Idols; and the first that set vp a Statue to be honored as god. Now if Assur must be of that Race, and not of the Familie of Sem, as he must be if he founded Niniue, then all those which seeke to giue him the honor thereof, doe him by a thousand parts more iniurie, by taking from him his true Parent and Religion. Besides, if this supposed Assur whom they make the Founder of Niniue (and so the sonne of Belus ) were any other, and not the same with Ninus; then what became of him? Certainely he was very vnworthy and obscure, and not like to be the Foun∣der of such an Empire and such a Citie, if no man haue vouchsafed to leaue to po∣steritie his expulsion thence, and how he lost that Empire againe or quitted it to Ni∣nus: whose acts and conquests are so largely written, and (according to my appre∣hension) farre differing from truth. It will therefore be found best agreeing to Scrip∣ture and to Reason, and best agreeing with the storie of that age written by prophane Authors, that Nimrod founded Babel, Erech, and Accad, and Chalne, the first workes and beginnings of his Empire, according to Moses, and that these workes being fi∣nished within the Valley of Shinaar, he looked farther abroad, and set in hand the worke of Ninus, lying neere vnto the same streame that Babel and Chalne did: which worke his grand-child Ninus afterward amplified and finished, as Semiramis (this Ninus his wife) did Babylon. Hence it came to passe, that as Semiramis was counted the Foundresse of the Citie which shee only finished: so also Ninus of Ninine: Quam quidem Babylonem potuit instaurare; She might repaire or renew Babylon, saith S. Augu∣stine. For so did Nabuchodonosor vaunt himselfe to be the Founder of Babylon also, because he built vp againe some part of the wall, ouer-borne by the furie of the Ri∣uer: which worke of his stood till Alexanders time, whereupon he vaunted thus: Is Dan. 4. 27. not this great Babel which I haue built? §. IIII. Of the acts of NIMROD and BELVS, as farre as now they are knowne. BVt to returne to the Storie, it is plaine in Moses, that Nimrod (whom Philo interpreteth transfugium; and Iulius Africanus surnamed Saturne ) was the establisher of the Babylonian Monarchie, of whom there is no other thing written, then that his Empire in the beginning consisted of those foure Cities before remembred, Babel, Erec, Accad, and Chalne: and that from hence he propagated his Empire into Assyria; and in Assyria built foure more Cities (to wit) Niniue, Rehoboth, Celah, and Resen. And seeing that he spent much time in building Babel it selfe and those adioyning, and that his trauailes were many ere he came into Shinaar: that worke of Babel (such as it was) with the other three Cities, and the large foundation of Niniue, and the other Ci∣ties of Assyria which he builded (considered with the want of materials, and with other impediments) were of greater difficultie then any thing performed by his Successors in many yeeres after: to whose vndertakings time had giuen so great an increase of people; and the examples and patternes of his beginning so great an aduancement and encouragement: in whose time (saith Glycas ) all these Nations were called Meropes, à sermonis linguarum terrae{que} diuisione; By reason that the earth and the speech were then diuided. Belus, or Bel, or Iupiter Belus, succeeded Nimrod, after he had reigned 114. yeeres; of whose acts and vndertakings there is little written. For it is thought that he spent much of his time in disburdening the low Lands of Babylon, and drying and making firme ground of all those great Fennes and ouer-flowne Marishes which adioyned vnto it. For any of his Warres or Conquests there is no report, other then of his begun enterprise against Sabatius King of Armenia, and those parts of Scythia which Berosus calls Scythia Saga, whose sonne and successor Barzanes became subiect and Tributarie to Ninus, that followed the warre to effect, which was by his Father Belus begunne. §. V. That we are not to maruaile how so many Kingdomes could be erected about these times: and of VEXORIS of Aegypt, and TANAIS of Scythia. THat so many Kingdomes were erected in all those Easterne parts of the World so soone after Nimrod, (as by the storie of Ninus is made manifest) the causes were threefold, (namely) Oportunitie, Example, and Necessitie. For Oportunitie being a Princesse liberall and power∣full, bestoweth on her first Entertayners many times more bene∣fits, then either Fortune can, or Wisedome ought; by whose presence alone the vn∣derstanding mindes of men receiue all those helps and supplyes, which they either want or wish for: so as euery Leader of a troupe (after the diuision of tongues and dispersion of People) finding these faire offers made vnto them, held the power which they possest, and gouerned by discretion all those people, whom they con∣ducted to their destined places. For it cannot be conceiued, that when the Earth was first diuided, mankinde straggled abroade like beasts in a Desart; but that by a∣greement they disposed themselues, and vnder-tooke to inhabite all the knowne parts of the World, and by distinct Families and Nations: otherwise, those remote Regions from Babylon and Shinaar, which had Kings, and were peopled in Ninus time, would not haue beene possest in many hundreds of yeeres after, as then they were; neyther did those that were sent, and trauailed farre off (order being the true parent of prosperous successe) vndertake so difficult enterprizes without a Condu∣cter or Commander. Secondly, the Example of Nimrod with whom it succeeded well, strengthened euery humour that aspired. Thirdly, Necessitie resolued all men by the arguments of common miseries, that without a Commander and Magi∣strate, neither could those that were laborious, and of honest dispositions, enjoy the haruest of their owne Trauailes: nor those which were of little strength, secure themselues against violence: nor those which sought after any proportion of greatnesse, eyther possesse the same in quiet, or rule and order their owne Ministers and Attendants. That these causes had wrought these effects, the vndertakings and Conquests of Ninus (the sonne of Belus ) made it apparent: for hee found euery where Kings and Monarches, what way soeuer his Ambition led him in the Warres. But Nimrod (his Grand-father) had no companion King, to vs knowne, when he first tooke on him Soueraignetie and sole commandement of all those the children of Noah, which came from the East into Babylonia: though in his life time others al∣so raysed themselues to the same estate; of which hereafter. Belus (his sonne and Successour) found Sabatius King of Armenia and Scythia, sufficiently powerfull to resist his attempts: which Sabatius I take to bee the same, which Iustine cals Tanais; and should coniecture, that Mizraim had beene his Vexoris, were it not that I vehe∣mently suspect some errour, (as Iustine placeth him) in the time of that Vexoris, who See more of this, l. 2. of this first Part. cap. 2. §. 6. by many circumstances seemes to me rightly accounted by the Iudicious and Lear∣ned Reineccius all one with the great Sesostris, that liued certaine Ages after Ninus. This Belus, the second King of Babylon, raigned 65. yeeres, according to the common account. §. VI. Of the name of BELVS, and other names affine vnto it. WHence this second King and Successour of Nimrod had the name of Bel, or Belus, question hath beene made: for it seemeth rather a name imposed, or (of addition) giuen by Ninus, then assumed by Belus him∣selfe. Cyrillus against Iulian cals the Father of Ninus Arbelus, affirming that hee was the first of all men that caused himselfe to be called a God: which were it so, then might the name of Belus bee thence deriued. But Bel, as many Learned Wri∣ters haue obserued, signifieth the Sunne in the Chaldoean Tongue; and therefore did Ninus and Semiramis giue that name to their Father, that hee might bee honoured as the Sunne, which the Babylonians worshipped as a God. And as this Title was assu∣med in after-times by diuers others of the Chaldoean Princes, and Babylonian Satrapae: so was it vsed (in imitation) by the chiefe of the Carthaginians and other Nations, as some Historians haue . To this Bel, or Belus, pertaine (as in affinitie) those voyces of Baal, Baalim, Belphegor, Beelphagor, Belsebub, and Beelsephon. Those that are learned in the Hebrew and Chal∣doean conuert the word Baal by the Latine, Princeps militiae, Chiefe in the Warre; though Daniel was so called (sayth SVIDAS) Ob honorem explicationis arcanarumrerum; In honour of his expounding secrets. Saint Hierome makes Bel, Beel, and Baal, to haue the . in . c. 2. same signification: and sayth, that the Idoll of Babylon was so called, which Ninus in memory of his father set vp to be worshipped: to which that he might adde the more honour and reuerence, he made it a Sanctuarie and refuge for all offendors. Hence (sayth Lyranus ) came Idolatrie, and the first vse of Images into the World. Isidore Lyr. in Sapien. Salom. c. 11. Isid. l. 8. c. 11. doth interprete Bel by Vetus, old or ancient; adding, that as among the Assyrians it is taken for Saturne and the Sunne: so in the Punicke or Carthaginian Language it signifi∣eth God. makes it an Assyrian name properly; and Iosephus a Tyrian. Hee al∣so affirmeth that the Idoll which the Moabites worshipped (by them erected on the Mountaine Phegor, or , and called Baal ) is the same which the Latines call Pria∣pus, the God of Gardens; which was also the opinion of Saint Hierome. But that the Hieron. in Ose. c. 4. & 9. word Bel, or Beel, was as much to say as God, appeareth by the word Beelzebub, the Idoll of . For Bel, or Beel soundeth (God) and Sebub (Flies or Hornets:) by which name (notwithstanding) the Iewes expresse the Prince of Deuils. But the Prophet Ose teacheth vs the proper signification of this word from the voice of God himselfe; And at that day (sayth the Lord) thou shalt call mee ISHI, and shalt call mee no more BAALIM: for I will take away the name of BAALIM out of their mouthes. For al∣though the name of Baal, or Bahal, be iustly to bee vsed towards God; yet in respect that the same was giuen to Idols, God both hated it and forbad it. And the vsing of the word Bel among the Chaldaeans for the Sunne, was not because it properly signi∣fieth the Sunne, but because the Sunne there was worshipped as a God: as also the Fire was, tanquam Solis particula. As for the wordes compounded (before remem∣bred (as Belphegor, and Belsephon; Belsephon is expounded out of FACIVS, Speculoe vel , The Lord of the Watch-towre, or of the Guard: the other word noteth the Idoll, and the place wherein it was worshipped. It is also written Belpeor, Baalpeor: and Peor (they say) is as much as Denudauit; and therefore the word ioy∣ned expresseth a naked Image. Some there are that call this Belus, the sonne of Sa∣turne: for it was vsed among the Ancients to name the Father Saturne, the Sonne Iupiter, and the Grand-child Hercules. SATVRNI dicuntur familiarum Nobilium, Re∣gum aequi. . 1. qui vrbes condiderunt senissimi; primogeniti eorum IOVES & IVNONES; HER∣CVLES vero nepotes eorum fortissimi; The ancientest of Noble Families, and Kings which founded Cities, are called SATVRNES; their first-borne IVPITERS and IVNOES; their valiant Nephewes HERCVLES. But this Belus (sayth L. Viues ) was famous by reason of his warlike sonne Ninus, who caused his Father to bee worshipped as a GOD by the name of Iupiter Babylonius, whom the Aegyptians (transported by the Dreames Diod. l. 3. of their Antiquitie) make one of theirs. For Neptune (say they) vpon Libya the Daughter of Epaphus begat this Iupiter Belus, who was Father to Aegyptus. They adde, that this Belus carrying a Colonie to the Riuer of Euphrates there built a Citie, in which he ordained after the Aegyptian manner. But were there any the sonne of Epaphus and Isis, or of Neptune and Libya, or (with Eusebius ) of Telegonus, who after the death of Apis married Isis, ( Cecrops then raigning in Athens ) the same was not this Babylonian Belus of whom wee speake, but rather some other Belus, of whom the Aegyptians so much vaunted. §. VII. Of the worshipping of Images begunne from BELVS in Babel. AS for the Babylonian Belus, hee was the most ancient Belus, and the In∣uentour of Astronomie, if Plinie say true: from whence the Aegyptians might borrow both the name and the Doctrine. Some part of the Temple, in which his Statue or Image was honoured as a God, the same Authour affirmeth that it remained in his time. Of the Sepulchre of Belus, Strabo writeth thus. Ouer the Riuer (sayth hee) there Strabo. l. 13. c. 3. are Gardens, where they say the ruines of BELVS his Tombe, which XERXES brake vp, are yet remaining. It was a square Pyramis made of Bricke, a furlong high, and on euery side it had a furlong in breadth. It appeares by Cyril against , that hee ob∣tained L. 4. cont. Iulian. diuine worship yet liuing: for so hee writes of him (calling him ARBELVS.) ARBELVS, vir superbus & arrogans, primus hominum dicitur à subditis Deitatis nomen accepisse: perseuerârunt igitur Assyrij, & illis gentes sacrificantes ei. , a man very proud and arrogant, is accounted to be the first of all men that was euer honoured by their subiects with title of Deitie; (or with the name of God.) The Assy∣rians therefore and the bordering Nations haue perseuered, sacrificing to him. Euen Arius also, whom Suidas cals Thuras, who succeeded next after Ninyas, was made an Idoll∣god among them, if we credit Suidas. After Ninus (that is, after Ninyas) Thuras raigned (saith Suidas ) whom they called after the name of the Planet Mars; a man of sharpe and fierce disposition, who bid∣ding battaile to Caucasus of the Stocke of Iapheth slue him. The Assyrians worship∣ped him for their God, and called him Baal (that is) Mars; thus farre Suidas. Nei∣ther is it vnlikely but that many among Idolatrous Nations were Deified in their life-times, or soone after: though I denie not but that the most of their Images and Statuae were first erected without diuine worship, only in memorie of the glorious acts of Benefactors, as Glycas rightly conceiueth; and so afterward the Deuill crept into those woodden and brazen carcasses, when Posteritie had lost the memorie of their first inuention. Hereof Isidore speaketh in this manner: Quos autem Pagani Deos homines fuerunt, & pro vniuscuias{que} vitae meritis vel magnificentia, a∣pud suos post mortem coeperunt: sed (Daemonibus persuadentibus) quos illipro sua memoria âuerunt, minores Deos existimârunt: ad istavero magis excolenda accesserunt Poeta∣rum figmenta; They were men (sayth he) whom the Pagans affirmed to be Gods: and euery one for his merits or magnificence beganne after his death to bee honoured of his owne. But at length (the Deuils perswading) they accounted them lesser Gods, whose memories, they honoured: and the Fictions of the Poets made the opinions (concerning the honours of the dead) much more superstitious. And that the worshipping of Images was brought in by the Pagans, and Heathen Nations, it is not Isidore alone that witnesseth; but Gregorie: Gentilitas (sayth hee) Greg. . inuentrix & caput est imaginum; Gentilisme is the inuentresse and ground of Images: and Ambrose; Gentes lignum adorant, tanquam imaginem Dei; The Gentiles adore wood as it Ambros. in Psal. 108. were the Image of God. Eusebius also affirmeth as much, and calleth the worshipping Euseb. li. 7. c. 18. of Images a custome borrowed of the Heathen. The like hath Saint Augustine Aug. c. 13. against ADIMANTVS. Et verentur (sayth LACTANTIVS) nereligio vana sit, sinibil . lib. 2. c. videant quod adorent; They feare their Religion would bee vaine, should they not see that which they worship. And (out of doubt) the Schoolemen shift this fearefull custome very strangely. For seeing the very workemanship is forbidden, how can the heart of a wise Christi∣an satisfie it selfe with the distinction of Doulia and Hyperdoulia, which can imply no∣thing but some difference of worshipping of those Images after they are made? And it is of all things the most strange, why religious and learned men should straine their wits to defend the vse of those things, which the Scriptures haue not only no where warranted, but expresly in many places forbidden, and cursed the Practisers thereof. Yet this doctrine of the Deuill was so strongly and subtilly rooted, as neither the expresse Commandement of God himselfe, Thou shalt not make any grauen Image, nor all the threatnings of Moses and the Prophets after him could remooue, weed it, or by feare, or by any perswasions lead the hearts of men from it. For where shall we find words of greater weight, or of plainer instruction then these? Take there∣fore good heed to your selues (for yee saw no Image in the day that the Lord spake vnto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire) that yee corrupt not your selues; and make you a grauen Image, or representation of any Figure, whether it bee the likenesse of Male or Female. And besides the expresse Commandement, Thou shalt make thee no grauen Image, and the prohibition in many Scriptures, so it is written in the Booke of Wisedome, That the inuention of Idols was the beginning of Whoredome: and the finding of them the corruption of life: for they were not from the beginning, neyther shall they continue for euer. And whereas the Schoolemen affirme, that the Prophets spake against the wor∣shipping of the Heathen Idols, it is manifest that Moses spake of Images of the li∣uing God, and not of Baal and the rest of that nature, for you saw no Image (sayth MO∣SES) that day that the Lord spake vnto you in Horeb. Surely it was excellently sayd of BASIL; Noli aliquam in illo formam imaginari, ne circumscrib as eum mente : Doe not imagine any forme to be in God, lest thou limit or circumscribe him in thy minde too. Now, if the great Basil thought it a presumption vnlawfull to represent a patterne of the infinite God to our owne thoughts and mindes, how farre doe those men presume that put him vnder the greazie Pensill of a Painter, or the rustie Axe or other Instru∣ment of a Carpenter or Caruer. For as this dishonour to the infinite and incomprehensible God beganne in Babel: so did the Deuill transport and speed this inuention into all the Regions adioyning, and into Aegypt and Greece. The Romanes for a while resisted the erection of these Idols and Images, refusing to set them in their Temples for 170. yeeres, obseruing therein the Law of : who thought it impietie to resemble things most beautifull, by things most base. Tarquinius Priscus afterwards preuailing, and following the vanitie of the (a Nation of all others vnder the Sunne most deluded by Satan ) setvp the Images of their Gods; which (as Saint Augustine witnesseth) that Varro both De Ciuit. Dei. li, 4. cap. 31. bewailed, and vtterly condemned: and which Seneca thus derideth; Simulachra deorum venerantur, illis supplicant, genu posite illa adorant, & cùm haec suspiciant, fabros qui illa contemnunt; The Images of the Gods are worshipped, those they pray vnto with bended knees; those they adore, and while they so greatly admire them, they the Handi-craftsmen that made them: which also Sedulius the Poet in this sort scof∣feth at: Heu miseri qui vana colunt, qui corde sinistro Religiosa sibi sculpunt simulachra, suum{que} Factorem fugiunt, & quae fecere verentur. Quis furor est? quoe tanta animos dementia ludit? Vt volucrem, turpem{que} bouem, Draconem, Semi-hominem{que} supplex homo pronus adoret. Ah wretched they that worship vanities, And consecrate dumbe Idols in their heart, Who their owne Maker (God on high) despise, And feare the worke of their owne hands and art. What furie? what great madnesse doth beguile Mens minds? that man should vgly shapes adore, Of Birds, or Buls, or Dragons, or the vile Halfe-dogge-halfe-man on knees for aide implore. And though this deuice was barbarous, and first, and many yeeres practised by Heathen Nations onely, till the Iewes were corrupted in Aegypt, yet it is not alone that laugheth to scorne the ignorant stupiditie of his Nation: but Iustin remembreth how the Sibyls inueighed against Images: and Hospinian, how So∣phocles taught, that it was to the soules of men to erect and adore those Babels. Strabo and Herodotus witnesse, that the Persians did not erect or set vp any Statue of their Gods. Lycurgus neuer taught it the Lacedoemonians, but thought it im∣pietie to represent immortall natures by mortall Figures. Eusebius also witnesseth in his sixt Booke deproeparatione Euangelica, that it was forbidden by a Law in , or among the Brachmans in India, that Images should be worshipped. The same doe Tacitus Crinitus report of the ancient Germans. Many other Authours might bee remembred that witnesse the disdaine which the Heathen themselues had of this childish Idolatrie: of which Hospinian hath written at large in his Tract, de origine imaginum. And it was truly said, Omnia mala exempla bonis initijs orta sunt, All ill ex∣amples haue sprung from good beginnings. The Heathen at first made these Statuoe and Images, but in memorie of such remarkable men, as had deserued best of their Coun∣tries and Common-wealths: Effigies hominum (sayth PLINIE) non exprimi, nisi aliqua illustri causa perpetuitatem merentium: Men were not wont to make Pictures, but of men which merited for some notable to be remembred. And though of the more ancient Papists, some haue borrowed of the Gentiles (as appeareth in La∣ctantius ) that defence for Images: That Simulachra are pro , vt homines inuisibilem cognoscere: Images (say they, and so before them the Heathen said) are in stead of Letters, whereby men might learne to know the inuisi∣ble God: in which vnderstanding (perhaps they no otherwise esteemed them then Pi∣ctures indeed; yet as that of Baal or Bel set vp in memorie of Belus the Babylonian, be∣came afterwards the most reuerenced Idoll of the World, by which so many Na∣tions (and they which were appropriate to God himselfe) were misled and cast away: so those very stockes and stones, and painted Canuases (called the pictures of Christ, our Ladie, and others) were by thousands of ignorant people, not onely adored, but esteemed to haue life, motion, and vnderstanding. On these stockes wee call (sayth the Booke of Wisedome) when we passe through the raging waues, on these stockes more rotten then the Ship that carieth vs. This Heathen inuention of Images became so fruitfull in after-times, breeding an infinite multitude of gods, that they were forced to distinguish them into de∣grees and orders; as Dij Consentes, seu maiorum gentium; selecti, patrilij, insigniores, dijmedij: Counselling Gods, or Gods of the mightiest Nobilitie, select Gods, Patrian, Gods of marke, and common Gods (which the Romanes called Medioxumi) dij infimi, and terre∣striall Heroes, and multitudes of other Gods: of which Saint Augustine hath made large mention in his Booke de Ciuitate Dei. But (saith Lactantius ) among all those Lib. 14. miserable soules and rotten bodies, worshipped by men more like to their Idols, did Epimenides Cretensis (by what good Angell mooued I know not) erect in the Athe∣nian Fields, Altars to the vnknowne God, which stood with the same title and dedi∣cation euen to the times of Saint Paul: who made them first know to whom those Altars belonged, and opened their eyes which were capable of grace, that they might discerne the difference betwixt that light which lighteneth euery man, and the obscure and stinking mist wherin the Deuil had so many yeeres led and misled them. And it sufficed not that the multitude of these Gods was so great in generall, or that euerie Nation had some one which tooke particular and singular care of them; as Iu∣piter in Creete, Isis in Aegypt, in Athens Minerua, in Samos Inno, in Paphos Venus, and so of all other parts; but euery Citie, and almost euery Family had a God a-part. For as it is written in the second of Kings: the men of Babel, made Succoth Benoth, and the Cap. 17. v. 18. 31 men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima, and the Auns made Nibhaz and Tarrak, and the burnt their children in the fire to Adrame∣lech. All which how plainly hath the Prophet Esay derided? Men cut downe Trees, rinde them, burne a part of them, make readie their meate, and warme themselues by the fire thereof, and of theresidue he maketh a God; an Idoll, and prayeth vnto it: but God hath shut their eyes from sight, and their hearts from vnderstanding. It is therefore safest for a Chri∣stian to beleeue the Commandements of God so direct against Idolatrie, to beleeue the Prophets, and to beleeue Saint Paul: who speaketh thus plainely and feelingly, Cap. 44. My beloued, flye from Idolatrie, I speake as vnto them which haue vnderstanding, iudge yee what I say. §. VIII. Of the Warres of NINVS: and lastly of his Warre against ZOROASTER. VNTO this Belus succeeded Ninus, the first that commanded the exer∣cise of Idolatrie, the first that iniuriously inuaded his Neighbour Prin∣ces; and the first that without shame or feare committed adulterie in publique. But as of Belus there is no certaine memorie (as touching particulars:) so of this Ninus (whose Storie is gathered out of Pro∣phane Authours) I find nothing so warrantable, but that the same may bee dispu∣ted, and in the greatest part doubted. For although that piece of Berosus set out and commented vpon by Annius, hath many good things in it, and giueth great light (as Chytraeus noteth) to the vnderstanding of Diodorus Siculus, Dion, Halycarnassaeus, and others: yet Lodouicus Viues, B. Rhenanus, and others after them haue layed open the imperfection and defects of the Fragment; proouing directly that it cannot bee the same Berosus which liued in Alexanders time, cited by Athenaeus and Iosephus: and Athen. l. 14. Ioseph. . Ap∣pion. l. 1. & 7. whose Statue the Athenians erected, sayth Plinie. Yet it is from him chiefely, that ma∣ny haue gathered the succession of the Babylonian and Assyrian Princes, euen from Nimrod to the eighteenth King Ascatades, and to the times of Iosua. For of Metasthe∣nes an Historian, of the Race of the Persian Priests, there are found but certaine Pa∣pers, or some few lines of the Chaldaean and Monarchies: but hee afterwards in the collection of the Persian Kings is not without his errours. Ctesias of (a Citie adioyning to ) who liued together with Cyrus the yonger, and with Artaxerxes Mnemon, gathered his Historie out of the Per∣sian Records, and reacheth as farre vpwards as Ninus and Semiramis: and though in the Storie of Cyrus the yonger, Xenophon approoueth him in some things, and Athe∣naeus, Pausanias and Tertullian cite him; yet so base and apparent are his flatteries of the times and Princes with whom he liued, and so incredible are the numbers which he finds in the Armies of Ninus, and especially of Semiramis; as whatsoeuer his re∣ports were, times haue consumed his workes, sauing some very few excerptions late∣ly published. And therefore in things vncertaine, seeing a long discourse cannot bee pleasing to men of iudgement, I will passe ouer the Acts of this third Assyrian, in as few words as I can expresse them. Saint Augustine affirmes that Ninus mastered all Asia, India ex∣cepted. Others say that he wanne it all, saue India, Bactria, and Arabia. For he made Aricus of Arabia the Companion of his Conquests, with whom hee entred into a straight league of amitie, because he commanded many people and was his Kinsman, and a Chusite, and the neerest Prince confronting Babylonia. His first enterprize was vpon Syria, which he might easily subdue, both because he inuaded it on the sodaine, and because it lay next him: and also because the Arabians and their King Aricus (which bordered Syria) assisted him in the Conquest thereof. The King of Armenia, Barzanes, he forced to acknowledge him, and to aide him in his Warre against Zoroaster: for from Armenia hee bent himselfe that way toward the East; but that euer he commanded the lesser Asia, I doe not beleeue, for none of his Successours had any possession therein. His third Warre was against Pharnus, King of the Medes, whom it is sayd that hee ouerthrew, and cruelly murthered with his seuen children, though others affirme that they all dyed in one battaile against him. Whether hee inuaded Zoroaster be∣fore the building or amplifying of Niniue, or after, it is vncertaine. It is said that he made two expeditions into Bactria: and that finding little or ill successe in the first, he returned, and set the worke of Niniue forward: and then a second time entred Bactria with 1700000. Foot, and 200000. Horse, and 10000. sixe hundred Cha∣riots: being encountred by Zoroaster with 400000. But Ninus preuayling, and Aug. de . . Zoroaster slaine, he entred farther into the Countrie, and besieged the chiefe Citie thereof, called Bactra or Bactrion (saith Stephanus: ) which by a passage found, and Steph. de Vrb. an assault giuen by Semiramis (the wife of Menon) he entred and possest. Vpon this occasion Ninus both admiring her iudgement and valour, together with her person and externall beautie, fancied her so strongly, as (neglecting all Princely re∣spects) he tooke her from her husband, whose eyes he threatned to thrust out if he refused to consent. He therefore yeelding to the passion of loue in Ninus, and to the passion of sorrow in himselfe, by the strong perswasions of shame and disho∣nor, cast himselfe head-long into the water and dyed. CHAP. XI. Of ZOROASTER, supposed to haue beene the chiefe Author of Magick arts: and of the diuers kindes of Magicke. §. I. That ZOROASTER was not CHAM, nor the first Inuenter of Astrologie, or of Magicke: and that there were diuers great Magicians of this name. ZOROASTER King of the Bactrians, Vincentius sup∣poseth to be Cham, the sonne of Noah: A fancie of little probabilitie. For Cham was the Paternall An∣cester of Ninus, the Father of Chus, the Grand-father of Nimrod, whose sonne was Belus, the Father of Ni∣nus. It may be that Vincentius had heard of that booke which was called Scripturae Cham, deuised by some wicked Knaue, and so intituled: of which Sixtus Se∣nensis hath made the due mention. It is reported by Cassianus, that Serenus Abbas gaue Cassian. in Octa. Col. cap. 21. the inuention of Magicke to Cham, the sonne of Noah: so did Comestor in his Scholasticall Historie: which Arte (saith he) with the seuen liberall Sciences he writ in fourteene Pillers: seuen of which were made of brasse, to resist the defacing by the waters of the Floud; and seuen of brick against the iniurie of fire. There was also another deuised discourse, which went vnder the title of Prophetia Cham. Cassianus out of Serenus hath somewhat like vnto this of Comestor: These be Cassianus wordes: CHAM ( filius NOAH) qui superstitionibus istis & sacri∣legis fuit artibus infectus, sciens nullum se posse super hijs memorialem librum in Arcam inferre, in qua erat cum patre iusto, &c. CHAM (the sonne of NOAH) who was infected with these superstitions, and sacrilegious Arts, knowing that he could not bring any booke or memoriall of that nature into the Arke, wherein he was to remayne with his godly Father, caused the Precepts and Rules thereof to be grauen in metall and hard stone. S. Augustine noteth that Zoroaster was said to haue laught at his birth, when all other children weepe; which presaged the great knowledge which afterward he at∣tayned vnto: being taken for the Inuenter of naturall Magick and other Arts; for the Corrupter, saith Plinie and Iustine. But I doe not thinke that Zoroaster inuented the doctrine of the Horoscopes or Natiuities; or first found out the nature of herbs, stones, and mineralls, or their Sympatheticall or Antipatheticall workings; of which, I know not what King of Chaldaea is also made the Inuenter. I rather thinke that these knowledges were farre more ancient, and left by Noah to his sonnes. For Abraham who had not any acquaintance with Zoroaster, (as Iosephus reporteth) was no lesse learned herein then any other in that age, if he exceeded not all men then liuing: differing from the wisedome of after-times in this, that he knew and acknow∣ledged the true cause, and giuer of life and vertue to nature and all naturall things; whereas others (forgetting Gods infinite, dispersed, and vniuersall power) admired the instruments, and attributed proper strength to the things themselues, (from which the effects were sensible) which belonged to that wisedome, Which being one, . c. 7. and remayning in it selfe, can doe all things and reneweth all. Now whether this Zoroaster (ouer-throwne by Ninus) were the same which was so excellent a Naturalist, it is doubted. For Zoroaster the Magician, Ctesias calls Oxyartes, whom Plinie findes of a later time. And if Zoroaster were taken away by a Spirit (being in the midst of his Disciples) as some Authors report, then Zoroaster, slaine by Ninus, was not the Magician: which is also the opinion of . Scalig. in Euseb. Againe, Iosephus and Cedrenus affirme, that Seth first found out the Planets, or Iosep. lib. 1. wandring Starres, and other Motions of the Heauens: for if this arte had beene in∣uented Antiq. c. 4. by Zoroaster, he could not haue attayned to any such excellencie therein, in his owne life time; but being a man (as it seemeth) of singular iudgement, he might adde somewhat to this kinde of knowledge, and leaue it by writing to posteritie. But of this Zoroaster there is much dispute: and no lesse iangling about the word and arte of Magick. remembreth foure, to whom the name of Zoroaster, or Zoroastres was giuen: which by Hermodorus and Dinon seemeth to be but a cognomen, or name of arte, and was as much to say, as astrorum cultor. The first, Arnobius calleth the Bactrian, which may be the same that Ninus ouerthrew: the second, a Chaldaean, and the Astronomer of Ninus: the third was Zoroaster Pamphylius, who li∣ued in the time of Cyrus, and his familiar: the fourth, Zoroaster Armenius, the Ne∣phew of Hostianes, which followed Xerxes into Greece: betweene whom and Cyrus there past threescore and eighteene yeeres. Suidas remembreth a fift, called Per some∣dus sapiens: and Plato speaketh of Zoroaster the sonne of Oromasdes; which Picus Mi∣randula confirmeth. Now of what Nation the first and chiefe Zoroaster was, it is doubted. Plinie and Laertius make him a Persian. Gemisthius or Pletho, Ficinus and , make him a Chaldaean. But by those bookes of one Zoroaster, found by Picus Mirandula, it appea∣reth plainely, that the Author of them was a Chaldaean by Nation, though the word (Chaldaean) was as often giuen to the learned Priests peculiarly, as for any distinguish∣ment of Nations. Porphyrius makes the Chaldaei and Magi diuers; Picus the same. But that this Zoroaster was a Chaldaean both by Nation and Profession, it appeareth by his Bookes, which (saith Picus) were written in the Chaldaean tongue; and the Comment in the same language. Now that the Magi and they were not differing, it may be iudged by the name of those bookes of Zoroaster, which in an Epistle of Mirandula to Ficinus, he saith, to be intituled, Patris EZRE ZOROASTRIS, & MELCHIOR magorum oracula. §. II. Of the name of Magia: and that it was anciently farre diuers from Coniuring, and Witchcraft. NOw for Magicke it selfe; which Arte (saith MIRANDVLA) pauci intelli∣gunt, . Mir. fol. 81. multi ; Few vnderstand, and many reprehend. Et sicut ignotos semper allatrant; As Dogs barke at those they know not: so they condemne and hate the things they vnderstand not: I thinke it not amisse (leauing Ninus for awhile) to speake somewhat thereof. It is true that many men abhorre the very name and word (Magus) of Simon Magus: who being indeede, not Magus, but Goës, (that is) familiar with euill spirits, vsurped that title. For Magicke, Coniuring, and Witcherie, are farre differing Arts, whereof Plinie being ignorant scoffeth thereat. For Nero (saith Plinie) who . l. 30 . Nat. had the most excellent Magicians of the East sent him by Tyridates King of Arme∣nia, who held that Kingdome by his grace, found the arte after long studie and labour altogether ridiculous. Magus is a Persian word primitiuely, whereby is exprest such a one as is altoge∣ther Porphyr. & A∣pul. conuersant in things diuine. And (as Plato affirmeth) the arte of Magicke is the Plato. in of worshipping God. To which effect Apollonius in his Epistles expounding the word ( ) saith, that the Persians called their gods : whence he addeth that Magus is either: or (that is) that Magus is a name some∣time of him that is a God by nature; sometimes of him that is in the seruice of God: in which latter sense it is taken, Matth. 2. v. 1. And this is the first and highest kinde: which Piccolominie calleth diuine Magicke: and these did the Latines newly . . . 1. 7. intitle Sapientes or Wisemen: For, the feare & worship of God is the beginning of knowledge. Piccol. de . . . These Wisemen the Greekes call Philosophers: the Indians, Brachmans: which name they somewhat neerely retayne to this day, calling their Priests Bramines; among the Ae∣gyptians they were termed Priests; with the Hebrewes they were called Cabalistes, Prophets, Scribes, and Pharisees: amongst the Babylonians they were differenced by the name of Chaldaeans: and among the Persians, Magicians: of whom Arnobius (spea∣king of Hostanes, one of the ancient Magicians) vseth these wordes: Et verum Deum cum . pa. 360. merita maiestate prosequitur, & Angelos ministros Dei, sed veri, eius nouit as∣sistere, Idem daemonas prodit terrenos, vagos, humanitatis inimicos; SOSTHENES (for so M. Foelix calleth him, not HOSTANES) the due maiestie to the true God, and ac∣knowledgeth that his Angels are ministers and messengers which attend the worship of the true God. He also hath deliuered that there are Deuills earthly and wandering, and enemies to mankinde. HIS MAIESTIE also in his first Booke of Daemonologie c. 3. acknowledgeth, that in the Persian tongue the word (Magus) imports as much as a contemplator of di∣uine & heauenly sciences; but vniustly so called, because the Chaldaeans were ignorant of the true diuinitie. And it is also right which HIS MAIESTIE auoweth, that vn∣der the name of Magick al other vnlawfull arts are comprehended, and yet doth HIS MAIESTIE distinguish it from Necromancie, , and the rest: of all which he hath written largely and most learnedly. For the Magicke which HIS MAIESTIE Daemonolog. l. . cap. 1. condemneth, is of that kinde whereof the Deuil is a partie. Daniel in his second chap∣ter nameth foure kindes of those Wisemen: Arioli, Magi, Malefici, and Chaldaei. Arioli the old Latine translation calleth Sophistes: Vatablus and Pagninus, , or , or Philosophers, or (according to the note of Vatablus) Naturalists: Nempè sunt Magi apud , quod Philosophi apud Graecos ( ) diuinarum humanarum{que}, scientiam profitentes; For the Magi are the same with the Barbarians, as the Philosophers are with the Graecians (that is) men that professe the knowledge of things both diuine and humane. The Greeke and the English call them Inchanters; Iunius, Magicians; Castalion, Coniectarers: in the Syrian they are all foure by one name called Sapientes Babylonis; The Wisemen of Babel. The second sort Vatablus, Pagnin, Iunius, and our English, call Astrologers; Hierome and the Septuagint, Magicians. The third kinde are Malefici, or Venefici; in Hierome, Pagnin, and the Septuagint, Witches, or Poysoners: in Iunius, Praestigiatores, or Sorcerers, as in English. That Witches are also rightly so called Venefici, or Poysoners; and that indeede there is a kinde of Malefici, which without any arte of Magicke or Necromancie vse the helpe of the Deuill to doe mischiefe, HIS MAIESTIE confirmeth in the first Chapter of his second Booke: speaking also in the fifth Chapter of their practice, to mixe the powder of dead bodies with other things by the Deuill prepared; and at o∣ther times to make pictures of Waxe, or Clay, or otherwise (as it were ) to effect those things, which the Deuill by other meanes bringeth to passe. The fourth, all Translators call Chaldaeans: who tooke vpon them to foretell all things to come, as well naturall as humane, and their euents: and this they vaunted to performe by the influences of the Starres by them obserued, and vnderstood. Such were, and to this day partly (if not altogether) are the corruptions, which haue made odious the very name of Magicke, hauing chiefly sought (as is the man∣ner of all impostures) to counterfait the highest and most noble part of it, yet so as they haue also crept into the inferior degrees. A second kinde of Magicke was that part of Astrologie, which had respect to sow∣ing and planting, and all kindes of agriculture and husbandrie: which was a know∣ledge of the motions and influences of the Starres into those lower Elements. Philo Iudaeus goeth farther, affirming, that by this part of Magicke or Astrologie, together with the motions of the Starres and other heauenly bodies, Abraham found out the knowledge of the true God, while he liued in Chaldaea: Qui contemplatione creaturarum cognouit Creatorem, (saith . .) Who knew the Creator by the De vit. sanct. Glyc. Annal. fol. 180. contemplation of the creature. IOSEPHVS reporteth of Abraham, that he instructed the Aegyptians in Arithmeticke and Astronomie, who before ABRAHAMS comming vnto them knew none of these sciences. And so doth Archangelus de Burgo, in defence of Mirandula against Garsias: ALEX∣ANDER & EVPOLEMON , quod ABRAHAM sanctitate & sapientia omnium Chaldaeos primum, deinde Phoenices, demum Aegyptios sacerdotes Astrolo∣giaem & diuina docuerit; ALEXANDER (saith he, meaning ALEXANDER POLYHI∣STOR) and EVPOLEMON affirme, that ABRAHAM the holyest and wisest of men, did first teach the Chaldaeans, then the Phoenicians; lastly, the Aegyptian Priests, Astrologie and diuine knowledge. The third kinde of Magicke contayneth the whole Philosophie of nature; not See vpon his Comment. in Aug. . Dei, l. 18. c. 2. the brabblings of the Aristotclians, but that which bringeth to light the inmost ver∣tues, and draweth them out of natures hidden bosome to humane vse, Virtutes in centro centri latentes; Vertues hidden in the center of the center, according to the Chymists. Of this sort were Albertus, Arnoldus de villanoua, Raymond, Bacon, and many others: and before these, in elder times, and who better vnderstood the power of nature, and how to apply things that worke to things that suffer, were before spoken of: Apollonius remembred by S. Hierome to Paulinus; in some mens opinion Numa Pompilius among the Romanes: among the Indians, Thespian: among the Ae∣gyptians, Hermes: among the Babylonians, Budda: the had Zamolxis: the Hy∣perborians (as is supposed) Abbaris: and the Italians, Petrus Aponensis. The Magicke which these men profest is thus defined: Magia est connexio à viro per cum patientibus, sibi congruenter respondentibus, vt inde opera prodeant non sine admiratione qui causam ignorant; Magicke is the connexion of naturall and patients, answerable each to other, wrought by a wise man to the bringing forth of such effects, as are wonderfull to those that know not their causes. In all these three kindes which other men diuide into foure, it seemeth that Zoroaster was exceedingly lear∣ned: especially in the first and highest. For in his Oracles he confesseth God to be the Creator of the Vniuersall: he beleeueth of the Toto in mun∣do lucet Trias, cuius Monas est . Cuncta namque perfecit , & . Trinitie, which he could not in∣uestigate by any naturall knowledge: he speaketh of Angels, and of Paradise: ap∣proueth the immortalitie of the soule: teacheth Truth, Faith, Hope, and Loue, dis∣coursing of the Abstinence and Charitie of the Magi: which Oracles of his, Psellus, Psell. & . Ficinus, Patritius, and others haue gathered and translated. Of this Zoroaster, Eusebius in the Theologie of the Phoenicians, vsing Zoroasters owne wordes: Haec ad verbum scribit (saith EVSEBIVS) De . Euang lib. 1. cap. 7. sempiternus, ingenitus, expers partium, sibijpsi simillimus, benorum omnium auriga, expectans, optimus, prudentissimus, pater iuris, sine doctrina iustitiam perdo∣ctus, natura perfectus, sapiens, sacrae naturae vnious inuentor, &c. Thus writeth ZOROA∣STER word forword. God the first incorruptible, euerlasting, vnbegotten, without parts, most himselfe, the guide of all good, expecting no reward, the best, the wisest, the father of right, hauing learn'd iustice without teaching, perfect wise by nature, the onely inuenter thereof. Sixtus Senensis speaking of the wisedome of the , doth distinguish those Lib. 2. fol. 46. wise men into fiue orders, (to wit) Chascedim, or Chaldaeans: Asaphim, or Magicians: Chartumim; (which he translates Arioli, or Sophists) Mecasphim, or Malefici, or Venefici; Witches; or Poysoners; and Gazarim Augures, or Aruspices, or Diuiners. were those which had the name of Chaldaeans, which were Astronomers: Hij coelorum motus diligentissimè spectârunt; These did most diligently contemplate the mo∣tions of the heauens: whom Philo in the life of Abraham describeth. Asaphim were in the old Latine translation called Philosophers: of the Septuagint and of Hierome, Magicians: Qui de omnium tam diuinarum quàm humanarum cau∣sis Philosophati sunt; Who discoursed of the causes of all things, as well diuine as humane: of whom Origen makes Balaam (the sonne of Beor) to be the first: but Laertius ascri∣beth . l. 1. the inuention of this arte to Zoroastres the Persian. Chartumim, or Inchanters, the Disciples (saith Saint Augustine, Plinie, and Iustine) of another Zoroastres: who corrupted the admirable wisedome of the Magi, which he receiued from his Ancesters. Mecasphim, or , or Witches, are those of which we haue spoken alreadie out of HIS MAIESTIES booke of Daemonologia. Gazarim, or Aruspices (after S. Hierome) which diuine from the entrailes of beasts slaine for sacrifices: or by Gazarim others vnderstand Augures, who diuine by the flying, singing, or feeding of birds. By this distinction we may perceiue the difference betweene those wise men which the Kings of Babylon entertayned; and that the name and profession of the Magi among the ancient Persians was most honest. For as Peucer truely obserueth, Praeerant religioni Persicae, vt in populo Dei , verae Philosophiae dediti erant: Peucer. de Diui∣nat. c. de mag. fol. 135. & 136. nec quisquam Rex Persarum esse, qui non antea Magorum disciplinam percepisset; The Magi (saith he) were the chiefe Ministers of the Persian Religion: as the Leuites among Gods people, and they were giuen to the studies of true Philosophie: neyther could any be King of the Persians, who had not first beene exercised in the mysteries and know∣ledge of the Magi. SIXTVS SENENSIS in defence of Origen against Polychronius and Theophilus, hath two kindes of Magicke, his owne wordes are these: Et ne quem Bibl. l. 6. fol. 424. moueant praemissa POLYCHRONIJ & THEOPHILI testimonia, sciendum est dupli∣cem esse Magiam; alteram ab ORIGINE , per foedera cum daemo∣nibus inita aut verè aut apparenter operatur; alteram ab ORIGINE laudatam, quaead practicen naturalis philosophiae pertinet, docens res ex applicatione mutua naturalium virtutum ad inuicem agentium ac patientium; That the testimonies of THEO∣PHILVS and (saith he) may any , it be vnder∣stood that Magicke is of two sorts, the one euerywhere condemned by ORIGEN; which worketh (whether truely or ) by couenants made with Deuills; the other com∣mended by ORIGEN; which appertayneth to the part of naturall Philosophie, teaching to worke admirable things by the mutuall application of naturall vertues, and suffering reciprocally. This partition Hierome doth embrace in the first of his Commentaries vpon Daniel: where considering of the difference which Daniel makes betweene these foure kindes of wise Men formerly remembred, he vseth this distin∣ction: Quos nos hariolos; caeteri (id est) interpretati sunt, videntur mihi esse qui verbis rem peragunt; Magi, qui de singulis philosophantur; , qui san∣guine & victimis, & saepe contingunt corpora mortuorum: porro in Chaldaeis significari puto, quos vulgo Mathematicos vocant. Consuetudo autem communis pro maleficis accipit, qui aliter habentur suam, eo quòd sint Philosophi : & ad artis huius scientiam Reges & Principes eiusdem gentis omnia ; vnde & in natiuitate Domini Saluatoris ipsi ortum intellexerunt, & in sanctam Bethlehem adorauerunt puerum, stella de super ostendente; They whom we call Sorcercrs, and others interpret Inchanters, seeme to me such as performe things by wordes; Magicians, such as handle euery thing philosophically; Witches, that vse bloud and sacrifices, and often lay hands on the body of the dead: further, among the I take them to be signified by the name of vpon natiuities, whom the vulgar call Mathematicians. But common custome takes Magicians for Witches, who are otherwise reputed in their owne Nation: for they are the Philosophers of the : yea Kings and Princes of that Na∣tion doe all that they doe according to the knowledge of this arte: whence at the of the Lord our Sauiour they first of all vnderstood his birth, and comming vnto holy Bethlehem did worship the Child: the starre from aboue shewing him vnto them. By this therefore it appeareth that there is great difference betweene the doctrine of a , and the abuse of the word. For though some Writers affirme, that Magus hodie dicitur, qui ex foedere facto vtitur diaboli opera adrem ; That he is called a Magician now adayes, who entred league with the Deuill, vseth his helpe to any matter: yet (as our Sauiour said of ) it was not so from the beginning. For the Arte of is of the wisedome of Nature; other Artes which vnder-goe that title, were inuen∣ted by the , subtletie, and enuie of the Deuill. In the latter there is no other doctrine, then the vse of certayne ceremonies, Per malam fidem; By an euill faith: in the former no other ill, then the inuestigation of those vertues and hidden properties, which God hath giuen to his Creatures, and how fitly to apply things that worke to things that suffer. And though by the , those excellent , Philosophers, and Diuines, which came to worship our Sauiour Christ, were termed Mechaschephim, or ; yet had they no other reason, then common custome therein. Consuetu∣do Hieron. in . autem communis Magos pro maleficis accipit; Common custome (saith S. HIEROME) vnderstandeth Witches vnder the name of Magicians: And antiquitie (saith Peter Martyr) . Mart. Loci. by the word (Magi) vnderstood good and wise men. Quid igitur formidolose, nomen Euangelio gratiosum, quod non maleficum & veneficum, sed sonat & Sacerdotem? O thou fearefull one (saith FICINVS) why doubtest thou to vse the . part. prim. fol. 573. name of Magus, a name gracious in the Gospell, which doth not signifie a Witch or , but a wise man and a Priest? For what brought this slander to that studie and profes∣sion but only idle ignorance: the parent of causelesse admiration? fuit quorundam , quaere vera opera naturalia sunt: veruntamen quia procuratione daemonum natur as ipsas vel coniungentium, vel commiscentium, vel aliter ad operandum ex∣pedientium facta sunt, opera daemonum credebantur ab ignorantibus baec. De operibus est Magianaturalis, quam multi impropriè vocant; The Gul. . de , cap. 14. of some workes, which (indeed) are naturall, hath beene the cause of this slander: but because these workes haue beene done by procurement of Deuils, ioyning the natures together or mingling them, or howsoeuer fitting the natures to their working, they were thought the workes of the Deuils by the ignorant. Among these workes is naturall Magicke, which men call very improperly . in his Apologie goeth further: For by vnderstanding (saith he) the vt∣termost Fol. . actiuitie of naturall agents we are to know the of Christ: for other∣wise (to vse his owne wordes) ignoratis terminis potentiae & rerum naturalium stat nos illa eadem opera, quae fecit Christus, posse fieri per media naturalia; The termes or limits of naturall power and vertue not vnderstood, we must needes doubt whether those verie workes which Christ did may not bee done by naturall meanes: after which he goeth on in this sort: Ideo non , non superstitiosè dixi, sed & Catholicè per talem Magiam nos in cognoscenda : Therefore I said not , not superstitiously, but most truly and , that by such Magicke wee are furthered in knowing the of Christ. And seeing the and others the enemies of Christian Religion, doe impudently and impiously obiect, that those Miracles which Christ wrought were not aboue Nature, but by the exquisite knowledge thereof performed: a man for his yeeres fuller of knowledge then any that this latter Age hath brought forth, might with good reason auow, that the vttermost of Natures workes being knowne, the workes which Christ did, and which (as himselfe witnesseth) no man could doe, doe manifestly testifie of themselues, that they were performed by that hand which held Nature therein but as a Pencill, and by a power infinitely supreme and diuine; and thereby those that were faithlesse, were eyther conuerted or put to silence. §. III. That the good knowledge in the ancient is not to bee condemned: though the Deuill here as in other kinds hath sought to obtrude euill things, vnder the name and colour of good things. SEeing therefore it is confessed by all of vnderstanding, that a (according to the word) is no other then, & in∣terpres: A obseruer and of diuine things: and the Art it selfe (I meane the Art of naturall Magicke) no other, Quàm naturalis Philosophiae absoluta consummatio; Then the absolute perfection of Philosophie: Certainely then it proceedeth from common ignorance, and no way sorteth with wise and learned men and without difference and distinction, to confound lawfull and praise-worthy knowledge with that impious, and (to vse Saint Pauls words) with those beggerly , which the Deuill hath shuffled in, and by them bewitcheth and befooleth gracelesse men. For if we condemne natu∣rall Magicke, or the wisedome of Nature, because the Deuill (who knoweth more then any man) doth also teach Witches and Poysoners the harmefull parts of Herbes, Drugges, Minerals, and Excrements: then may wee by the same rule con∣demne the Physician, and the Art of healing. For the Deuill also in the Oracles of Amphiaraus, Amphilochus, Trophonius, and the like, taught men in Dreames what Herbes and Drugges were proper for such and such diseases. Now no man of iudge∣ment is ignorant, that the Deuill from the beginning hath sought to thrust himselfe into the same imployment among the Ministers and Seruants of God, changing him∣selfe for that purpose into an Angell of Light. Hee hath led men to Idolatrie as a do∣ctrine of Religion; he hath thrust in his Prophets among those of the true God; hee hath corrupted the Art of Astrologie, by giuing a diuine power to the Starres, teach∣ing men to esteeme them as Gods, and not as instruments. And (as Bunting obser∣ueth) . in . it is true, that iudiciall is corrupted with many superstitions: but the abuse of the thing takes not away the Art; considering that heauenly bodies (as euen general experience sheweth) haue and exercise their operation vpon the . For the Sunne, and the Starre of doe drie; the Moone doth moi∣sten, and gouerne the Tides of the Sea. Againe, the Planets, as they haue seuerall and proper names, so haue they seuerall and proper vertues: the Starres doe also differ in beautie and in ; and to all the Starres hath God giuen also their proper names, which (had they not influences and vertues different) needed not: He counteth the number of the Starres, and calleth them by their names. But into the good Psal. 147. and profitable knowledge of the celestiall influences, the Deuill ceaseth not to in his : and so to the knowledge of the secret vertues of Nature hath he fastened his doctrine of Characters, Numbers, and Incantations; and taught men to beleeue in the strength of Words and Letters: (which without Faith in God are but Inke or common breath) thereby eyther to equall his owne with the All-powerfull Word of God, or to diminish the glorie of Gods creating Word, by whom are all things. Moreouer, hee was neuer ignorant, that both the wise and the simple obserue when the Sea-birds forsake the shores and flye into the Land, that commonly some great storme followeth; that the high flying of the Kite and the Swallow betoken faire weather; that the crying of Crowes and bathing of Duckes foreshew raine: for they feele the Ayre moistened in their Quils. And it is written in Hieremie the Ca. 8. ver. 7. Prophet, Euen the Storke in the ayre knoweth her appointed times, und the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow. Hereupon, this enemie of Mankind working vpon these as vpon the rest of Gods creatures, long time abused the Heathen by teaching them to obserue the flying of Fowles, and thereby to iudge of good or ill successe in the Warre: and (withall) to looke into their entrailes for the same, as if God had written the secrets of vnsearchable prouidence in the liuers and bowels of birds and beasts. Againe, because it pleased God sometimes by Dreames, not only to warne and teach . 12. 17. his Prophets and Apostles, but Heathen Princes also; as Abimelech to restore to ABRAHAM; because he admonished Ioseph, and by Dreame informed Iacob, Laban, , Salomon, Paul, Ananias, the Magi of the East, and others. For as it is remem∣bred in IOB: In Dreames and Visions of the night when sleepe falleth vpon men, &c. Then Iob. 33. 17. God openeth the eares, that he might cause man to returne from his enterprize: therefore, I say, doth the Deuill also practise his Diuinations by Dreames, or (after Parisiensis) G. . de leg. 24. cap. diuinitatis imitationes, his mocke-diuinitie. This in the end grew so common, as ARI∣STIDES compiled an Ephemerides of his owne Dreames: Mithridates of those of his Concubines. Yea the Romanes finding the inconuenience hereof, because all Dreames (without distinction of causes) were drawne to Diuination, forbad the same by a Law, as by the words of prohibition (aut narrandis somnijs occultam aliquam artem diui∣nandi) Codex de male∣fic. & Mathe∣mat. leg. & ac∣cepta. it may appeare. Likewise by the Law of God in Deuteronomie cap. 13. seducing Dreamers were ordered to be slaine. Yet it is to be contemned, not that Marcus An∣tonius was told a remedie in his Dreame for two grieuous diseases that opprest him; nor that of Alexander Macedon for the cure of Ptolomies poysoned wound; nor that Aug. de cura pro mortuis agenda which Saint AVGVSTINE reporteth of a Millanoise; whose sonne (the Father dead) being demanded a debt alreadie payed, was told by his Father in a Dreame where the Acquittance lay to discharge it: nor that of Astyages of his Daughter, and many others of like nature. Of the reason of all which, forasmuch as the cause is not in our selues, this place denieth dispute. §. IIII. That DANIELS mistiking NABVCHODONOSORS condemning of the Magicians doth not iustifie all their practices. BVT it may be obiected, that if such Diuination as the Heathens com∣monly vsed were to be condemned in them, who tooke on them verie many and strange Reuelations: how came it to passe that Daniel both condemned the sentence of Nabuchodonosor against the Magi∣cians of Chaldaea, and in a sort forbad it? especially considering that such kind of people God himselfe commanded to be slaine. To this diuers answeres Deut. 13. & . Leuit. 20. may be giuen. First, it seemeth that Daniel had respect to those Chaldaeans, because they acknowledged that the Dreame of the King, which himselfe had forgotten, could not be knowne to any man by any Art eyther Naturallor Diabolicall: For there is none other (sayd the Chaldaeans) that can declare it before the King, except the Gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh: and herein they confessed the power of the Euer-liuing God. Secondly, it may be coniectured (and that with good reason) that among so ma∣ny learned men, some of them did not exercise themselues in any euill or vnlawfull Artes, but were meerely Magicians and Naturalists: and therefore when the King commanded to kill all, Daniel perswaded the contrarie, and called it a hastie iudge∣ment, which proceeded with furie without examination. And that some of those mens studies and professions were lawfull, it may be gathered by Daniels instruction: for himselfe had beene taught by them, and was called chiefe of the Inchanters; of which some were termed Soothsayers, others Astrologians, others Chaldaeans, others Magi or Wisemen: and therefore of distinct professions. Thirdly, Daniel misliked and forbad the execution of that iudgement, because it was vniust. For howsoeuer those men might deserue punishment for the practice of vnlawfull Arts (though not vnlawfull according to the Law of that State) yet here∣in they were altogether guiltlesse. For it exceeded humane power to pierce the Kings thought, which the Deuill himselfe could not know. So then in Daniels dislike, and hindering of the execution of sentence of death pronounced against the Magicians, there is no absolute iustifying of their practice and profession. §. V. The abuse of things which may bee found in all kinds, is not to condemne the right vse of them. NOtwithstanding this mixture euery where of good with euill, of false∣hood with truth, of corruption with cleannesse and purity: The good, The truth, The puritie in euery kind may well be embraced: As in the ancient worshipping of God by Sacrifice; there was no man knowing God among the Elders, that therefore forbare to offer Sacrifice to the God of all power, because the Deuill in the Image of Baal, Astaroth, Chemoth, Iupiter, Apollo, and the like was so adored. Neyther did the abuse of Astrologie terrifie Abraham (if we may beleeue the most ancient and religious Historians) from obseruing the motions and natures of hea∣uenly . ex . & . bodies; neyther can it dehort wise and learned men in these dayes from attri∣buting those vertues, influences, and inclina ions to the Starres and other lights of Heauen, which God hath giuen to those his glorious creatures. The Sympatheticall and Antipatheticall working of Herbes, Plants, Stones, Mi∣nerals, with their other vtmost vertues, sometimes taught by the Deuill, and applyed by his Ministers to harmefull and vncharitable ends, can neuer terrifie the honest and learned Physician or Magician from the vsing of them to the helpe and com∣fort of Mankind: neyther can the illusions, whereby the Deuill betrayeth such men as are fallen from God, make other men reiect the obseruations of Dreames; so farre as with a good Faith and a Religious caution they may make vse of them. Lastly, the prohibition to marke flying of Fowles (as signes of good or euill suc∣cesse) Deut. 18. 20. hath no reference at all to the crying of Crowes against Raine, or to any ob∣seruation not superstitious, and whereof a or cause may bee giuen. For if we confound Arts with the abuse of them, wee shall not only condemne all honest Trades and enterchange among men (for there are that deceiue in all professions) but wee shall in a short time burie in forgetfulnesse all excellent knowledge and all learning, or obscure and couer it ouer with a most scornefull and beggerly igno∣rance: and (as Plinie teacheth) wee should shew our selues ingratos erga eos, qui labo∣re cur a{que} lucem nobis aperuerunt in hac luce: Vnthankefull we should shew our selues towards those, who with paines and care haue discouered vnto vs light in this light. Indeed not only these naturall knowledges are condemned by those that are ig∣norant; but the Mathematickes also and Professors thereof: though those that are ex∣cellently learned iudge of it in this sort: In speculo Mathematico verum illud, quod in Cusan. Comp. . c. 1. omni scibili quaeritur, relucet; non modo remota similitudine, sed fulgida quadam : In the Glasse of the Mathematickes that Truth doth shine, which is sought in euery kind of knowledge; not in an obscure image, but in a neere and manifest representation. § VI. Of the diuers kindes of vnlawfull Magicke. IT is true that there are many Artes, if wee may so call them, which are couered with the name of Magicke: and esteemed abusiuely to bee as branches of that Tree, on whose root they neuer grew. The first of these hath the name of Necromancie or Goetia: and of this againe there are diuers kinds. The one is an Inuocation at the Graues of the dead, to whom the Deuill himselfe giues answere in stead of those that seeme to appeare. For certaine it is, that the immortall soules of men doe not inhabit the dust and dead bo∣dies, but they giue motion and vnderstanding to the liuing: death being nothing else but a separation of the bodie and soule: and therefore the soule is not to be found in the Graues. A second practice of those men, who pay Tribute or are in league with Satan, is that of coniuring or of raysing vp Deuils, of whom they hope to learne what they list. These men are so distract, as they beleeue that by terrible words they make the Deuill to tremble; that being once impaled in a Circle (a Circle which cannot keepe out a Mouse) they therein (as they suppose) insconce themselues against that great Monster. Doubtlesse, they forget that the Deuill is not terrified from doing ill and all that is contrarie to God and goodnesse, no, not by the fearefull Word of the Al∣mightie: and that he feared not to offer to sit in Gods seat, that hee made no scruple to tempt our Sauiour Christ, whom himselfe called the Sonne of God. So, forget∣ting these proud parts of his, an vnworthy wretch will yet resolue himselfe, that hee can draw the Deuill out of Hell, and terrifie him with a Phrase: whereas in verie truth, the obedience which Deuils seeme to vse, is but thereby to possesse themselues of the bodies and soules of those which rayse them vp; as His Maiestie in his Booke aforenamed hath excellently taught: That the obedience is only, secundum quid, scilicet ex pacto; respectiuè, that is, vpon bargaine. I cannot tell what they can doe vpon those simple and ignorant Deuils, which Sunt in mundo genus quoddam val∣de , in∣discretum & in∣consideratum; & quod , verum a falso nc{que}, possi∣bile ab impossibili. inhabite Iamblicus imagination; but sure I am the rest are apt enough to come vncal∣led: and alwayes attending the cogitations of their seruants and vassals, doe no way need any such inforcement. Or it may be that these Coniurers deale altogether with Cardans mortall Deuils, following the opinion of Rabbi Auornathan and of Porphyrius, who taught that these kind of Deuils liued not aboue a thousand yeares: which Plutarch in his Trea∣tise de Oraculorum defectu confirmeth, making example of the great God Pan. For . Viues in cap. 11. lib. 10. were it true that the Deuils were in awe of wicked men, or could bee compelled by them, then would they alwaies feare those wordes and threats, by which at other Aug. de . Dei, lib. 10. times they are willingly mastered. But the Familiar of Simon Magus when hee had Cusan. exerc. c. lifted him vp in the Ayre, cast him out of his clawes, when he was sure hee should perish with the fall. If this perhaps were done by S. Peters Prayers (of which S. Peter no where vaunteth) yet the same pranck at other times vpon his own accord Euseb. hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 16. the Deuill played with : who transported (as Simon Magus was supposed to haue beene) had the same mortall fall that he had. The like successe had Budas, a principall pillar of the Manichaean Heresie, as Socrates in his Ecclesiasticall Historie Lib. 1 c. 21. witnesseth: and for a manifest proofe hereof wee see it euery day, that the Deuill leaues all Witches and Sorcerers at the Gallowes, for whom at other times hee ma∣keth himselfe a Pegasus, to conueigh them in haste to places farre distant, or atleast makes them so thinke: For to those that not the truth (sayth Saint PAVL) God Corint. 5. 5. shall send them strong illusions. Of these their supposed transportations (yet agreeing with their confessions) His in the second Booke and the fourth Chapter of the , hath confirmed by vnanswerable reasons, that they are meerely illu∣siue. Another sort there are who take on them to include Spirits in Glasses and Cri∣stals: of whom CVSANVS: Fatui sunt incantores, qui in vngue & vitro volunt spiritum Exercitat. l. 2. includere: quia Spiritus non clauditur corpore: They are foolish Incbanters which will shut vp their spirits within their nailes or in Glasse: for a Spirit cannot beinclosed by a body. There is also another Art besides the afore mentioned, which they call Theurgia, or White Magicke; a pretended conference with good Spirits or Angels, whom by Sacrifice and Inuocation they draw out of Heauen, and Communicate withall. But the administring Spirits of God, as they require not any kind of adoration due vnto their Creatour: so seeing they are most free Spirits; there is no man so absurd to thinke (except the Deuill haue corrupted his vnderstanding) that they can bee con∣strained or commanded out of Heauen by threats. Wherefore let the professours thereof couer themselues how they please by a professed puritie of life, by the mini∣sterie of Infants, by fasting and abstinence in generall; yet all those that tamper with immaterial substances and abstract natures, either by Sacrifice, Vow, or inforcement, are men of euill faith and in the power of Satan. For good Spirits or Angels cannot be constrained; and the rest are Deuils which willingly obey. Other sorts there are of wicked Diuinations: as by fire, called Pyromantia: by wa∣ter, called Hydromantia: by the ayre, called Mataeotechnia, and the like. The last, and (indeed) the worst of all other is Fascination or Witchcraft: the Practisers whereof are no lesse enuious and cruell, reuengefull and bloudie, then the Deuill himselfe. And these accursed creatures hauing sold their soules to the Deuil, worke two wayes; either by the Deuill immediately, or by the art of poysoning. The difference betweene Necromanciers and Witches, His Maiestie hath excellently taught in a word: that the one (in a sort) command; the other obey the Deuill. There is another kind of pettie Witcherie (if it be not altogether deceit) which they call charming of Beasts and Birds, of which Pythagoras was accused, because an Aelian. l. 6. not. bistor. Eagle lighted on his shoulder in the Olympian fields. But if the same exceeded the Art of Falconrie, yet was it no more to be admired then Mahomets Doue, which he had vsed to feed with Wheate out of his eare: which Doue, when it was hungrie, lighted on Mahomets shoulder, and thrust his Bill therein to find his breake-fast: Ma∣homet perswading the rude and simple Arabians, that it was the Holy Ghost that gaue him aduice. And certainely if Bankes had liued in elder times hee would haue shamed all the Inchanters of the World: for whosoeuer was most famous among them, could neuer master or instruct any Beast as he did his Horse. For the drawing of Serpents out of their Dens, or killing of them in the holes by Inchantments (which the Marsians a people of Italie practised: Colubros disrumpit Lucil. in Marsia cantu: Inchanting Marsia makes the Snakes to burst.) That it hath beene vsed it appeares, Psal. 58. 6. though I doubt not, but that many Impostures may bee in this kind; and euen by naturall causes it may be done. For there are many Fumes that will either draw them out or destroy them; as womens haire burnt, and the like. So many things may be laied in the entrance of their holes that will allure them: and therein I find no other Magicke or Inchantment; then to draw out a Mouse with a piece of tosted Cheese. §. VII. Of diuerswayes by which the Deuill seemeth to worke his wonders. BVT to the end that we may not dote with the Manichees, who make two powers of gods: that we doe not giue to the Deuil any other dominion then he hath (not to speake of his abilitie, when hee is the Minister of Gods vengeance, as when Aegypt, according to Dauid, was destroyed by euill Angels) he otherwise worketh but three wayes. The first is by mouing the cogitations and affections of men: The second by the exquisite know∣ledge of Nature: and the third by deceit, illusion, and false semblance. And that they cannot worke what they would, G. Parisiensis giueth three causes: the first, a na∣turall impotencie: the second, their owne reason disswading them from daring ouer∣much, or indeed (and that which is the only certaine cause) the great mercie of the Creatour, Tenens eas ligatas (sayth the same Authour) velut immanissimas bellu as. Saint . . de . p. c. 70. Augustine was of opinion that the Frogges which Sorcerers produced were not naturall, but that the Deuill (by betraying of their senses that looked on) made them appeare to be such. For as Vairus obserueth, those Frogges of the Inchanters were not found corrupted as those of Moses were, which might argue that they were not creatures indeed. Hereof sayth Saint AVGVSTINE: Nec sanè Daemones naturas creant, sed quae à Deocreatae sunt commutant, vt videantur esse quodnon sunt: The Deuils create not any natures, but so change those that are created by God, as they seeme to bee that which they be not: of which in the 83. Question he giueth the reason. nebulis implet omnes meatus intelligentiae, per quos aperire lumen rationis radius mentis so∣let, (that is) The Deuill fils with certaine cloudes all passages of the vnderstanding, by which the beame of the mind is wont to open the light of reason. And as Tertullian in his Booke de anima rightly conceiueth, if the Deuill can pos∣sesse himselfe of the eyes of our mindes, and blind them, it is not hard for him to da∣zell those of the body. For (out of doubt) by the same way that God passeth out, the Deuill entreth in, beginning with the fantasie, by which he doth more easily be∣tray the other faculties of the soule: for the fantasie is most apt to bee abused by Maxima vis est ad er∣reres. vaine apprehensions. Aquinas on the contrarie held that those Frogges were not imaginarie, but such indeed as they seemed: not made Magicae ludibrio, which indeed agreeth not with the Art but (according to THOMAS) Per aptam & idoneam agentium & patien∣tium applicationem: By an apt and fit applying of agents and patients. And this I take to be more probable. For Moses could not bee deceiued by that sleight of false sem∣blance; and Saint Augustine in another case like vnto this, (to wit) of the turning of Diomedes his Companions into Birds, per actiua cum passiuis, inclineth rather to this o∣pinion: though I am not perswaded that Saint Augustine beleeued that of Diomedes. And this opinion of Thomas, G. Parisiensis a man very learned also confirmeth. For speaking of naturall Magicke hee vseth these words: De est . 24. fol. 67. subita generatio , & pediculorum, & vermium, aliorm{que} animalium quorundam: in quibus omnibus sola natura operatur, verùm adhibitis adiutorijs, semina naturae confortant & acuunt, it a vt opus generationis tantum accelerent, vt qui nesciunt non opus natur & videatur (quae tar dius efficere consueuit) sedpotentia Daemonum, &c. to which he addeth: Qui autem in hijs docti sunt talia non mirantur, sed solum Creatorem in hijs glorificant: In such workes (sayth he) the sodaine generation of Frogges, and Lice, and Wormes, and some other creatures is: in all which Nature alone worketh; but by meanes strengthning the Seeds of Nature, and quickning them; in such wise that they so hasten the worke of generation, that it seemeth to the ignorant not to bee the worke of Nature, which vsually worketh more , but they thinke it is done by the power of Deuils. But they who are learned in these Arts maruaile not at such working, but glorifie the Creatour. Now by these two wayes the Deuills doe most frequently worke, (to wit) by knowing the vttermost of nature; and by illusion: for there is no incomprehensible or vnsearch∣able power, but of God only. For shall we say, he causeth sometimes thunders, lightnings, and tempests; and can infect the ayre, as well as moue it or compresse it; who knowes not that these things are also naturall? Or may it be obiected that he fore-telleth things before they happen, which exceedeth nature, and is no illusion? it is true, that he some∣times doth it; but how? In elder ages he stole his knowledge out of the predictions of the Prophets: and he fore-told the death of Saul, at such time as he was in his owne possession and power to dispose of. And he that hath liued from the infancie of the world to this day, and obserued the successe of euery counsaile: he that by reason of his swift motions can informe himselfe of all places, and preparations: he that is of counsaile with al those that studie and practise subuersion and destruction: Ephes. 2. . & 6. 12. he that is Prince of the ayre, and can thence better iudge, then those that inhabite Diabolus habet v∣sum: quae res multum habet momenti in quo∣uis negotio, Aug. de , c. 26. 27. &c. the earth: if he should not sometimes, yea if he should not very oftentimes ghesse rightly of things to come (where God pleaseth not to giue impediment) it were very strange. For we see that wise and learned men doe oftentimes by comparing like causes conceiue rightly of like effects, before they happen: and yet where the Deuill doubteth and would willingly keepe his credit, he euermore answereth by Riddles, as CROESVS Halym penetrans magnam subuertit opum vim. If Croesus ouer Halys goe, Great Kingdomes he shall ouerthrow. Which answere may be taken either way: either for the ouerthrow of his owne Kingdome, or of his Enemies. And thus farre we grant the Deuill may proceed in predictions, which (otherwise) belong to God only; as it is in ESAY: Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that yee are Gods: shew vs at all times and certaynely what is to come. Solius enim diuinae intelligentiae ac est, nosse Guil. Parisiensis de . c. 24. & reuelare; It is only proper to Gods vnderstanding and wisedome, to know and reueale hidden things. §. VIII. That none was euer raysed from the dead by the power of the Deuill: and that it was not the true SAMVEL which appeared to SAVL. TO conclude, it may be obiected that the Deuill hath raysed from the dead: and that others by his power haue done the like, as in the ex∣ample giuen of Samuel raysed by the Witch of Endor: which were it true, then might it indeed be affirmed, that some of the Deuils acts ex∣ceed all the powers of nature, false semblance, and other illusions. Iu∣stine Iust. Martyr in colloq. cum Try∣phone in resp. ad . . 52. Ambr. in Luc. l. s. c. . Lyra in Reg. 1. Aug. ad Simpl. l. 2. . 3. De . Dei, . 13. c. . Martyr was sometimes of the opinion, that it was Samuel indeede: and so was Ambrose, Lyra, and Burgensis; from which authorities those men borrow strength which so beleeue. But Martyr changed his opinion: and so did S. Augustine, who at first seemed to be indifferent: For in his questions vpon the Old and New Testa∣ment, he accounteth it detestable to thinke that it was Samuel which appeared: and these be his wordes elsewhere to the same effect: In requie sunt animae piorum separatae, impiorum poenas luunt, donecistarum ad , illarum verò ad secunda dicitur corpora ; The soules of the godly sepa∣rated from their bodies are at rest, but those of the wicked suffer punishment, till the of the iust rise to eternall life, and of the wicked to an eternall and second death. And (besides S. ) Iustine Martyr, Hilarius, Tertullian, , Chry∣sostome, Aug. de verb. . 18. and others, beleeued firmely, and taught it: that the soules of men being once . Mart. ad Orthodox. . 75. . Psal. 2. in fine. separate from their bodies, did not wander on the earth at all: Credere (saith CYRIL) quum à corporbus animae abierint, tanquam in manus charissimi patris bonitati diuinae commendari; We must beleeue when the soules of holy men are departed from Tert. de. . in fin. their bodies, that they be commended to the diuine Goodnesse, as into the hands of a most . q. 13. . 19. in Euang. Matth. deare Father. If then they be in Heauen, the power of the Deuill cannot stretch so high: if in Hell, Ab nulla est redemptio; From hell there is no redemption. For there are but two habitations after death: Vnum (saith AVGVSTINE) in igne ae∣terno; alterum in regno aeterno; The one in fire; the other in Gods eternall King∣dome. And though it be written in Iure Pontificio, that many there are who beleeue that the dead haue againe appeared to the liuing; yet the Glosse vpon the same Text findes it ridiculous: Credunt, & malè, quia sunt Phantasmata (saith the Glosse) They 26. q. 5. . beleeue, and they beleeue amisse, because they be but Phantasmes, or Apparitions. For where∣as any such voice hath beene heard, saying, I am the Soule of such a one: Haec oratio à fraude à fraude at{que} deceptione diabolica est; That speech is framed by the fraud and deception of the deuill, saith Chrysostome. Likewise of the same, saith TERTVLLIAN: Absit vt ani∣mam sancti, nedum Prophetae, à daemonio credamus extractam; God forbid that we should thinke that the soule of any holy man, much lesse of a Prophet, should be drawne vp againe by a Deuill. It is true that the Scriptures call that apparition Samuel; so doe they the woodden images Cherubins: and false brazen gods are called gods, and the like. And where∣as these of the contrarie opinion build vpon that place of the 26. of Ecclesiasticus (a booke not numbred among the Canonicall Scriptures, as S. Augustine himselfe in his Treatise, if it be his, De cura pro mortuis agenda, confesseth) yet following the literall sense and phrase of the Scriptures, proueth nothing at all: For though the Deuill would willingly perswade, that the soules (yea euen of iust men) were in his power, yet so farre is it from the promises of the Scriptures, and from Gods iust and mercifull nature, and so contrarie to all diuine reason, as Saint Augustine (or whosoeuer wrote that booke before cited) might rightly terme it a detestable opi∣nion so to thinke. For if God had so absolutely forsaken Saul, that he refused to an∣swere him either by dreames, by Vrim, or by his Prophets: it were sottish to conceiue, that he would permit the Deuil, or a wicked Witch, to raise a Prophet from the dead in Sauls respect: it being also contrarie to his owne diuine Law to aske counsaile of 1. 17. . the dead; as in 18. and elsewhere. Therefore it was the Deuill, and 2. Kings 4. 34. not the soule of a dead body, that gaue answere and aduice. Nullus enim magus verè vnquam excitauit, . de fascin. But because Helias and Helizeus had raised some from the dead by the power of God; those Deuils which S. Augustine calleth ludificatores animantium sibi subiectorum; Mockers of their owne vassals, casting before their eyes a semblance of humane bodies, and framing sounds to their eares like the voyces of men, doe also perswade gracelesse and accursed attendants, that themselues both possesse, and haue power ouer the soules of men. Eludit Diabolus aciem tum spectantium, tum etiam cogitantium, saith L. VIVES; The Deuill beguileth the sense both of the beholders, and of those that so imagine. These then are the bounds of the Deuils power, whom if we will not feare, we must feare to sinne. For when he is not the instrument of Gods venge∣ance, he can touch no man that makes not himselfe his voluntaire vassall: Potest ad malum inuitare, non potest trahere, saith S. AVGVSTINE, he can , but he cannot in∣force to euill. Such as thinke otherwise, may goe into the number remembred by Lucretius. Nam veluti pueri trepidant, at{que} omnia coecis In tenebris metuunt: sic nos in luce timemus. We feare by light, as children in the darke. CHAP. XII. Of the memorable buildings of NINVS, and of his wife SEMIRAMIS: and of other of her acts. §. I. Of the building of Niniue by NINVS: and of Babylon by SEMIRAMIS. BVt to come backe to Ninus the amplifier and finisher of Niniue: whether he performed it before or after the ouerthrow of Zoroaster, it is vncertayne. As for the Citie it selfe, it is agreed by all prophane Writers, and confirmed by the Scriptures, that it exceeded all other in circuit, and answerable magnificence. For it . l. 1. Diod. l. 2. had in compasse 440. stadia, or furlongs; the walls . l. 1. whereof were an hundred foot vpright, and had such a bredth as three Charriots might passe on the Ram∣pire in front: these walls were garnished with 1500. Towres which gaue exceeding beautie to the rest, and a strength no lesse admirable for the nature of thosetimes. But this Citie (built in the Plaines of Assyria, and on the bankes of Tigris, and in the Region of Eden) was founded long before Ninus time; and (as ancient I report, and more lately Nauclerus) had the name of Campsor, at such time as Ninus amplified the same, and gaue it a wall, and called it after his owne name. For these workes of Babylon and Niniue begun by Nimrod in , and in Assy∣ria, Ninus and Semiramis made perfect. Ninus finished Niniue, Semiramis Babylon: . l. 1. wherein shee sought to exceede her husband by farre. Indeed in the first Age when Iustin. l. 1. . l. 2. & 3. Princes were moderate, they neither thought how to inuade others, nor feared to be inuaded: labouring to build Townes and Villages for the vse of themselues and their people, without either Walls or Towres; and how they might discharge the earth of Woods, Bryars, Bushments, and Waters, to make it the more habitable and fertile. But Semiramis liuing in that Age, when Ambition was in strong youth: and purposing to follow the conquest which her husband had vnder-taken, gaue that beautie and strength to Babylon which it had. §. II. Of the end of NINVS: and beginning of SEMIRAMIS reigne. THis shee did after the death of her husband Ninus: who after he had mastred Bactria, and subiected vnto his Empire all those Regions be∣tweene it and the Mediterran Sea and Hellespont (Asia the lesse excep∣ted) and finished the worke of Niniue, he left the World in the yeere thereof 2019. after he had reigned 52. yeeres. Plutarch reporteth that Semiramis desired her husband Ninus, that he would grant vnto her the absolute soueraigne power for one day. Diod. Siculus out of Athenaeus, and others, speakes of fiue dayes. In which time (moued either with desire of rule, or licentious libertie, or with the memorie of her husband Menon, who perished for her) shee caused Ni∣nus her husband to be slaine. But this seemeth rather a scandall cast on her by the Greekes, then that it had any truth. Howsoeuer Ninus came to his end, Semiramis tooke on her after his death the sole rule of the Assyrian Empire: of which, Ninus was said to be the first Monarch, because he changed his seat from Babylonia in Chaldaea to Niniue in Assyria. Iustin re∣ports, Aelian. l. 7. ex Didone. that Semiramis (the better to invest herselfe, and in her beginning without murmure or offence to take on her so great a charge) presented herselfe to the people in the person of her sonne Ninias or Zameis, who bare her externall forme and pro∣portion without any sensible difference. This report I take also to be fayned, for which many arguments might be made. But as she ruled long, so she performed all those memorable acts which are written of her by the name of Semiramis, and subscribed that letter which shee sent to the King of India (her last challenge and vndertaken conquest) by her owne name. And were it true that her sonne Ninias had such a stature at his Fathers death, as that (who was very personable) could be taken for him; yet it is very vnlikely that she could haue held the Empire from him 42. yeeres after by any such subtil∣tie: (for so long shee reigned after the death of her husband:) but it may be true that Ninias or Zameis (being wholly giuen to his pleasures, as it is written of him) was well pleased with his Mothers prosperous gouernement and vnder-takings. §. III. Of SEMIRAMIS parentage and education, and of her Mother. SOme Writers (of which Plutarch is one) make this famous woman to haue beene of base parentage, calling her after the name of her Coun∣trey, a Syrian. Berosus calls her after the name of her Citie wherein shee was borne, Semiramis Ascalonitis; of Ascalon, the ancient Citie and Metropolis of the Philistims. Others report her to be the daughter of Derceta, a Curtizan of Ascalon, exceeding beautifull. Others say that this Derceta or Dercetis, the Mother of Semiramis, was sometimes a Recluse, and had profest a holy and a religious life, to whom there was a Temple dedicated, seated on the banke of a Lake adioyning to Ascalon; and afterward falling in loue with a goodly yong man, she was by him made with child, which (for feare of extreme punishment) she con∣uayed away, and caused the same to be hidden among the high reedes which grew on the bankes of the Lake: in which (while the child was left to the mercy of wild beasts) the same was fed by certayne birds, which vsed to feede vpon or neere those waters. But I take this tale to be like that of Lupa the Harlot that fostered Romulus. For some one or other adioyning to this Lake, had the charge and fosteridge of this child, who being perchance but some base and obscure creature, the mother might thereby hope the better to couer her dishonor and breach of vow; notwithstan∣ding which she was cast from the top of her Temple into the Lake adioyning, and (as the Poets haue fayned) changed by Venus into a Fish, all but her face, which still held the same beautie and humane shape. It is thought that from this Derceta the of that Idoll of the Philistims (called Dagon) taken: for it is true, that Dagon had a mans face, and a fishes body: into whose Temple when the Arke of God was brought, the Idoll fell twice to the ground: and at the second fall there remayned only the Trunke of Dagon, the head being broken off: For so S. Hierome hath conuerted that place. , Pagninus, and Iunius, write it by Dagon onely, which signifieth a fish, and so it only appeared: the head thereof by the second fall being sundred from the body. For my selfe I rather thinke, that this Dagon of the Philistims was an Idoll repre∣senting Triton, one of those imaginarie Sea-gods vnder Neptune. For this Citie be∣ing maritimate (as all those of the Philistims were, and so were the best of Phoenicia) vsed all their deuotions to Neptune, and the rest of the pettie gods which atten∣ded him. §. IIII. Of her Expedition into India, and death after discomfiture: with a note of the improbabilitie of her vices. BVt for her Pedigree, I leaue it to the Assyrian Heralds: and for her vicious life, I ascribe the report thereof to the enuious and lying Grecians. For delicacie and ease doe more often accompanie licentiousnesse in men and women, then labour and hazzard . And if the one halfe be true which is reported of this Lady, then there neuer liued any Prince or Princesse more worthy of fame then Semiramis was, both for the workes she did at Babylon and elsewhere, and for the warres she made with glorious successe: all but her last enterprise of India; from whence both Strabo and Arianus report that she neuer returned: and that of all her most powerfull Armie there suruiued but on∣ly twentie persons: the rest being either drowned in the Riuer of Indus, dead of the famine, or slaine by the sword of Staurobates. But as the multitude which went out are more then reason hath numbred: so were those that returned lesse then could haue escaped of such an Armie, as consisted of foure millions & vpwards. For these Suid. f. 845. lit. S. numbers which she leuied by Lieutenant Dercetaeus (saith ) did consist of Foot-men three millions; of Horse-men one million; of Charriots armed with hookes on each side one hundred thousand; of those which fought vpon Camels as many; of Camels for burden two hundred thousand; of raw Hides for all vses three hundred thousand; of Galleyes with brazen heads three thousand, by which shee might transport ouer Indus at once three hundred thousand Souldiers: which Gallies were furnished with Syrians, , Cilicians, and men of Cyprus. These incredible and impossible numbers, which no one place of the earth was able to nourish (had euery man and beast but fed vpon grasse) are taken from the authority of Ctesias whom Diodorus followeth. But as the one may be taxed with many fri∣uolous reports: so Diodorus himselfe hath nothing of certaynetie, but from Xerxes expedition into Greece and afterwards: whose Armie (though the same was farre in∣ferior to that of Semiramis) yet had it weight enough to ouerlode the beliefe of any reasonable man. For all Authors consent, that Xerxes transported into Greece an Ar∣mie of 1700000. and gathered together (therein to passe the Hellespont) three thou∣sand Gallies, as Herdotus out of the seuerall Prouinces whence those Galleyes were taken hath collected the number. But of what multitude soeuer the Armie of Semiramis consisted: the same being broken and ouerthrown by Staurobates vpon the banks of Indus, canticum cantauit ex∣tremum: shee sang her last song; and (as Antiquitie hath fayned) was changed by the gods into a Doue (the bird of Venus) whence it came that the Babylonians gaue a Doue in their ensignes. §. V. Of the Temple of BELVS built by SEMIRAMIS: and of the Py∣ramides of Aegypt. AMong all her other memorable and more then magnificent workes (besides the wall of the Citie of Babylon) was the Temple of Bel, ere∣cted in the middle of this Citie, inuironed with a wall carryed foure∣square of great heighth and beautie, hauing on each square certayne brazen gates curiously engrauen. In the Core of the square she raised a Towre of a furlong high, which is halfe a quarter of a mile; and vpon it againe (taking a Basis of a lesse circuit) she set a second Towre; and so eight in all, one aboue another: vpon the top whereof the Chaldaeans Priests made the obseruation of the starres, because this Towre ouer-topped the ordinarie cloudes. By beholding the ruines of this Towre haue many Trauailers beene deceiued; who suppose that they haue seene a part of Nimrods Towre, when it was but the foundation of this Temple of Bel: (except this of Bel were founded on that of Nim∣rod.) There were burnt in this Temple one hundred thousand talents of frankin∣cense euery yeere (saith Herodotus.) This Temple did Nabuchodonosor adorne with the spoiles of , and of the Temple of Salomon: all which vessels and orna∣ments Cyrus redeliuered. This temple Xerxes euened with the soile; which Alexander is said to haue repaired by the perswasions of the Chaldaeans. I denie not that it might haue been in his desire so to doe; but he enioyed but a few yeeres after Babylon taken, and therefore could not performe any such worke. The Aegyptians (saith Proclus) Procl. in , lib. 1. inhabiting a low and leuell ground, and giuen to the same superstition of the starres that the Chaldaeans were, erected in imitation, and for the same seruice and vse, the Py∣ramides by Memphis, which were conspicuae vndi{que} nauigantibus, saith Plinie. Of these Pyramides, Bellonius a carefull obseruer of rarities (who being in Aegypt mounted by Bellon. l. 2. steps to the top of the highest) maketh this report: Le archer qui seroit a sa sommite, & tirant vne fleche en l'air, a peine pouroit l'enuoyer hors de sabase qu'elle ne se tombast sur les degrez; The best archer standing on the top of one of these Pyramides, and shooting an arrow from thence into the ayre as farre as can, with great difficul∣tie shall be able so to force the same, but that it will fall vpon some of the degrees or steps. Finis Libri primi. THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORIE OF THE WORLD: INTREATING OF THE TIMES FROM The birth of ABRAHAM to the destruction of the Temple of Salomon. THE SECOND BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of the time of the birth of ABRAHAM: and of the vse of this question, for the ordering of the Sto∣rie of the Assyrian Empire. §. I. Of some of the successours of SEMIRAMIS: with a briefe transition to the question, about the time of the birth of ABRAHAM. AFTER the death of Semiramis, Ninias or Zameis succeeded her in the Empire, on whom Berosus Annianus bestowes the conquest of Ba∣ctria, and the ouerthrow of Zoroaster; contra∣ry to Diodorus, Iustine, Orosius, and all other ap∣proued writers. For Ninias being esteemed no man of warre at all, but altogether feminine, and subiected to ease and delicacie, there is no probabilitie in that opinion. Now because there was nothing performed by this Ninias of any moment, other then that out of iealousie he euery yeere changed his Prouinciall Gouer∣nors, and built Colledges for the Chaldaean Priests, his Astronomers: nor by Arius his successor, whom Suidas calleth Thuras; but that he reduced againe the Bactrians and Caspians, reuolted as it seemeth in Nini∣as his time: nor of Aralius, the successor of Arius; but that he added sumptuosity, inuented iewels of gold and stone, and some engins for the warre: I will for this present passe them ouer, and a while follow Abraham, whose wayes are warrantable, (till wee meet these Assyrians againe in this story) by whom and by whose issues we shall best giue date to the Kings of Babylon: Abraham liuing at once with Ninus, Ni∣nias, Semiramis, Arius, Aralius, and Xerxes or Balanius. For otherwise if we seeke to proue things certaine by the vncertaine, and iudge of those times, which the Scrip∣tures set vs down without error, by the raignes of the Assyrian Princes: we shall but patch vp the story at aduenture, and leaue it in the same confusion, in which to this day it hath remained. For where the Scriptures doe not helpe vs, Mirum nòn est in re∣bus . in . antiquis Historiam non constare, No maruaile if then in things very ancient, History want assurance. The better therefore to finde out, in what age of the World, and how long these Assyrian Kings raigned, as also for other good causes, we must first assure the time of Abrahams birth, and in what yeere the same hapned after the floud. Now since all agree, that the fortieth three yeere of Ninus was the birth-yeere of Abraham; by prouing directly out of the Scriptures, in what yeere after the floud the birth of A∣braham hapned, we shall thereby set all the rest in square and order. But of this time there is much iangling betweene those Chronologers, which follow the Hebrew ac∣count, and others: the most part making 292. or 293. yeeres; others 352. yeeres be∣tween Abrahams birth and the floud: a matter often disputed, but neuer concluded. Archilochus de temporibus (as we finde him in Annius) makes but 250. yeeres from the floud to Ninus: then seeing that Abraham was borne in the fortieth three yeere of Ninus, according to Eusebius, and S. Augustine, it followeth by the addition of those two numbers, that the yeere of Abrahams birth was in the yeere after the floud 293. or as the most part of all Chronologers gather, the yeere 292. Now, since I doe here enter into that neuer-resolued question, and Labyrinth of times, it behoueth me to giue reason for my owne opinion: and with so much the greater care and circumspection, because I walke aside, and in a way apart from the multitude; yet not alone, and without companions, though the fewer in num∣ber: with whom I rather choose to endure the wounds of those dartes, which En∣uie casteth at nouelty, than to goe on safely and sleepily in the easie waies of ancient mistakings: seeing to be learned in many errors, or to be ignorant in all things, hath little diuersity. §. II. A proposall of reasons or arguments, that are brought to proue ABRAHAM was borne in the yeere 292. after the Floud, and not in the yeere 352. THose which seeke to proue this account of 292. yeeres, betweene the generall floud and Abrahams birth, ground themselues, first on these words of the Scripture: So TERAH liued 70. yeeres, and begot ABRA∣HAM, NAHOR, and HARAN: secondly, vpon the opinion of Iosephus, S. Augustine, Beda, Isidore, and many of the ancient Hebrewes before them: authorities (while they are slightly lookt ouer) seeming of great weight. From the place of Scripture last remembred, the latter Chronologers gather these arguments. First out of the wordes as they lie; that TERAH at 70. yeeres begot A∣BRAHAM, NAHOR and HARAN: and that Abraham being the first named, Abra∣ham being the worthiest, Abraham being the sonne of the promise, ought in this re∣spect to be accounted the eldest sonne of Terah, and so necessarily borne in the seuen∣tieth yeere of his life. Secondly, it was of Abraham that Moses had respect, in whom the Church of God was continued, who was heire of the blessing; and not of Nahor and Haran: for the scope of this Chapter was to set downe the Genealogy of Christ, from Adam to Abraham, without all regard of Nahor, and Haran. It is thirdly obiected, that if Abraham were not the eldest sonne, then there can bee no certainty of his age, and so are all future times made doubtfull. For it can∣not then be proued, that Abraham was borne more assuredly in the 130. yeere of Terah his age, then in the 131. 132, &c. Moses hauing no where set downe precisely that Abraham went into Canaan that very yeere, in which his Father died. Fourthly, it is thought improbable, that Terah begat Abraham at 130. yeere: see∣ing Abraham himselfe thought it a wonder to be made a Father at 100. yeeres. §. III. The answere to one of the obiections proposed, shewing that ABRAHAM made but one iourney out of Mesopotamia into Canaan: and it, after his Fathers death. TO answere all which obiections it is very easie, the way being prepa∣red thereto by diuers learned Diuines long since, and to which I will adde somewhat of mine owne, according to the small talent which God hath giuen me. Now forasmuch as the state of the question can∣not well be scanned, vnlesse the time of Abrahams iourney into Cana∣an be first considered of; before I descend vnto the particular examination of these arguments, I will make bold with order and method so farre, as to search into a strange tradition concerning his trauailes, that serueth as a ground for this opinion, and a bulwarke against all that can be said to the contrary. But it is conceiued that Abraham made two iournies into Canaan: the latter after his Fathers death, the former presently vpon his calling, which he performed without all delay, not staying for his fathers death at Haran: a coniecture, drawn from a place in the Epistle to the Hebrewes, where it is written, By faith ABRAHAM ( when hee was Heb. 11. 8. called) obeyed God, to goe out into a place, which he should afterward receiue for inheritance: and he went out, not knowing whither hee went. This supposition (if it bee granted) serues very well to vphold the opinion, that can ill stand without it. Let vs therefore see whether we may giue credit to the supposition it selfe. Surely, that Abraham first departed Charran or Haran after the death of Terah his Father, the same is proued, without the admission of any distinction, by these words of S. STEPHEN: And after his Father was dead, God brought him into this Land, where Act. 7. 4. ye now dwell, that was, out of Haran into Canaan. Against which place so direct, and plaine, what force hath any mans fancie or supposition, perswading, that Abraham made two iourneys into Canaan; one before Terah's death, and another after: n such thing being found in the Scriptures, nor any circumstance, probability, or rea∣son to induce it? For if any man out of this place before alleadged can picke any ar∣gument, prouing, or affording any strong presumption, that Abraham past into Ca∣naan, Heb. 11. 8. and then returned vnto Haran, from whence he departed a second time: then I thinke it reason, that he be beleeued in the rest. But that hee performed the com∣mandement of God after his Fathers death, leauing Vr and Haran for Canaan, it is as true as the Scriptures themselues are true. For after his Father was dead, (saith the Martyr Stephen) God brought him into this Land. And, as Beza , if Abraham made a double iourney into Canaan, then must it be inferred, that Moses omitted the one, and Stephen afterwards remembred the other: and whence had Stephen, saith Be∣za, the knowledge of Abrahams comming into Canaan, but out of Moses? For if Stephen had spoken any thing of those times, differing from Moses, he had offered the Iewes his aduersaries too great an occasion both of scandalizing himselfe, and the Gospell of Christ. Indeed we shall finde small reason to make vs thinke that Abraham passed and repassed those wayes, more often than he was enforced so to doe, if we consider, that he had no other guide or comforter in this long and wearisome iourney, than the strength of his faith in Gods promise: in which if any thing would haue brought him to despaire, he had more cause then euer man had to fall into it. For hee came into a Region of strong and stubborne nations: a Nation of valiant and resolued Idolaters. He was besieged with famine at his first arriuall, and driuen to flie into Aegypt for reliefe. His wife was olde, and he had no sonne to inherit the promise. And when God had giuen him Isaac, he commaunded him to offer him vp to him∣selfe for Sacrifice: all which discomforts hee patiently and constantly vnder∣went. Secondly, let vs consider the wayes themselues, which Abraham had to passe ouer, the length whereof was 300. English miles: and through Countries of which he had no manner of experience. He was to transport himselfe ouer the great riuer of Eu∣phrates, to trauaile through the dangerous and barren Desarts of Palmyrena, and to climbe ouer the great and high mountaines of Libanus, Hermon or Gilead: and whe∣ther these were easie walkes for Abraham to march twice ouer, containing, as afore∣said, 300. miles in length, let euery reasonable man . For if hee trauailed it twice; then was his iourney in all 1800. miles from Haran: and from Haran twice into Canaan. But were there no other disproue this fancie; the manner of Abrahams departing from Haran hath more proofe, that hee had not ani∣mum reuertendi, not any thought of looking backward, than any mans bare coniecture, be he of what antiquity or authority soeuer. For thus it is written of him, Then ABRA∣HAM . 12. 5. tooke SARA his wife, and LOT his brothers sonne, and all their substance that they possess, and the soules that they had gotten in Haran: and they departed to go to the land of Ca∣naan, and to the Land of Canaan they came. Now if Abraham brought all with him that was deare vnto him; his wife, and kinsmen, and his, and their goods: it is not proba∣ble that he meant to walke it backe againe for his pleasure, in so warme, dangerous, and barren a Country as that was: or if hee could haue beene thereto mooued, it is more likely that he would haue then returned, when he was yet vnsettled, and prest with extreme famine at his first arriuall. For had his Father beene then aliue, hee might haue hoped from him to receiue more assured comfortand reliefe, then a∣mong the Aegyptians, to whom hee was a meere stranger both in Religion and Nation. What the cause might bee of Abrahams returne to Haran, as I will not enquire of them, that without warrant from the Scriptures haue sent him backe thither, about the time of his fathers death: so they perhaps, if they were vrged, could say little else, than that without such a second voyage their opinion were not maintai∣nable. One thing in good reason they should doe well to make plaine if it be noto∣uer-troublesome. They say that Abraham was in Haran at his Fathers death, or sometime after, being then by their account 135. yeeres old, or a little more. How then did it happen, that he left quite vndone the businesse, which as wee reade, was within foure or fiue yeeres after that time his greatest, or (as may seeme) his onely care? Did not he binde with a very solemne oath his principall seruant, in whom hee . 24. reposed most confidence, to trauaile into those parts, and seeke out a wife for Isaac his sonne? and doth it not appeare by all circumstances, that neither he nor his ser∣uant were so well acquainted in Mesopotamia, that they could particularly designe any one woman, as a fit match for Isaac? Surely if Abraham had beene there in per∣son so lately, as within foure or fiue yeeres before, hee would not haue forgotten a matter of such importance; but would haue trusted his owne iudgement, in choo∣sing a woman, fit for her piety, vertue, and other desireable qualities, to be linked in marriage with his onely sonne, who was then 35. yeeres old; before which age most of the Patriarches after the floud had begotten children, rather than haue left all at randome to the consideration of a seruant, that neither knew any, nor was knowne of any in that Country. But let it be supposed (if it may be beleeued) that either Abraham forgot this businesse when he was there, or that somewhat hapned which no man can deuise. What might be the reason, that Abrahams man, in doing his ma∣sters . 24. 35, 36. . errand, was faine to lay open the whole story of his masters prosperity, telling it as newes, that Sarah had borne to him a sonne in her old age? If Abraham him∣selfe, a more certaine Author, had so lately beene among them, would not all this haue beene an idle tale? It were needlesse to stand long vpon a thing so euident Whether it were lawful for to returned back to Haran, would perhaps be a question hardly answerable: considering how auerse hee was from permitting his sonne to bee carried thither, euen though a wife of his owne kindred could not Gen. 24. 6. & 8. haue beene obtained without his personall presence. indeed was sent thither by his parents, to take a wife of his owne linage; not without Gods especial appro∣bation, Gen. 28. by whose blessing he prospered in that iourney: yet hee liued there as a ser∣uant; suffered many iniuries; and finally was driuen to conuey himselfe away from thence by flight. For although it bee not a sentence written, yet out of all written examples it may be obserued, that God alloweth not in his seruants any desire of re∣turning to the place, from whence hee hath taken, and them. That briefe saying, Remember LOTS wife, much matter. Let vs but consider Mesopotamia from whence Abraham was taken, and Aegypt, out of which the whole nation of the was deliuered: shall finde, that no blessing issued from either of them, to the posterity of the Hebrewes. When Ezechias was visited with 2. Kings. 20. an honourable Embassie from Babel, it seemes that hee conceiued great pleasure in his minde, and thought it a piece of his prosperity; but the prophecy which there∣upon he heard by Esai, made him to know, that the counsaile of God was not agree∣able to such thoughts: which more plainely appeared in a following generation, when by the waters of Babylon they sate downe and wept. Concerning Aegypt we Psal. 1; 7. reade, that Sesac and Kings of Aegypt brought calamitie vpon Israel: also that 1. Kin. 14. 25. & 2. Kin. 23. v. 29. their confidence in the Aegyptian succours was the cause of their destruction. Where they were forbidden to return into Aegypt I doe not remember, nor can readily find; but it is found in Deuteronomie, that God had said, They should no more returne that way; Deut. 17. v. 16. which is giuen, as the reason, why their King might not cause the people to returne to Aegypt, for the muliplying of his Horses. Whether the Lord had laied any such iniunction vpon Abraham of not returning to Mesopotamia, I cannot say; many things do argue it probably: that hee neuer did returne, all circumstances do (to my vnder∣standing) both strongly and necessarily conclude. But because this double passage of Abrahams is but an imagination: and that ima∣ginations of men are rather valuable among children, than that they can perswade those of iudgement or vnderstanding: I take it sufficient, that S. Stephen hath direct∣ly taught vs, that Abraham left Haran, his Father being dead. And for the rest, when they shew any one Scripture to proue it, I will beleeue as they doe. For all the tra∣uailes of Abraham are precisely set downe in the Scriptures: as first from Vr or Camerina in Chaldaea to Haran or Charran: and then from Haran (after his Fathers death) to Sichem; from Sichem he remooued to a mountaine betweene and Haie: thence into Aegypt: from Aegypt hee returned thither againe, where Lot and he parted, because their flockes and heards of Cattle were more, then could bee fed in that part: from thence the second time hee remooued to Mamre, neere Hebron: and thence hauing pursued Amraphel, and rescued Lot, hee after inhabited at Gerar, in the border of Idumaea, vnder Abimelec: and after neere vnto it at Bérsable, at which time hee was ready to offer vp his sonne Isaac on the mountaine Moriah. But this fiction of his retrait to Haran or Charran, appeareth not in any one story, either diuine or humane. Now if it may bee supposed, that Abraham had made any for∣mer iourney into Canaan, as Leuita in his Cabala hath fained; it should in reason bee there withall beleeued, that he would in those his first trauailes haue prouided himselfe of some certaine seat, or place of abiding: and not haue come a second time, with his wife, kinsmen, familie, goods and Cattle, not knowing whereon to rest him∣selfe. But Abraham, when he came from Charran, past through the North part of Ca∣naan, thence to Sichem, and the Plaine of Moriah: where finding no place to inhabite, . . v. 6. he departed thence to Bethel and Haie: and so from Nation to Nation, to discouer and finde out some fit habitation: from whence againe, as it is written in Genesis the eleuenth, He went foorth going and iournying towards the South: and alwayes vnsettled. By occasion of which wandring to and fro, some say, the Aegyptians gaue him and his the name of Hebroei. Further, to proue that hee had not formerly beene in the . Countrie, we may note, that ere he came to Bethel and Haie, and at his first entrance into Canaan, God appeared vnto him, saying, Vnto thy seed will I giue this Land, shew∣ing it him as vnto a stranger therein, and as a land to him vnknowne. For Abraham without any other prouident care for himselfe, in the word of the liuing God: neither sending before, nor comming first to discouer it; but being arriued, he receiued a second promise from God, that hee would giue those Countries vnto him and his seede to inhabit and inherit. Lastly, what should mooue any man to thinke, that Moses would haue omitted any such double iourney of Abrahams, seeing hee setteth downe all his passages els∣where, long and short? as when he moued from Sichem, and seated betweene Haie and Bethel: the distance being but twenty miles: and when he moued thence to the valley of , being but twentie foure miles: and when hee left Mamre, and sate downe at Gerar, being lesse then sixe miles; no, Moses past ouer all the times of the first age with the greater breuity, to hasten him to the story of Abraham: shutting vp all betweene the Creation and the Floud in six chapters; which age lasted 1656. yeeres: but hee bestoweth on the story of Abraham fourteene chapters, beginning with his birth in the eleuenth, and ending with his death in the fiue and twentieth; and this time endured but 175. yeere. It hath therefore no face of trueth, that Mo∣ses forgot or neglected any thing concerning Abrahams trauailes, or other actions: or that hee would set downe those small remooues of fiue miles, and omit those of three hundred. For such a iourney in going and comming would haue ministred some varietie of matter, or accident, worthie the inserting and adding to Abrahams storie. §. IIII. The answere to another of the obiections proposed, shewing that it was not vnlikely, that TERAH should beget ABRAHAM in his hundred and thirty yeere. NOw touching the obiection, where it is said, that it was very vnlikely that Terah should beget Abraham in his 130. yeere, seeing Abraham himselfe thought it a wonder to haue a sonne at an hundred: this is hardly worth the answering. This wonder is indeed miscast, and mis∣taken: Abraham hauing respect only to Sarah his wife, when he spake of their many yeeres. For when the Angell saide vnto Abraham in his Tent doore at Mamre; Loe, SARAH thy wife shall haue a Sonne, it followeth in the next verse, Now ABRAHAM and SARAH were olde and stricken in age, and it ceased to be with SARAH after the manner of women: therefore SARAH laughed, &c. So then, in that it is said, it ceased to be with SARAH after the manner of women, it appeareth that the wonder was wrought on her, & not on Abraham. For Abraham by his secōd wife Keturah had many sons after Sarah's death, as Zimron, Iockshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah: and the eldest of these was borne 37. yeeres : and the yongest 40. yeeres after. What strangenesse then, that Terah being 130. yeeres old should beget Abraham, will they say, may bee gathered from this supposed despaire of Abraham at one hundred yeeres? For Sarah died in the yeere of the world 2145. and Isaac was borne in the yeere 2109: and Abraham did not marry till Sa∣rah . . 11 in . Aug. de . dei. l. 16. c. 34. Caietan: & . in Gen. was buried. So if wee deduct the number of 2109. out of 2145. there remai∣neth 36. And therefore if Abraham begat fiue sonnes 36. yeeres after this supposed wonder, and when Abraham was 137. yeeres old: it is not strange that his Father Terah should beget Abraham at 130. And if Booz, Obed, and Iesse, who liued so many yeeres and ages after Abraham, begat sons at 100. yeeres, or neere it, it cannot be mer∣uailed at, that Terah begat Abraham at 130; and Abraham others at the same age and seuen yeeres after. §. V. The answere to two more of the obiections: shewing that wee may haue certaintie of ABRA∣HAMS age from the Scripture, though we make not ABRAHAM the eldest Sonne: and that there was great cause, why in the story of ABRAHAM his two brethren should be respected. IT followeth now to speake something to the obiection, which brings Abrahams age altogether in doubt, except we allow him to be the el∣dest sonne of Terah, and borne when Terah was 70. yeeres old. For A∣brahams age being made vncertaine, all succeeding times are thereby without any perfect rule or knowledge. But this proposition, That wee cannot be certaine of Abrahams age, vnlesse we make him the eldest sonne, is false. For it is plaine in the Scriptures, that when Terah was 205. which was the yeere of his death, then was Abraham 75. And if you aske, how I can iudge of times, either preceding or succeeding, by knowing that A∣braham departed Haran at that age: I answere, that S. Stephen hath told vs, that A∣brahams departure followed the death of his Father Terah: and Terah died at 205; so as the 75. yeere of Abraham was the 205. yeere of Terah: which knowne, there can be no error in the account of times succeeding. Now to come to the obiection, where it is said, That Moses had no respect vnto Nachor and Haran, because they were out of the Church, but to Abraham onely, with whom God established the Co∣uenant, and of whom Christ descended according to the flesh, &c. I answere, that Moses for many great and necessary causes had respect of Nachor and Haran. For the succession of Gods Church is not witnessed by Abraham alone, but by the issues of Nahor and Haran, were they Idolaters or otherwise. For Nahor was the Father of Be∣thuel, & Bethuel of Rebecca, the mother of Israel: & Haran was the parent of Lot, Sarah, and Milcah: and Sarah was mother to Isaac, and grandmother to Iacob: Milcah also the wife of Nahor, and mother of Bethuel, was Iacobs great grandmother: and the age of Sarah the daughter of Haran is especially noted, in that it pleased God to giue her a sonne at 90. yeeres, and when by nature she could not haue conceiued. And there∣fore, though it were not in regard of themselues, yet because both Nahor and A∣braham married the daughters of their brother Haran; and because Isaac married Rebecca the grand-childe of Nahor; and Iacob, Lea, and Rachel, the daughters of Laban, the grand-childe also of Nahor: It was not superfluous in Moses to giue light of these mens times and ages. And though sometime they worshipped strange Gods, as it is Ios. 24. 2. yet I see no cause to thinke, that they still continued Idolaters. For they beleeued and obeyed the calling of Abraham, leauing their naturall Countrey, and Citie of Vr in , as Abraham did, and remooued thence all, except Haran, who died before his Father Terah, ere they left Chaldaea; but Lot, his sonne, followed A∣braham into Canaan; and Sarah, the sister of Lot, married. Nabor also, who remained at Charran, gaue his sonnes daughters to Isaac, and Iacob, his own kinsemen: he himselfe hauing also married in his owne family; not thinking it pleasing vnto God to mixe themselues with strangers and Idolaters. And that these men at length beleeued in the God of Abraham, it can no way be doubted. For when Laban had seene the seruant of Abraham standing at the Well beside Charran, hee inuited him to his Fathers house in this manner: Come in, thou blessed of IEHOVAH, &c. And Gen. 24. v. 31. when this seruant of Abrahams demanded an answere as touching Rebecca, then an∣swered Laban and , and said; This thing is proceeded of IEHOVAH: meaning that Gen. 24. v. 50. it was the will of the true God it should be so; wherein he acknowledged Gods pro∣uidence. Likewise in the following verse it is written; Take, take, goe that shee may bee thy Masters sonnes wife, euen as IEHOVAH hath said. This their often vsing of the name of IEHOVAH, which is the proper Name of the true God, is a signe that they had the knoledge of him. Now although it be the opinion of Saint Chrysostome, and some later writers, as Caietan, Oleaster, Musculus, Caluin, Mercer, and others, that Laban was an Idolater, be∣cause he retained certaine Idols, or houshold Gods, which Rachel stole from him; yet that he beleeued in the true God it cannot bee denied. For hee acknowledgeth the God of Abraham and of Nahor, and he called Abrahams seruant, blessed of IEHOVAH, as aforesaid. So as for my selfe I dare not auow, that these men were out of the Church, who sure I am were not out of the faith. §. VI. That the naming of ABRAHAM first of the three brethren, Gen. 11. v. 26. doth not proue that hee was the eldest: together with diuers reasons proouing that ABRAHAM was not the eldest sonne of TERAH. TO the maine obiection which I answere last, because it seemeth of most strength, by which, those that striue to shorten the times, ende∣uour to proue that Abraham was the eldest sonne of Terah, and borne in the 70. yeere of Terahs life: grounding themselues first and chiefly on this place of the Scripture, And TERAH liued 70. yeeres and begat ABRAHAM, NAHOR, and HARAN: To this I say, that although Abraham in this Gen. 11. v 26. verse be first named, yet the same is no proofe at all that he was the eldest & first born sonne of Terah. For it is no necessary consequence, that the first named in Scrip∣tures was therefore eldest in bloud and birth, neither doth it appeare, that it plea∣sed God to make especiall choice of the first sonnes in nature and time: for Seth was not the first borne of Adam; nor Isaac of Abraham; nor Iacob of Isaac; nor Iuda and Ioseph of Iacob: nor Dauid the eldest of Iesse; nor Salomon of Dauid: as is formerly re∣membred. But it is written of NOAH; NOAH was 500. yeres old, and NOAH begat SHEM, HAM, and IAPHET: shewing that at the 500. yeere of his age he began to beget the first of those three sonnes. For according to S. Augustine, speaking generally, Nec Aug. quaest. super Gen. 25. est in his ordo natiuitatis, sed significatio futurae dignitatis: in qua excelluit ABRAHAM. The order of natiuitie is not here to be respected, but the signification of the future dignitie: in which ABRAHAM was preferred. And therefore, as in the order of the sonnes of Noah: so is it here; where it is said, that TERAH liued 70. yeeres, and begat ABRAHAM, NAHOR, and HARAN: For it was late ere Terah began to beget Sonnes, him∣selfe being begotten by his Father Nachor at 29. as other his Ancestors were at 30. The like also happened to Noah: for whereas Adam begat Seth at 130; Enosh Kenan at 90; Kenan Mahalaleel at 70; Mahalaleel Iered at 60: Noah was yet 500. yeeres old when he began to beget the first of his three sonnes, as aforesaid. And S. Augu∣stine in the place before cited, rather inclineth to the opinion that Abraham was the yongest of Terahs sonnes, then otherwise: though for his excellencie he was wor∣thily named first. His owne words are these: Fieri enim potuit vt posterior sit gene∣ratus ABRAHAM: sed merito excellentiae, qua in Scriptur is valdè commendatur, prior fu∣erit nominatus. It might be, saith he, that ABRAHAM was begotten later: but was first na∣med in regard of his excellencie, for which in Scripture he is much commended. So as the naming first or last proueth nothing who was first or last borne: either in those is∣sues of Noah, or in these of Terah: Neither hath God any respect of the eldest in na∣ture, as touching his election or spirituall blessing, for Moses nameth first the chil∣dren of the promise, and the eldest and first in Gods fauour. Pietas ergò vel ipsa po∣tiùs electio diuina, quae secum trahit pietatem, & Dei timorem, prim as partes dat SEMO in liberis NOA, & ABRAHAMO in liber is Thare. Pietie, saith he, or rather diuine election, which doth euermore draw with it or after it pietie and the feare of God, gaue place and precedencie to SEM among the children of NOAH, and to ABRAHAM among those of Thare. For the rest it is manifest, that Abraham entred Canaan in the 75. yeere of his age. And it was in Canaan that Hagar bare him Ismael, when Abraham had liued 86. yeeres. Gen. 12. 4. It was at Gerar (the South border of Canaan) that Sarah bare Isaac, when Abraham Gen. 16. 16. had consumed 100. yeeres. It was from the valley of Mamre in Canaan that Abra∣ham rose out, when he rescued Lot and ouerthrew Amraphel: and he had then but the age of 83. yeeres: and it is as manifest that he parted from Haran after his Father Act. 7. 4. & Gen. 14. Terah was dead. But if Terah begat Abraham at 70. yeere old, then must Abraham haue beene 135. yeeres when hee first set his foote in Canaan: seeing Terah must bee dead ere he parted, and so 70. added to 135. made 205, the true age of Terah, which is contrary to all those places of Scripture before remembred. For hee entred at 75: hee rescued Lot at 83: hee had Ismael at 86: hee had Isaac at 100. proued by the former places. Moreouer, if Abraham were the eldest sonne of Terah, and borne in the 70. yeere of his age: then had Terah liued till Isaac had beene 35. yeeres old, and Ismael, 49. both which must then haue been borne in Mesopotamia, and therein fostered to that age: vnlesse we should either denie credit to S. Stephen, who saith that Abraham departed from Mesopotamia after his Fathers death: or else giue credit to the inter∣pretation of Daniel Angelocrator, who in his Chronologia antoptica, saith it was about his Fathers death: because the Greeke word, , may bee transported by the Latine sub, aswell as by post: which though elsewhere it may bee, yet cannot it be so in this place. For it were most improperly spoken, to say that those things were done a∣bout Terahs death, which were 60. yeeres before. Wherefore supposing Abraham to haue beene borne in the 70. yeere of Terah; we must giue those times and places of birth to Abrahams children, which no authoritie will warrant; For Abraham had no children in Vr of Chaldea, nor in Haran: nor in 10. yeeres after his arriuall into Ca∣naan. For the yeere of Terahs death, in which Abraham left Haran, was the yeere of the World 2083. and the yeere of Ismaels birth was the Worlds yeere 2094: which maketh 10. yeeres difference. And that Isaac was borne in Canaan, and was to bee offered vpon the mountaine Moriah therein, 39. miles from Berjabe, where Abraham then inhabited: and that three Angels first of all appeared to Abraham in the valley of Mamre, no man doubteth. And therefore it cannot be that any of Abrahams sonnes were borne in Mesopota∣mia; nor while Terah liued; nor in lesse then 10. yeeres after Terahs death: and consequently was not Abraham the eldest sonne of Terah, nor borne in the 70. yeere of Terahs age. Thirdly, whereas Abraham came into Canaan at 75: if Terah had 70, then had Terah liued but 145. for 70. and 75. make 145. which must Gen. 12. been the full age of Terah: but Terah liued 205. yeere: and therefore was not A∣braham borne in the 70. yeere of Terah. Fourthly, the ages of Lot and Sarah make it manifest, that Haran was the elder, if not the eldest brother of Abraham; for Sarah or Iscah wanted but 10. yeeres of A∣brahams age: Isaac beeing borne when Abraham was 100. and Sarah 90. yeeres olde. It followeth then, that if Abraham had beene the elder brother of Haran, Ha∣ran must haue begotten Sarah at 9. yeeres old: for granting that Haran was borne but one yeere after Abraham, and Sarah within 10. yeres as old as Abraham, then of necessitie must Haran beget her, when hee had liued but 9. yeeres; which were too ridiculous to imagine. And that Iscah was Sarah, Rab. Solomon affirmeth; both names, saith he, bearing the same signification; and names of principalitie. Againe, to what end was the word Iscah or inserted in this place, if Sarah were not meant thereby? for to speake of any thing superfluous it is not vsed in Gods Bookes: and if Iscah had not belonged to the story, it had been but an idle name to no purpose remembred. Now if it had been true (as those of the contrary opinion affirme) that Moses had no respect of Nachor and Haran, who were not withstanding the parents of Bethuel and Rebecca, the mother of Israel, and of Christ: what regard then had Moses of Iscah in this place, were she not Sarah, but otherwise an idle name of whom there is nothing else first or last. The age also of Lot disproueth the eldership of Abraham: for Lot was called an old man when Abraham was but 83. yeeres: And if Lot were of a greater age than Abraham, and were Father to Lot, Sarah, and Milcah, Abraham marrying one of Harans daughters, and Nahor the other, Sarah also being within ten yeeres as old as : it may appeare to euery reasonable man (not obstinate and preiudicate) that Haran was the eldest sonne of Terah, and not Abraham: who also died first and before his Father left Vr in Chaldaes. Also Lyra reasoneth against the opinion of A∣brahams eldership, vpon the same place of Genesis: drawing argument from the age of Sarah, who was but 10. yeeres yonger than Abraham himselfe. Lyra his wordes are these: Siigitur HARAN fuit iunior ipso ABRAHAM, sequitur quòd non habebat de∣cem annos quando genuit SARAM: octo, &c. and afterward, & idcò melius vi∣detur dicendum, quòd ABRAHAM fuit vltimò natus de tribus filijs THARE, tamen no∣minatur primò, propter dignitatem: & quia ponendus erat caput stirpis & generatio∣nis sequentis: & quia primò facta est ei expressa de CHRISTO, sicut supra dictum est de SEM, &c. If therefore (saith Lyra) HARAN was yonger then ABRAHAM himselfe, it followeth that he was not ten yeeres old when he begat SARAH: And therefore it seemeth better to be said, that ABRAHAM was the last borne of the three sonnes of THARE, neuerthelesse he is named first for his dignitie, both because he was to be ordained head of the stocke and generation following, and because the promise of CHRIST was first made him, as before it is said of SEM. §. VII. A conclusion of this dispute, noting the Authors on both sides: with an admonition that they which shorten the times, make all ancient stories the more vnprobable. IT therefore agreeth with the Scriptures, with Nature, Time, and Reason, that Haran was the eldest sonne of Terah, and not Abraham: and that Abraham was borne in the 130. yeere of Terahs life, and not in the 70. yeere. For Abraham departing Charran after Terah died, ac∣cording to S. Stephen, and that iourney by Abraham performed when 3. 4. hee was 75. yeeres old, these two numbers added make 205. yeeres, the full age of Terah: seeing that when Terah died, then Abraham entred Canaan. For my selfe, I . 12. 4. haue no other end herein then to manifest the truth of the Worlds Story: I reue∣rence the iudgements of the Fathers: but I know they were mistaken in particu∣lars. Saint Augustine was doubtfull, and could not determine this controuer∣sie. For whatsoeuer is borrowed from him out of his 16. Booke de Ciuit Dei, ca. 15. the same may bee answered out of himselfe in his fine and twentieth question vpon Gen. But S. herein followed Iosephus, and Isidor: and Beda followed S. Augustine. And it was out of a foolish pride and vanitie, that the Hebrews and Iose∣phus fought to make Abraham the first borne: as if God had had respect to the eldest in nature. So did Iosephus together with Nicholas Damascenus (thinking thereby to glorifie the Iewish Nation) make Abraham a king, entitling Sarah by the name of Queene Sarah: and said that Abraham was followed with . Captaines, of which euery one had an infinite multitude vnder him; & octodccem praefectos : quorum singulis infinita multitudo parebat. And that Pharao inuading him with a great armie, tooke from him his wife Sarah: Such fables argue that Iosephus is not to be beleeued, but with discreet reseruations. This account of times, allowing no more than 292. yeeres from the Floud to Abra∣ham, is vpheld by many of the Hebrews. But how should wee value the opinion of such Chronologers, as take Amraphel for Nimrod? Surely, if their iudgement in such matters were worthy to be regarded, it would haue appeared in setting downe the succession of the Persian Kings, vnder whom they liued, whose Historie was not so farre remote in time, as these antiquities, nor wanting the light of many good wri∣ters. Yet grossely haue they erred therein, and so familiar are their mistakings in all things of like nature, that we seldome finde their opinion rehearsed without the confutation treading on the heeles of it. They of the Romane religion are also ge∣nerally on the same side: it being a thing vsuall among them, to maintaine whatsoe∣uer they haue beene formerly knowne to holde and . Contrariwise, of the more ancient, , and some following him: of later times , Codoman, , Caluin, Innius, Beza, Broughton, Doct. Gibbons, and Moore, with diuers of the Protestants, hold Abraham to haue been borne in the 130. yeere of his Father Terah. From these, (as in a case not concerning any point in Religion) diuers of the same Religion, and those neuerthelesse good Authours, as Bucholcerus, aeus, and others, are very herein, especially Iosephus with his Sethus Calui∣sius, proclaiming Beroaldus an Arch-heretike in Chronologie, and condemning this opinion of his as poysonous. Contrariwise, Augustinus Torniellus a Priest of the Con∣gregation of S. Paul, a iudicious, diligent and free writer, whose Annales are newly set forth, very earnestly defends the opinion, which I haue already deliuered; not al∣leadging Beroalàus, nor any Protestant writer, as beeing perhaps vnwilling to owe thankes to heretikes. For my selfe I doe neither mislike the contrary opinion, be∣cause commonly those of the Romish Religion labour to vphold it, Nor fauour this larger account of times, because many notable men of the Protestant writers haue approued it; but for the trueth it selfe. To strengthen which, after all these former reasons, and testimonies of Scripture, I will adde thus much more to the rest. First, it is apparant to all men of iudgement, that the best approoued , Diuine and prophane, labour to inuestigate the trueth of times, thereby to the sto∣ries, and forepast actions of the world: and not the trueth of histories to approue the times by. Let vs then make iudgement to our selues, which of these two accounts giue the best reputation to the storie of the Scriptures; teaching the Worlds new plantation, and the continuancie of Gods Church: either that of , and those which follow him; who makes but 292. yeeres, or thereabouts, betweene the floud and birth of Abraham: or this other account, which makes 352. yeeres be∣tweene the one and the other: the one taking Abraham to be the first borne of Thare, in the 70. yeere of his life: the other a yonger sonne of Thare, and borne when hee had liued 130 yeeres. And if we looke ouer all, and doe not hastily satisfie our vnderstanding with the first things , and thereby being satiated doe sloth∣fully and drowsily sit downe; wee shall finde it more agreeable rather to allow the reckoning of the Septuagint, who, according to some editions make it aboue 1072. yeeres betweene the Floud and Abrahams birth: then to take away any part of those 352. yeeres giuen. For if we aduisedly consider the state and countenance of the world, such as it was in Abrahams time, yea, before Abraham was borne, wee shall finde that it were very ill done of vs by following opinion without the guide of reason, to pare the times ouer-deepely betweene Abraham and the Floud: because in cutting them too neere the quicke, the reputation of the whole storie might per∣chance bleede thereby, were not the testimonie of the Scriptures supreme, so as no obiection can approch it: and that wee did not follow withall this precept of S. Augustine, That wheresoeuer any one place in the Sctiptures may bee conceiued disagreeing to the whole, the same is by ignorance of interpretation misunderstood. For in Abrahams time all the then knowne parts of the World were peopled: all Regionsand Countries had their Kings. Aegypt had many magnificent Cities: and so had Palaestina, and all the bordering Countries: yea, all that part of the World besides, as far as India: and those not built with stickes, but of hewne stones, and defended with walles and rampiers: which magnificence needed a parent of more antiquitie, then those other men haue supposed. And therefore, where the Scrip∣tures are plainest, and best agreeing with reason and nature, to what end should we labour to beget doubts and scruples, or drawe all things into wonders and ? giuing also strength thereby to common cauellers, and to those mens apish braines, who onely bend their wits to finde impossibilities, and monsters in the storie of the World and Mankinde. §. VIII. A computation of the times of the Assyrians and others, grounded vpon the times noted in the storie of ABRAHAM. IN this sort therefore for the reasons before alleadged, I conclude, An. mundi 2008 dil. 352. natus Abraham, Eus. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, . 16. c. 17. that from the generall Floud, to the birth of Abraham, 352. yeeres were consumed: and taking the Assyrian History with vs, the same number of yeeres were spent from the Floud to the 43. yeere of Ninus: in which 43. yeere of Ninus Abraham was borne: which happened in the yeere of the World, 2009. Now of this time of 352. yeeres, wee must giue one part as well to the increase of those people which came into Shinar, as to those that stayed in the East, to wit, 30. yeere to Chus, ere he begat Seba: of which, though the Scriptures are silent, yet be∣cause those of the same time had that age when they begat their first sonnes, we may the more safely giue the like allowance to these. For Eber begat Peleg at 34. Peleg Regu at 30. Regu Serug at 32. Now after Seba, Chus begat Hauila, Sabta, Raama and : and Raama begat Sheba and Dedan, before Nimrod was borne, as it appea∣reth Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. Gen. 10. which S. Augustine approueth. Giuing then 30. yeeres more to Raama ere hee begat Sheba, and fiue yeeres to the fiue elder brothers of Nimrod, it may bee gathered that 65. yeeres were consumed ere Nimrod himselfe was borne: and that Raamah had that age ere any of his sonnes were begotten, it may be gathered, by ex∣ample and comparison: for Peleg the fourth from Noah, as Raamah was, begat Regu Gen. 11. 18. in the same yeere of his life. Let vs then allow 60. yeeres more after the birth of Nimrod, for two other gene∣rations to be brought forth, or else we shal hardly find people to build Babel: for sure wee are that it was done by hands, and not by miracle: because it displeased God. These two numbers of 65. and 60. make 125. The rest of the time of 131. (in which yeere they arriued in Shinar, whereof there are 6. yeeres remaining) wee may giue them for their trauels from the East: because they were pestered with women, chil∣dren and Cattell: and as some ancient writers haue conceiued, and Becanus of later times, they kept alwaies the mountaines sides, for feare of a second Floud. Now, An. a salute generis ab centesimo primo cepit reg∣num Babyloni∣cum sub nostro Saturno patre , qui imperauit annis 65. Berosus. if we take this number of 131. out of 352. there remaines 221. of which number Berosus bestoweth 65. on Belus, and 42. on Ninus, before Abraham borne: both which S. Augustine approueth: which two numbers taken againe out of 221. there remaineth 114. yeeres of the 352. from the Floud to Abrahams birth: which num∣ber of 114. necessitie bestoweth on Nimrod. And if it be obiected that this time giuen to Nimrod, is ouer-long: sure if we com∣pare the age of Nimrod with the rest of the same descent from Noah, it will rather appeare ouer-short. For Nimrod, by this accompt, liued in all but one hundred seuenty nine yeeres: whereof hee reigned one hundred and twelue: whereas Sale who was the sonne of Arphaxad the sonne of Sem, liued foure hundred thirty three yeeres: and of the same age of the World was Nimrod, the sonne of Chus, the sonne of Cham. Now after Abraham was borne, Ninus reigned 9. yeers: which added to 43. make — — — — 52. Ninus dieth and leaueth Semiramis his successor. Of the World 2017. Semiramis gouerned the Empire of Babylonia and Assyria 42. yeeres, and died in the 52. yeere compleat of Abrahams life Of the Floud 761. Ninias or Zameis succeeded Semiramis, and ruled 38. yeeres, in the second yeere of whose reigne Abraham left Mesopotamia. 2059. mundi. 403. a dil. 2083. 427. 2093. 437. When Abraham was 85 yeeres old, he rescued his nephew Lot, and ouerthrew by surprise Amraphel king of Shinar, or Babylonia. Ninias reigned 38. yeeres, and Abra∣ham came into Canaan but 23. yeeres after Semiramis died: which was the 75. yeere of his age: so that Amraphel may seeme to haue beene this Ninias the sonne of Ni∣nus, and Semiramis, whose 23. yeere, as aforesaid, being the 75. yeere of Abraham, he and his fellow-kings might haue receiued this ouerthrow in the 85. yeere of Abra∣ham, and the 33. yeere of his own reigne: after which he reigned fiue yeeres: which make in all 38. But the trueth is, that the reasons to the contrary, vrging that this Amraphel could not be Ninias, are not easily answered. Howbeit for the times of the Assyrian kings, that they are to bee ordered as wee haue set them downe, accor∣ding to the times noted by Moses, in the storie of Abraham, it is most certaine: vn∣lesse we will either derogate from the trueth of Moses his computation, which were impietie: or account the whole Historie of Ninus and Semiramis to bee a fiction; which were to condemne all ancient Historians for fablers. §. IX. That AMRAPHEL, one of the foure Kings whom ABRAHAM ouertbrew, Gen. 14. may probably be thought to haue beene NINIAS the sonne of NINVS. ANd now touching this Amraphel, whom Moses makes king of Shinar or Babylonia, in the 85. yeere of Abrahams life, that is, in the 33. yeere of the reigne of Ninias Zameis the king of the Assyrians, the sonne of Ninus and Semiramis, it is hard to affirme what he was, and how hee could bee at this time king of Babylonia: Ninias then reigning there. To this doubt the answere which first offereth it selfe as most probable, is that which hath beene alreadie noted, that this Ninias or Zameis, was no other then our Amraphel: who inuaded Traconitis or Basan, and ouerthrew those fiue kings of Pentapolis, or the valley of Siddim. For the Scriptures tell vs, that Amraphel was king of Shinar, which is Babylonia: and the times before accounted make him to be the successour of Ninus and : and it falleth out with the 85. yeere of Abrahams life: wherein he rescued Lot, slew Chedorlaomer, and ouerthrew the rest. True it is, that this Amraphel was not at this time the Monarke: for Chedorlao∣mer, commanded in chiefe, though Amraphel bee first named by Moses in the first verse of the 14. Chapter of Genesis. For the Kings of the valley of Siddim, or of Pen∣tapolis, or of the fiue Cities, were the vassals of Chedorl. and not of Amraphel: as it is written. Twelue yeeres were they subiect to CHEDORLAOMER, but in the 13. yeere Gen. 14. 4. they rebelled, and in the 14. yeere came CHEDORLAOMER and the kings that were with him: and therefore was Chedorl. the principall in this enterprise, who was then king of Elam, which is Persia: Now Persia being seated ouer Tigris, and to the East of Am∣raphels Countrie; and the other two kings, which were companions with Amraphel, being seated to the West of Shinar or Babylonia: Amraphel, who held Babylonia it selfe, seemeth at this time to haue had no great scope or large dominion. For had Am∣raphel beene so great a Prince as prophane Historians make Ninus or Semiramis whom hee succeeded, he should not haue needed the assistance of three other kings for this expedition. But though Chedorlaomer were the first and greatest of those foure Kings, (as it is manifest that hee was: For these little kings of Sodome, Gomora, &c. were his vassals, and not Amraphels) yet this makes not the coniecture lesse pro∣bable, but that this Amraphel might be Ninias. For it may be, that the great and po∣tent Empire of Assyria, had now (as we shall shew more plainely in that which fol∣loweth) receiued a downe-right fall, at the time of this warre: though not long be∣fore it commanded all the kingdomes betweene India and the Phaenician Sea: to wit, in the times of Ninus and Semiramis. §. X. of ARIOCH another of the Kings, and that ELLAS, whereof he is said to haue beene King, lies betwene Coelesyria and Ara∣bia Petraea. NOw the two other kings ioyned with Amraphel, and Chedorl. were Ari∣och and Tidal; the one king of Ellassar, the other of the Nations. For Ellassar, Aquila and Hierome write Pontus: so Tostatus thinketh that it should bee Hellespont: which opinion Pererius fauoureth. But this is onely to defend the Latine translation. For as Pontus, so is Hellespont distant, and out of the way to send any armies into Arabia Petras, or into Idu∣msa: which Countries these foure Kings chiefly inuaded: Besides that, it is certaine, that the Assyrians (when they were greatest) had neuer any dominion in Asia the lesse. For at such time as the Assyrians feared the inuasion of the Medes and Persians, they sent not into Asia the lesse as commaunders: but vsed all the Arte they had to Xenophon. inuite Croesus to their assistance: perswading him that nothing could bee more dan∣gerous for himselfe, and the other Kings of those parts, than the successe of the Medes against the Assyrians. But examine the enterprise what it was. These Kings (saith the Text) made warre with BERA, king of Sodome, BrRSHA king of Gomor∣ha, Gen. 14. SHINAB king of Admath, and SHEMEBAR king of Zeboim, and the king of BELA which is Zoar. All which fiue kings had not so much ground as Middlesex: being such a kind of Reguli, as Iosua found in the land long after: namely, Lords of Cities and small territorries adioyning; of which Canaan had 33. all slaine or hanged by Iosus. Neither can the other Countries, which in the Text they are saide also to haue inuaded, bee imagined to haue beene at that time of any great power: and therefore to call in Kings from Pontus or Hellespont, had manifested a great impoten∣cie and weakenesse in the kings of Babylon and Persia. And though it bee alleadged for an example, that diuers kings farre off, came to assist Pompey against Caesar: yet these same examples without like occasions and cir∣cumstances, do neither lead nor teach. For there was no cause to feare the greatnesse of these pettie kings, or of the other Countries: But the eyes of the world were fixed on Caesar; and his vndertakings and intents were to all other Princes, no lesse doubtfull then fearefull: But the whole Countrie by these foure kings mastered in their passage, was afterward giuen to the halfe tribe of Manasse, Gad, and Reuben: a narrow valley of ground lying betweene Iordan and the mountaines of Seir: inclo∣sed by the riuer of Arnon on the South side, and by Lybanus on the North, consisting of the two small Prouinces of Traconitis or Basan, and the Region of the Moabites: a conquest farre vnualuable, and little answering the power of the Assyrian Empire, if the same had remained in any comparable estate with the times of Ninus and Se∣miramis, who subiected all the great kings of that part of the World, without the assistance of any of the Kings of Hellespont, or any other part of Asta the lesse. But as the Vulgar and Aquila conuert Ellassar by Pontus: so Symmachus makes Arioch a King of the Scythians, a King indeed, as farre fetched to ioyne with the in this warre, as the World had any at that time. The Septuagint doe not change the word of Ellassar at all, but as they keep the word , on the mountaines wher∣of the Arke did rest, so doe they in this place retaine the Hebrew word Ellassar, being doubtfull to giue it a wrong interpretation. And Percrius himselfe remembreth o∣ther opinions farre more probable then this of Pontus or Hellespont: yet he dares not auow his liking of them, because the Latine Translation hath it otherwise. For Ste∣phanus de Vrbibus a Graecian Cosmographer, findeth the Citie of Ellas in the border of Coelesyria: and S. calleth Ellas the Citie of , as in truth it was. Now although the same be seated by in Coelesyria, yet it standeth on the border of Arabia, of which Arioch was king: who formerly ioyned with in all his con∣quests, being of the same familie, and descended from Cham and Chus: after whom the name of Arius was by the Hebrews written Arioch: and afterward againe Aretas: as in the Machabees: the kings of holding that name euen to the time of S. Mac. 2. c. 5. v. 2. Paul, who was sought to be betrayed by the Lieutenant of Aretas commanding in Cor. 2. 11. Damascus. They were Princes for the most part confederate and depending vpon the Assyrian Empire. It is true that wee finde in , that in the time of Nabucho∣donosor, Dan 2. one Arioch was Generali of his armie, and the principall Commander vnder him, who was a king of kings: which makes it plaine, that heere spoken of, the sonne of that Arioch Confederate of Ninus was no king of Pontus, nor of Scythia: regi∣ons farre remooued from the Assyrians and Babylonians. The name also of Arioch who commanded vnder Nabuchodonosor is mentioned in Iudith, by the name of king of the Elymeans: who area Nation of Persians bordering Assyria, according to Stepha∣nus: though Plinie sets it betweene the Sea-coast, and Media: and if any brother of the Arabian Kings or other of that house (knowne by the name of Arius, Arioch, A∣reta or Aretas) had the gouernment of that Persian Prouince called Elymais (as it see∣meth they had by the places of Daniel and Iudith) yet the same was in Nabuchodono∣sors time. But this Arioch heere spoken of may with more reason bee taken for the king of Arabia, the sonne of Arius, the of Ninus: whose sonnes held league, as their Fathers did, being the next bordering Prince of all on that side to∣wards the West to Babylonia, and Chaldaea: and in amitie with them from the begin∣ning, and of their owne house, and bloud: which D. also confirmeth. Diod. Sic. l. 2. c. 1 §. XI. Of TIDAL another of the soure Kings. THe fourth King by Abraham ouerthrowne was Tidal, king of the Na∣tions. The Hebrew writes it Goijm, which Vatablus takes to be a proper name: of mixt people: Caluin of runnagates without habitation: Pererius out of Strabo, findes that Galilaea was inhabited by diuers Na∣tions, which were a mixt people: namely of Aegyptians, Arabians, and Strab. li. 16. fol. 523. Phoenicians. Nàm tales sunt qui Galilaeam habitant; Such are the inhabitants of Galilee, saith Strabo: and therefore was Tidal called king of these Nations, as they suppose. And it may be so: but the authoritie of Strabo is nothing in this question. For Galilaea was not peopled at this time, as it was in the time of Strabo. For when Abraham came Gen. 12. 6. into Canaan, the Cananite was then in the Land, howsoeuer they might be afterwards mixt; which I know not. But there are many pettie kingdomes adioyning to Phoe∣nicia, and Paloestina; as Palmvrena, Batanea, Laodicene, Apamena, Chalcidice, Casstotis, Cha∣libonitis, and all these doe also ioyne themselues to Mesopotamia, on the North, and to Arabia on the East. And that these Nations gathered themselues together vnder Ti∣dal, I take to be the probablest coniecture. §. XII. That CHEDORLAOMER the chiefe of the 4. Kings was not of Assyria, but of Persia: and that the Assyrian Empire at this time was much impaired. LAstly, wheras it is conceiued that Chedor laomer was the Assyrian-Emperor, and that Amraphel was but a Satrape, Viceroy, or gouernour of Babylonia, and that the other kings named were such also, I cannot a∣gree with Pererius in this. For Moses too well acquainted with the names of Assur, and Shinar, to call the Assyrian a king of Elam: those kings being in the Scriptures euermore called by the name of Chaldaea, Shinar, Babylo∣nia, or Assyria: but neuer by Elam; and Chedorlaomer or Kedarlaomer was so called of Kidor, from Cidarim which in the Hebrew signifieth Regale: for so Q. Curtius calleth the garment which the Persian kings ware on their heads. Neither doe I beleeue that the Assyrian or Babylonian Empire stood in any great∣nesse at the time of this inuasion, and my reasons are these: First, example and expe∣rience teach vs, that those things which are set vp hastily, or forced violently, doe not long last: Alexander became Lord of all Asia, on this side of Indus, in a time of so short a life, as it lasted not to ouer-looke what it selfe had brought forth. His fortunes were violent, but not perpetuall. For his Empire died at once with himselfe: all whose chiefe Commanders became kings after him. Tamberlain conquered Asia and India with a storme-like and terrible successe: but to preualent furie God hath adioi∣ned a short life: and whatsoeuer things Nature herselfe worketh in haste, she taketh the least care of their continuance. The fruit of his victories perished with him, if not before him. Ninus beeing the first whom the madnesse of boundlesse dominion transported, inuaded his neighbour Princes, and became victorious ouer them: a man violent, in∣solent, and cruell. Semiramis taking the opportunitie, and being more proud, aduen∣turous, and ambitious, then her Paramor: enlarged the Babylonian Empire, and beau∣tified many places therein with buildings vnexampled. But her sonne hauing chan∣ged Nature and Condition with his Mother, proued no lesse feminine then shee was masculine. And as wounds and wrongs, by their continuall smart, put the Patient in minde how to cure the one, and reuenge the other: so those kings adioyning (whose subiection, and calamities incident were but new, and therefore the more grieuous) could not sleepe, when the aduantage was offered by such a successour. For in regno Babylonico hic parùm resplenduit, this King shined little (saith Nauclerus of Ninias ) in the Babylonian kingdome. And likely it is that the neckes of mortall men hauing beene neuer before galled with the yoke of forraine dominion, Nor hauing euer had experience of that most miserable and detested condition of liuing in slaue∣ry: no long descent hauing as yet inuested the Assyrian with a right: nor any other title being for him to bee pretended than a strong hand; the foolish and effeminate of a tyrannous and hated Father, could very ill hold so many great Princes and Nations his vassals, with a powerlesse mastering, and a mind lesse industrious than his Father and Mother had vsed before him. And hee that was so much giuen ouer to licentious idlenesse, as to suffer his Mother to raigne 42. yeeres, and thereof the greatest part after he came to mans estate: witnessed thereby to the World, that he so much preferred ease before honour, and bodily pleasures before greatnesse, as he neither indeuoured to gaine what he could not gouerne, nor to keepe what he could not without contentious perill enioy. These Considerations being ioyned to the storie of , deliuered by Mo∣ses, by which wee finde that Amraphel king of Shinar was rather an inferiour to the king of Persia, than either his superiour, or equall, make it seeme probable, that the Empire of Ninus and Semiramis was at that time broken a sunder, and restrained again to Babylonia. For conclusion I will adde these two arguments confirming the former: First, that at such time as it pleased God to impose that great trauaile vpon Abraham, from Vr in Chaldaea to Charran, and then to Canaan, a passage of 700. miles, or little lesse, with women, children, and carriages: the Countries through which hee wandred were then settled, and in peace. For it was in the 23. yeere of Ninias, when Abraham obeying the voice of God, tooke this great iourney in hand: in which time of 23. yeeres after the death of Semiramis, the neighbour Princes had recouered their liber∣tie and former estates. For Semiramis armie of foure millions, with herselfe vtterly Strab. l. 15. consumed in India, and all her armes and engins of war, at the same time lost, gaue an occasion and opportunitie euen to the poorest soules and weakest hearted creatures of the World, to repurchase their former libertie. Secondly, it is affirmed by the best and ancientest Historians, that Arius the sonne of Ninias, or Amraphel, inuaded the Bactrians and Caspians, and againe subiected them: which needed not if they had not beene reuolted from Ninias, after Ninus death. And as Arioch recouered one part, so did Baleus or Balaneus, otherwise Xerxes, reduce the rest reuolted to their former obedience. Of whom it is said that hee con∣quered from Aegypt to India: and therefore was called Xerxes, id est, Victor & trium∣phator, a conquerour and triumpher, which vndertakings had beene no other then the of madnesse, had not those Countries freed themselues, from the Babylonian sub∣iection. Now if we shall make any doubt heereof, that is, of the reconquest of Arius and Xerxes, both which liued after Ninus and Ninias wee may as well thinke the rest of Ninus and Semiramis to be but fained: but if wee this reconquest, then is it true that while Ninias or Amraphel ruled, the Assyrian Empire was torne asunder, according to that which hath beene gathered out of Moses as before remembred. §. XIII. That it is not vnprobable that the foure Kings had no dominion in the Countries named, but that they had else-where with their colonies planted themselues: and so retained the names of the Countries whence they came: which if it be so, we neede not say that AMRAPHEL was NINIAS, nor trouble our selues with many other difficulties. THe consent of all writers, whose workes haue come to my perusall, a∣greeing as they doe, that these 4 kings, Amraphel of Shinar, Chedorlao∣mer of Elam, and their fellowes were Lords of those Regions, where∣unto they are or seeme intituled: doth almost inforce vs to thinke that the Historie must so be vnderstood, as I haue deliuered. But if in this place, as often elsewhere in the Scriptures, the names of Countries may be set for peo∣ple of those lands, or if (as Hierome hath it) Chedorlaomer was king of the Elamites, as Tidal was said to be of the Nations, that is, of people either wanting a fixed habitati∣on, or gathered out of sundrie regions: then may we otherwise conceiue of this Hi∣storie: remouing thereby some difficulties which men perhaps haue beene vnwilling to find, because they could not find how to resolue them. For as it had been a strange coniecture to thinke that Arioch was drawn to assist the Persian, against the Sodomite; as far as from Pontus, where it is very vnlikely that Chedorlaomer was knowne, and al∣most impossible that the vale of Siddim should haue beene once named: so in true esti∣mation it is a thing of great improbabilitie, that Chedorlaomer, if he were king of Per∣sia alone, should passe through so great a part of the World, as the Countries of Assy∣ria, Chaldaea, Mesopotamia, Syria, and part of Arabia, and Canaan, to subdue those fiue Townes, whose very names how they should come to his eare, being disioined by so many great Nations of different languages, a wise man could hardly coniecture. And if all the Countries bordering Persia together with the Babylonian himselfe, yea the kingdom of Ellasar, & that of Tidal, so far off remoued, were become his dependants, what reason can we finde that might haue induced him to hearken after Sodome and Gomorah? & when he should haue sought the establishment of his new-gotten Empire, by rooting out the posteritie of Ninus (as Ninus had dealt by Pharnus of Media, and Zoroaster of Bactria ) then to imploy the forces of Amraphel, and those other kings, against fiue pettie townes, leauing Tyrus, and Sidon, and the great Citie of Da∣masco, with many other places of much importance, and farre neerer vnto him, vn∣subdued? Now as these doubts which may bee alleadged against the first conquest of the vale of , are exceeding vehement: so are the obiections to be made a∣gainst his reconquest of these fiue Cities, when they had reuolted, as forcible; yea and more, as being grounded partly vpon the text it selfe. For first, what madnesse had it beene in that small Prouince to rebell against so powerfull a Monarch? Or if it were so that they dwelling farre from him, hoped rather to bee forgotten, then that hee should come or send to reclaime them: was it not more then madnesse in them, when his terrible armie approached, still to entertaine hope of euasion: yea to make resistance (being themselues a dissolute and therefore vnwarlike people) against the power of all the Nations betweene Euphrates, yea betweene themselues and the ri∣uer of Indus? Likewise on the part of Chedorlaomer we should finde no greater wise∣dome, if he knowing the weakenesse of this people, had raised such a world of men against them: whom by any Lieutenant, with small forces hee might haue subdued. For the perpetuall inheritance of that little Countrie, was not sufficient to counter∣uaile one moneths charges of so huge an armie. How small then must his valour haue beene, who with so mightie preparations effected no more then the wasting of that Valley, wherein he left the Cities standing, taking no one of them; but returned well contented with a few prisoners, and the pillage of the Countrie, although hee had broken their armie in the field? Now the Scriptures doe not of this inuasion (supposed so great) make any fearefull matter: but compose the two armies, as e∣qually matcht, saying they were foure kings against fiue: yea, if the place be literally expounded, we shall finde that Abraham slew all these kings, of which great slaugh∣ter Gen. 14. 17. no Historie makes mention: Neither will the raigne of Ninias, who liued foure or fiue yeeres longer, permit that he should haue died so soone: neither would Hi∣stories haue forgotten the manner of his death, if hee had so strangely perished in Syria. Whereby it appeares, that these foure kings were not the same that they are commonly thought: nor their forces so great as opinion hath made them. It may therefore well bee true, that these kings were such as many others, who in that age carried the same title: Lords and Commanders euery one of his owne companie, which he carried foorth as a Colonie, seeking place where to settle himselfe and them, as was the vsuall manner of those times. Neither is it vnprobable, that Chedorlaomer leading a troupe of Persians, Amra∣phel some people out of Shinar, and Tidal others gathered out of sundry places, might consort together, and make the weakest of the Countrie which lay about them, to pay them tribute. Whosoeuer will consider the beginning of the first booke of Thucydides, with the manner of discoueries, conquests and plantations, in the infan∣cie of Greece, or the manner of the Saracens inuading Affrica, and Spaine, with almost as many kings as seuerall Armies: or the proceedings of the Spaniards in their new discoueries, passages, and conquests in the West-Indies: may easily perceiue, that it was neither vnusuall, for the leaders of Colonies to receiue title from the people whom they conducted: nor to make alliances together, and breake them againe, di∣sturbing sometimes one the other, sometimes helping in pursuit of a conquest. That Amraphel and his associates were such manner of Commaunders, it may seeme the more likely, by the slothfull qualitie of Ninias then raigning in Assyria: whose vn∣manlike temper was such, as might well giue occasion to such vndertaking spirits, as wanted the imploiments whereunto they were accustomed, in the raigne of Semi∣ramis, rather to seeke aduentures abroad, than to remain at home vnregarded: whilst others more vnworthie than themselues, were aduanced. If the consent of the whole streame of writers vpon this place make this coniecture disagreeable to the Text, to the authoritie whereof all humane reason must subscribe, then wee may hold our selues to the former coniecture, that Amraphel was Ninias: and that the power of his Ancestours being by his sloth decayed, hee might well be inferiour to the Persian Chedorlaomer: or if this doe not satisfie, wee may say that Amraphel was an Vnder-king or Satrapa of Shinar, vnder Ninias; who may be supposed to haue had his Imperiall seat in his Fathers Citie Niniue: and to haue preferred it before Shi∣nar and Babylon the Citie of his Mother, whom hee hated as an vsurper of his right. But if it were possible that in a case not concerning any mans Saluation, and where∣in therefore none hath cared to take great paines, all might erre: then can I thinke that the opinion, That these foure kings were leaders of Colonies, sent out of the Countries named in the Text, and not kings of the Countries themselues, is most consonant both to the condition of those times, and to the Scripture. And heereto adde that Chedorlaomer seemes rather called a Persian king, then king of Persia: and that Arioch (whose kingdome vndoubtedly was betweene Syria and Arabia ) hauing beene a man of action, or being a worthy mans sonne, was very well pleased, to giue passage and assistance, to these Captaines or pettie kings. These and such like things heere to vrge, were but with circumstances to adorne a supposition, which ei∣ther may stand without them, or if it must fall, is vnworthie to haue cost bestowed vpon it: especially considering, that it is not my intent to imploy any more time in making it good, but to leaue it wholly to the Readers pleasure, to follow any of these opinions, or any other, if he finde any that shall seeme better than these. But of what Countries or people soeuer these foure were kings, this expedition is the onely pub∣lique action that we know of performed by Abraham. And as for other things be∣longing to his Storie, and of his sonnes, and of his Nephews Esau and Iacob, as they are registred by Moses, because it is not our purpose, neither to stand vpon things ge∣nerally knowne to all Christians, nor to repeate what hath beene elsewhere alreadie spoken, nor to preuent our selues in things that may hereafter in due place be re∣membred, wee passe them heere in silence. And because in this Storie of Abraham and his posteritie, there is much mention of Aegypt: by which it appeares that euen in the time of Abraham, it was a settled and flourishing king∣dome, it will not bee amisse in the next place to speake somewhat of the anti∣quities, and first kings thereof. CHAP. II. Of the Kings of Aegypt from the first peopling of it after the Floud, to the time of the deliuerie of the Israe∣lites from thence. §. I. A briefe of the names and times of the first Kings of Aegypt: with a note of the causes of difficulty in resoluing of the trueth in these points. SOone after the confusion at Babel (as it seemes) with many of his issue and followers (hauing doubt∣lesse knowne the fertilitie of Aegypt before the Floud) came thither and tooke possession of the Countrie: in which they built many Cities: and beganne the kingdome one hundred ninetie one yeeres after the deluge. The ancient Gouernours of this Kingdome till such time as Israel departed Aegypt, are shewne in the Table following. An. Mundi An. dil. 1847. 191. Cham. 2008. 352. Osiris. 2269. 613. Typhon Hercules. 2276. 620. Orus. 2391. 735. Sesostris the great. 2424. 768. Sesostris the blinde. 2438. 782. Busiris or Oris the second. 2476. 820. Acenchere or Thermutis or Meris. 2488. 832. Rathoris or Athoris. 2497. 841. Chencres drowned in the red Sea. The Table and especially the Chronologie, is to be confirmed by probabilities and coniectures, because in such obscurity manifest and restlesse truth cannot be found. For S. Augustine, a man of exceeding great iudgement, and incomparable diligence, who had sought into all antiquities, and had read the bookes of Varro, which now are lost, yet omitted the succession of the Aegyptian Kings: which he would not haue done, if they had not been more vncertaine then the Sicyonians, whom he remem∣breth, then whom doubtlesse they were more glorious. One great occasion of this obscurity in the Aegyptian Storie, was the ambition of the Priests: who to magnifie their Antiquities, filled the Records (which were in their hands) with many lea∣sings, and recounted vnto strangers, the names of many Kings that neuer reigned. What ground they had for these reports of supposed Kings, it shall appeare anon. Sure it is that the magnificent workes and royall buildings in Aegypt, such as are ne∣uer found but in States that haue greatly flourished, witnesse that their Princes were of marueilous greatnesse: and that the reports of the Priests were not altoge∣ther salse. A second cause of our ignorance in the Aegyptian History, was the too much credulitie of some good Authors, who beleeeuing the manifold and contrary reports of sundry Aegyptians, & publishing in their own name, such as pleased them best; haue confirmed them, and as it were inforced them vpon vs, by their authori∣tie. A third and generall cause of more than Aegyptian darkenesse in all ancient Hi∣stories, is the edition of many Authors by Iohn Annius, of whom (if to the censures of sundry very learned I may adde mine) I thinke thus; That Annius hauing seene some fragments of those writers, and added vnto them what he would, may be cre∣dited, as an auoucher of true Histories, where approued writers confirme him: but otherwise is to be deemed fabulous. Hereupon it commeth to passe that the account of Authours, either in the Chronologie or Genealogie of the Aegyptian Kings, runs three altogether different wayes. The Christian writers, such as are ancient, for the most part follow Eusebius: Many late writers follow the edition of Annius his Authors: The prophane Histories follow Herodotus, Diodorus, and such others. §. II. That by the account of the Aegyptian Dynasties, and otherwise, it appeares that CHAMS reigne in Aegypt began in the yeere after the Floud, 191. TO reconcile these, or gather out of them the times of the ancient Kings, about whom is most controuersie, the best meane is by helpe of the Dynasties: of whose continuance there is little or no disagree∣ment. The account of the Dynasties (besides the authoritie of ap∣proued Authors) hath this good ground, that it agreeth for the most part, if not altogether with the Histories of the Assyrians, Troians, Italians, and others, &c. The beginning of the 16. Dyn. is ioyned by generall consent, with the 43. yeere of Ninus: in which Abraham was borne. The twelue first Dynasties lasted each of them seuen yeeres, vnder the twelue, which were called the greater Gods: so that all the yeeres of their continuance were 84. The thirteenth Dynast indured foure∣teene yeeres: the fourteenth 26: the fifteenth 37. These three last, are sayd to haue beene vnder the three yonger Gods. So the first Dynasties lasted one hundred sixty one yeeres. As I doe not therfore beleeue that the continuance of these Dyn. was such as hath been mentioned, because Annius in such-wise limits out their time: so I cannot reiect the account vpon this onely reason, that Annius hath it so: consi∣dering that both hitherto it hath passed as currant, and is greatly strengthened by many good reasons. For, whereas Eusebius placeth the beginning of the sixteenth Dynastie, in the yeere of Abrahams birth, as aforesayd: the reckoning is easily cast; by which the summe of 161. yeeres, which according to our account were spent in the fifteene former, being subducted out of the summe of 352. yeeres, which were betweene the Floud and Abrahams birth, shew that the beginning of the first Dy∣nastie, which was the beginning of Chams reigne in Aegypt, was in the yeere 191. As also by other probabilities the same may appeare. For it is generally agreed, that the multitude of mankinde which came into Shinar, arriued at Babel, Anno à diluuio . In building the Tower were consumed fourtie yeeres, as Glicas recordeth: whose report I haue elsewhere confirmed with diuers probabilities. That Cham was long in passing with his company, their Wiues Children, Cattell, and substance, through all then desolate, and full of Bogges, Forrests, and Bryers (which the Deluge and want of culture in one hundred seuentie one yeeres had brought vpon it) no reasonable man will doubt. To this his passage therefore, and the seating of himselfe in Aegypt, wee allow twenty yeere: and these summes being added to∣gether, to wit, one hundred thirtie one yeeres after the Floud, before they arriued at Babel, 40. yeeres for their stay there, and 20. for passage into Aegypt, and set∣tling there, make vp the summe of 191. yeeres: at which time we said that Cham be∣gan his reigne in Aegypt, in the beginning of the first Dynastie. And to this summe of 191. yeeres if we adde the 161. yeeres of the 15. first Dynasties, as they are numbred in common account, we shall fall right with the yeere of Abrahams birth, which was An. Dil. 352. And hereto omitting many other reasons, which might be brought to prooue that these first Dynasties must needes haue beene very short, and not contai∣ning in the whole summe of their seueral times aboue 161. yeeres: Let it suffice that had they lasted longer, then either must Aegypt haue been peopled as soone as Babel after the Floud: or the Dynasties (as thinkes) must haue beene before the Floud. That the arriuall at Babel was many yeeres before the plantation of Aegypt, after the Floud, enough hath been said to prooue: and that the Dynasties were not before the Floud the number of the long-liu'd generations betweene Adam and the Floud, which was lesse than the number of the Dinasties, may sufficiently witnesse. Or if we will thinke, that one life might (perhaps) bee diuided into many Dynasties, then may this haue beene as well after the Floud, as before: considering that the sonnes of did not in euery Countrie erect such forme of Policie, as had beene vsed in the same ere the Deluge: but such, as the disposition of the people, the autho∣ritie and power of the Conducter, together with many other circumstances, did in∣duce or inforce them to. §. III. That these Dynasties were not diuers families of Kings, but rather successions of Regents, oft times many vnder one King. THe short continuance of the Dynasties, doth shew that they were not seuerall races of Kings, as the vaunting Aegyptians were wont to them. What they were it cannot certainly bee warranted. For in re∣stitutions of decayed antiquities, it is more easie to denie than to af∣firme. But this may be said partly vpon good circumstance, partly vpon the surest proofe, That it was the manner of the Aegyptian Kings, to put the gouernment of the Countrie into the hands of some trustie Counsellor, onely re∣seruing the Soueraignty to themselues, as the old Kings of France were wont to the Masters of the Palace, and as the Turke doth to the chiefe Visier. This is confirmed, first, by the number of the Dynasties, whereof many are vnder Cham, and more then one vnder or Mizraim; and must therefore haue beene successions, not of Kings, but rather of Counsailors and Regents. Secondly, by custome of such Prin∣ces borderers to Aegypt, as are mentioned in the Scriptures: of whom Abimelech the Philistim in his dealing with Abraham and Isaac about confederation, did no∣thing without Phicol Captaine of his Hoste; though in taking Abrahams wife, and in his priuate carriage, hee followed his owne pleasure. Likewise of the sonne of Gideon it was said: Is not hee the sonne of IERVBBAAL? and is his Officer? Also the sonne of Saul, feared Abner the Captaine of the . Yea, Dauid himselfe hating Ioab for his crueltie did not punish him, in regard of his greatnesse, which was such, as was feared euen of Hadad the liuing then in Aegypt. Thirdly, this is confirmed by the temper and disposition of Cham, who was lewd, as appeares by the Scriptures: therefore likely both for his owne idlenesse and pleasure, to haue layd the burden of gouernement vpon others; and vpon iealousie, the companion of vnworthinesse, to haue changed his Lieute∣nants often. Aboue all other proofes is the aduancement of Ioseph by Pharaoh. For Pharaoh said to IOSEPH; Onely in the Kings throne will I be aboue thee: behold, I William. . de bell. Sacro. l. 19. ca. 17, 18, 19. & 20. haue set thee ouer all the Land of Aegypt. William, Archbishop of Tyre, who flourished about the yeere of our Lord, one thousand one hundred eightie, affirmes that the like or very same forme of gouernement by , was in his time practised in Aegypt, hauing there beene in vse (as he beleeued) euer since the time of Ioseph. He plainely shewes, that the Soldans of Aegypt were not Lords of the Countrie, how e∣uer they haue beene so deemed; but that they acknowledged and humbly perfor∣med the duetie of subiects vnto the Caliphe: who residing in a most magnificent Pa∣lace in Cairo, did commit the charge, not onely of ciuill gouernement, but the power of making warre and peace, with the whole office and authority royall into the Sol∣dans hands. He that shal reade in William of Tyre, the state of the Caliphe, or Mulene , Lib. 19. c. 20. with the forme of his Court, shall plainely behold the image of the ancient Pharaoh, ruling by a Lieutenant, as great in authoritie as Ioseph was, though farre in∣feriour in wisedome. To thinke that many names of such Regents or Lieutenants as Ioseph was, haue crept into the List of the Aegyptian Kings, were no strange imagination. For Iosephs brethren called him, The man that is Lord of the Land, and the Lord of the Countrie: Besides, it is not vnlikely that the vaineglorious Aegyptian Priests would as easily re∣port Gen. 42. 30. & 33. him a King to posterity, as ignorant men and strangers deeme him such, vnder whose hand all dispatches of importance, and royall managing of the State had pas∣sed, whilest that the King himselfe intending his quiet, had giuen his office to ano∣ther. How strangers haue mistaken in this kinde, the example already cited of Io∣sephs brethren, doth sufficiently witnesse. The reports of Priests doe appeare in Dio∣dorus, and Herodotus: each of whom, citing their relations, as good authoritie, say; Diodorus, that Sesostris was the nineteenth King after Menas; Herodotus, that hee was the 332. after Menas: which could not haue been, if Menas had been Adam. Therfore we may well conclude, That the Dynasties were not so many races of Kings, but suc∣cessions of Regents, appointed by the kings of so many sundry linages or sorts of men. Now by whatsoeuer meanes a Dynastie or Regencie continued: whether in one fami∣lie, as being made an hereditary office: or in one order of men, as held by faction: sure it is that it was the Kings gift and free choyce, that gaue the office. But the Crowne royal alwaies passed by descent, & not by election: which (beside consent of Authors ) the Scriptures also proue. For whereas Ioseph bought all the land of Aegypt for Pha∣raoh, if the Crowne had passed by election, then should Pharaoh's children hereby ei∣ther haue been inthralled amongst the rest of the people, to the next successour: or inioying their Fathers land, though not his estate, haue been more mighty then the King: as Land-lords of all Aegypt, and the King their Tenant. Likewise we find in Exod. 12. that God smote the first borne of PHARAOH, that was to set on his Throne. And in Esay it is said of PHARAOH: I am the sonne of the ancient King. Esa. 19. § IIII. Of CHAM, and his sonne MIZRAIM, or OSIRIS. THat the succession of Kings began, and continued in such wise as the Table hath shewed from Cham to Chencres, now it followeth to shew. Aegypt is called in the Scripture, the land of HAM. That this name is not Psal. 78. 51. 105. 23. . 106. 22. giuen to it, because the posterity of Cham did reigne there, but for that himselfe did first plant it, we may gather by many circumstances. For I thinke it is no where found, that the Countries of Cush, Put, or Canaan, as well as Aegypt, were called the Land of Ham. Further it is found in Diodorus Siculus, that Diod. Sic. l. 1. calleth himselfe the eldest sonne of Cham, saying, pater Saturnus deorum om∣nium iunior: also, Sum Saturni filius , germen ex pulchro & generoso ortum: which must needs be vnderstood of Cham: for this Saturnus Aegyptius was Cham: as it is said, that on the monument of Ninus was an inscription, wherein Cham was cal∣led Saturnus Aegyptius. Likewise the Temple of Hammon, not sarre from Aegypt, doth testifie, that Ham resided in those parts: And S. Hier ome in quaestionibus Hebrai∣cis, saith, that the Aegyptians themselues did in his dayes call their Countrie Ham: as in foure seuerall places in the Psalmes this Countrie is called the land of Cham. And Ortelius, noting out of Plutarch in Osiride, that in the sacrifices of the Aegyptians this Countrie of Aegypt was called Chemia, expounds it for Chamia: vt puto (saith he) à Chamo NOES filio, to which also he addeth out of Isidore, Aegyptum vs{que} hodie Ae∣gyptiorum lingua KAM vocari: that Aegypt vnto this day in the tongue of the Aegypti∣ans is called KAM. For the beginning and continuance of Chams reigne, the same reasons may suffice to be alleadged, which I haue already giuen in proofe of the time spent in the 15. first Dynasties: Neither is it strange that the reigne of Cham should last so long as 161. yeeres: considering that Sem liued 600. Arpachshad and Shelab each aboue 400. But strange it had beene, if one Saltis created by Manetho, had in those long-liued generations reigned there 19. yeeres, and with Baeon, Apachnas, Apochis, and others of the same brood, obscured the fame and glory of Osiris, Orus, and Sesostris. Reineccius in histor. Iulia, placeth Mizraim next, otherwise called Osiris ac∣cording to Diodorus: who saith hee was the sonne of Hammon: Krentzhemius saith that Mizraim and Osiris are words of neere affinitie and sound in the Hebrew tongue. Howsoeuer it bee, wee know that Mizraim the sonne of Cham, was Lord of Ae∣gypt, and Reineccius citing good authoritie in this case, affirmeth that Aegypt is now called by the naturalls in their owne language, Mezre. Neither doe I see cause of doubt whether Osiris were the same with Mizraim. It is more necessarie, and hard to shew manifestly, how long Mizraim or Osiris reigned. For whereas the yeere of his death is no where precisely set downe, we must be faine to follow probabilities. That he is not vainely saide by Annius his Berosus, to haue begun his reigne at the birth of Abraham, when the Dynastie of the Thebai began, it appeareth, first, by the authoritie of Eusebius: who auoucheth as much; next by , who saith that he inhabited Thebes: which habitation of Osiris there, that it might be cause of that Dynast. I can well beleeue: assenting so farre to Reineccius, who thinkes the Dynasties were named only, according to the seuerall seates of the kings. §. V. Of the time when OSIRIS reigne ended: and that IACOB came into Aegypt in the time of ORVS the sonne of OSIRIS. THe death of Osiris, when it was, none can certainely affirme. The one∣ly coniecture that I know is made thus: Lehabim the sonne of Miz∣raim called Hercules Lybius, made warre in Italy, to reuenge his Fathers death, on the associats of Typhon, in the 41. yeere of Baleus King of As∣syria: before which yeere he had made many great warres in Aegypt, Phoenicia, Phrygia, Crete, Lybia, and Spaine: and hauing ended his Aegyptian warres, left the Kingdome to Orus. Thus farre Berosus, or authors following Berosus. That Orus last of all the Gods (as they were stiled) held the Kingdome of Isis, Diodorus Si∣culus Diod. Sic. l. 2. c. 1 Plut. l. de . & Osid. plainely saith: and Plutarch as much; to which all old Histories agree. hereupon inferres, that sixe yeeres may bee allowed to the warres, which Hercu∣les made in so many Countries, after the Aegyptian warres were ended: so should the death of Osiri, haue beene the 34. of Baleus, when himselfe had reigned 297. yeeres. I thinke that Krentzhemius was a greater Scholler than Souldier. For sure∣ly in those dayes when commerce was not such as now, but all Nauigation made by coasting, a farre longer time would haue been required, to the subduing of so many Countries. An allowance of more time though it would alter his computation, yet would it well agree with his intent: which was (doubtlesse) to finde the trueth. If according to his account the death of Osiris had beene the 34. of Baleus, then must Israel haue come into Aegypt but seuen yeeres before the death of Osiris: and haue liued there in the reigne of Typhon. A thing not easily beleeued. For it was the same king who aduanced Ioseph, bad him send for his Father; and gaue him leaue to goe into Canaan, to the performance of his Fathers sunerall: as may easily bee gathered out of the booke of Genesis. Whereas therefore the raigne of Osiris cannot be exten∣ded by any possible allowance in account of times, beyond the seuenth yeere of Is∣raels comming into Aegypt: wee must needes cut off 23. yeeres from that number, which Krentzhemius coniecutres his raigne to haue continued: namely seuen which hee should haue liued after Iacobs comming into Aegypt: nine in which Ioseph had there flourished, ere his fathers comming: and other seuen in which Typhon and Hercules had reigned after the death of Osiris, yet before Iosephs aduancement. Neither will this disagree with the time of Hercules Lybius his wars. For the warre which Hercules made in Italie, is said to haue indured 10. yeeres: After which propor∣tion we may well giue not only sixe yeeres, as Krentzhemius doth, but 23. more to so many wars in so many and so far-distant Countries, as are named before: yea, by this proportion we may attribute vnto Orus the 13. yeeres, which passed betweene the time of Iosephs being sold into Aegypt, vnto his aduancement: considering that Puti∣phar who bought him, and whose daughter he may seeme to haue married, continu∣ed all that while chiefe Steward vnto Pharaoh: a thing not likely to haue been, if so vi∣olent alterations had hapned the whilest in Aegypt, as the tyrannous vsurpation of Ty∣phon must needs haue brought in. If citing some fragment of a lost old author, I should confidently say, that Putiphar for his faithfulnesse to Orus, the sonne of Osiris, was by him in the beginning of his raigne made his chiefe Steward: at which time buying Ioseph and finding him a iust man, and one vnder whose hand all things did prosper, he rather committed his estate into Iosephs hands, than vnto any of his Aegyptian fol∣lowers (many of whom he had found either false-hearted, or weake and vnlucky in the troublesom daies of Typhon ) I know not what could be obiected against this. Per∣haps I might proceed further & say, That when the saying of Ioseph pleased Pharaoh, and all his seruants: then Putiphar Priest of On, being chiefe Officer to Pharaoh, did ac∣knowledge in Ioseph, the ancient graces of God & his iniurious imprisonment: wher∣upon he gaue him his daughter to wife: and being old, resigned his office of chiefe Steward vnto him: who afterward in regard of Putiphar, did sauour the Priests, when hee bought the lands of all other Aegyptians. This might appeare to some a tale not vnlike to the frierly booke of Asenath, Putiphars daughter: but vnto such as consider that God workes vsually by means: and that Putiphar was the Steward of that king, vnder whom Iacob died: it would seeme a matter not vnprobable, had it an Author of sufficient credit to auouch it. Concerning the warres of Hercules, in which by this reckoning hee should haue spent 42. yeeres after he left Aegypt, ere he began in Italie, it is a circumstance which (the length of his Italian wars considered, and his for∣mer enterprises & atchieuements proportioned to them) doth not make against vs, but for vs: or if it were against vs, yet could it not so weaken our supposition, as these probabilities collected out of the vndisputable trueth of Scripture doe confirme it. Neuerthelesse I freely grant that all these proofes are no other, than such as may be gathered out of Authors, not well agreeing, nor to be reconciled in such obscuritie, otherwise than by likelihoods, answerable to the holy Text. §. VI. Of TYPHON, HERCVLES AEGYPTVS, ORVS, and the two SESOSTRES, successiuely reig∣ning after MIZRAIM: and of diuers errors about the former SESOSTRES. COncerning the reigne of Typhon, and of Hercules, I finde none that precisely doth define how long either of them continued. Daniel Angelocrator giueth three yeeres to Typhon, omitting Hercules. But he is so peremptorie without proofe, as if his owne word were sufficient authoritie, in many points very questionable; alleadging no witnesse, but as it were saying, Teste me ipso: yet herein we may thinke him to speake proba∣bly, forasmuch as the learned Krentzhemius affirmeth, that Hercules did very soone vndertake his Fathers reuenge: and was not long in performing it: and that lea∣uing Aegypt to his brother, hee followed other warres, in the same quarrell, as hath beene before. True it is, that I cannot collect (as Krentzhemius doth) out of Berosus, that Hercules reigned after Typhon: yet seeing Auentinus a follower of Berosus hath it so, I will also beleeue it. That in the reigne of Typhon and Hercules, seuen yeeres were spent, howsoeuer diuided betweene them, I gather out of Krentz∣hemius onely, who placeth the beginning of Orus seuen yeeres after the death of O∣siris: forgetting to set downe his reasons, which in a matter so probable I thinke hee wanted not. Now whereas he alloweth 90. yeeres of the eighteenth Dynastie to O∣siris, Typhon, Hercules, and Orus: it seemes that the reigne of Orus lasted 115. yeeres. From the death of Orus to the departure of Israel out of Aegypt, there passed 122. yeeres by our account: who (according to Beroaldus and others,) thinke that Abra∣ham was borne in the 130. yeere of Terah, and thereupon reckon thus. From the end of the Floud to the birth of Abraham —352 From that time to the vocation of Abraham —75 departure out of Aegypt —430 Summa —857 which summe diuers other wayes may bee collected. Since therefore to the depar∣ture out of Aegypt, there doe remaine (as is aforesaid) onely 122. yeeres from the death of Orus: wee are now to consider how many of them are to bee allowed vnto or Sesonchosis: who is placed next vnto Orus, by authoritie of the Scholiastes : not without good probabilitie. For this great king or conquerour, is by many Histories recorded to haue ouer-run a great part of Asia: to haue built a fleete of shippes on the red Sea: and so to haue entred into India: likewise with another fleete on the middle-earth Seas, to haue passed into Europe, and subdued many Na∣tions. This is hee (as Reineccius iudgeth) whom Iustine erring in account of his time calleth Vexoris: For Iustine placeth Vexoris in ages before Ninus: whereby it would follow that Sesostris, if hee were Vexoris, was more ancient then was Osiris (otherwise Mizraim ) a thing altogether vnlikely. Certaine it is that after the departure of Is∣rael out of Egypt, no one Pharaoh came into the land of Canaan (which lieth in the way from Aegypt into Asia ) till the Fatherin law of Salomon, Pharaoh Vaphres, tooke Gerar, and gaue it to his daughter: after which time Sesac oppressed Rehoboam, and gaue it to his daughter: after which time Sesac oppressed Rehoboam, & Necho sought passage through the land of Israel, when he made his expedition against the Chal∣daeans. Of King Vaphres and Necho it is out of question, that neither of them was the great King Sesostris. Of Sesac it is doubted by some, forasmuch as he came into Iu∣daea with a great armie. Reineccius propounding the doubt, leaueth it vndecided; vn∣lesse it be sufficient proofe of his owne opinion, that he himselfe placeth Sesostris next to Orus: following the Scholiastes Apollonij. But further answere may bee made to that they were not one. For, as Iustine witnesseth, Sesostris, otherwise Vexoris, made warre on people farre remoued, abstaining from his neighbours, Sesac came vp purposely against Hierusalem. , as witnesseth, had but 24000. horse: Sesac had 60000: Sesostris had 8020. Chariots, Sesac but 1200: Sesostris made his expedition for no priuate purpose, but to get a great name: Sesac, as most agree, had no other purpose then to succour Ieroboam, and giue him countenance in his new reigne; whom he had fauoured euen against Salomon: therefore Sesostris must needes haue reigned whilest Israel abode in Aegypt. Whereas Krentzhemius collecteth out of Herodotus, and Diodorus, that one Me∣nas, or Menis, was next to Orus: because those Historians affirme that hee reigned next after the Gods; it moueth mee nothing. For Osiris did succeed those 15. Gods, namely the twelue greater, and three lesser: himselfe also (as the learned Reineccius noteth) being called Menas. Which name, as also Menaeus, and Menis, were ti∣tles of dignitie: though mistaken by some as proper names. doth ve∣rie probably gather, that Menas was Mercurius Ter-maximus: the Hebrew word Meni signifying an Arithmetician: which name Ter-maximus might well be attribu∣ted to Osiris: who was a great Conquerour, Philosopher, and benefactor to man∣kind, by giuing good Lawes, and teaching profitable Artes. In prowesse and great vndertakings Sesostris was no whit inferiour to Osiris. For he sought victorie not sor gaine, but for honour onely: and being well contented, that many Nations had ac∣knowledged his power, and submitted themselues to his will and royall disposition, leauing them in a manner to their libertie, returned into Aegypt. Soone vpon his returne he was endangered by a great Treason, the house in which he was, being by his owne brother purposely fired which neuerthelesse hee is saide to haue escaped, and to haue reigned in all thirtie three yeeres: after which time hee chose rather to die then to liue: because he fell blinde. Both Herodotus, and Diodorus, affirme that Sesostris left a sonne, whose name was Pheron or Pherones: who afterwards tooke the name of Sesostris: but was nothing like to his Father in glorie: for hee shortly fell blinde. The cause of his blindnesse Herodotus attributes to his assaulting the riuer Nilus with a iaueline: which tale Diodorus hauing likewise heard, yet reports as a fable, saying that perhaps he tooke the disease naturally from his Father. How long this man reigned it is no where expressed: yet forasmuch as Orus the second, (other∣wise Busiris ) who succeeded him, began 14. yeeres that this Sesostris had beene king, it must needes bee that this reigned 14. yeeres at least. That Busiris began not vntill these 14. yeeres at least were expired, the very account of time from the first of Busiris, to the departure of Israel out of Aegypt plainely shewes, being almost gene∣rally agreed vpon, to haue beene 75. yeeres. That none came betweene Sesostris the second and Busiris or Orus the second, it stands only vpon probabilities: which are these. After Sesostris had reigned somewhile, hee fell blinde: after certaine yeeres hee recouered his sight, as is saide: which may haue beene true, but is more like to haue beene a fable: surely the manner of his recouerie as it is set downe, is very fa∣bulous: namely that by looking vpon a woman, or washing his eyes with her water, who had onely knowne her owne husband, hee got his sight againe. As the time of his reigne, before his blindnesse, and when hee was well againe (if euer hee were) may haue taken vp a good part of 14. yeeres: so his workes which were great, doe much more strongly argue, that his reigne was not very short. His words are largely set downe by Herodotus, and Diodorus: a part of which may seeme to haue beene the finishing of that which his Father had begun, about the channels and sluces of Nilus: whom I thinke he rather frighted, (as his Father had done) with spades and shouels, then with darts, and iauelins: and by his diligent ouersight of that worke, was like enough to lose both his eye-sight and his peoples loue: whom his Father had very busily employed in excessiue labour about it. §. VII. Of BVSIRIS the first oppressor of the Israelites: and of his successor Queene THER∣MVTIS that tooke vp MOSES out of the water. ANd heerein (if I may presume to coniecture) Busiris, who was after∣wards king, is like to haue dealt with him, as Ieroboam did with the sonne of Salomon. For that Busiris himselfe was much addicted to magnificent workes, it well appeared, by the drudgerie wherewith he wearied the children of Israel in his buildings: If therefore he were em∣ployed by the great Sesostris, as Ieroboam was by Salomon, in the ouersight of those businesses, he had good opportunitie to worke his greatnesse with the king by indu∣strie: and afterward with the people by incensing them against their new king: as Ie∣roboam did. For what the multitude will endure at one Princes hands, they will not at anothers: vnlesse hee haue either an equall spirit, or a surer foundation. If moreouer he sought to deriue all the paine and labour of publique workes from the , to the Israelites: hee surely did that which to his owne people was very plausible: who (as appeares in Exodus ) were nothing slack in fulfilling the kings cru∣eltie. Exod. 1. Now that Orus the 2. or was the king that first oppressed , and made the Edict of drowning the Hebrew children, which (saith Cedrenus ) lasted tenne is a common opinion of many great & most learned writers; who also thinke that hereupon grew the fable of Busiris sacrificing strangers. It is also a common in∣terpretation of that place, Ex. 1. that the King who knew not Ioseph, was a king of a new family. That Busiris was of a new familie, Reineccius doth shew: who also thinks him Author of the bloudie edict. Neuerthelesse, true it is, that Busiris, according to all mens computation, began his reigne 5. yeeres after the birth of Moses; before whose birth it is most manifest, that the Law was made, and much more that the persecu∣tion began: which Bunting thinkes to haue lasted 87. yeeres, ere the departure out of Aegypt. Let vs therefore consider, besides the blindnesse of Sesostris the second, how great the power of the Regents or Viceroyes in Aegypt was: and how great confidence the kings did put in them: seeing Ioseph ruled with such full power, that he bought all Aegypt, & all the Aegyptians for bread; giuing at the same time the best of the land to his owne father & brethren, for nothing: seeing also that when the Aegyptians cried out vpō Pharaoh, for bread: Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, Go to Ioseph: what he saith to you, do ye. If to a stranger borne lately fetcht out of prison, a king well able to haue gouerned himselfe, would giue such trust, and soueraigne authoritie: it is not vnlikely that a blind Prince should do it to a man of especial reputation. For God often pros∣pers, not only the good (such as Ioseph was) but wicked men also, as his instruments against the day of wrath. Therfore perhaps the king did (as many haue done) resigne his kingdom to him, though his reign was not accounted to haue begun, till the death of . But whether Busiris did vsurpe the kingdom, or protection of the land by violence: or whether the blind king resigned it, keeping the title: or whether were onely Regent, whilst the king liued, and afterwards (as is acknowledged all) king himselfe: it might well be said that Pharaohs daughter tooke vp Moses, and that Pharaoh Israel: seeing he both at that time was king in effect, and shortly after king in deed and title both. It were not absurd for vs to say that the blind king the second oppressed Israel: but forasmuch as it may seeme that the wicked shewed his euill nature euen when he first arose: I thinke it more likely, that Busiris did it, vsing at first the power of a king, and shortly after the stile. Thus of the 122. yeeres which passed betweene the beginning of Sesostris his reigne, and the departure of Israel out of Egypt, 47. being spent: the 75. which remaine, are to bee accounted to Busiris or Orus the second, and his children. Busiris himselfe reigned 30. yeeres, according to Eusebius: whom very many iudicious authors heerein approoue. After him his daughter, who tooke Moses out of the water, is saide by all that I haue read, to haue reigned 12. yeeres: Her name was Thermutis Phareis, or Muthis according to Cedrenus: . cals her Acencris: and out of Artabanus his Historie Me∣ris: Iosephus cals her both Acenchere, & Thermutis, Epiphanius in Panario saith that she was honoured afterward of the Egyptians, by the name of Thermutis the daughter of Amenoph, the son of Pharaoh. Of this last title question might be made & much spo∣ken: for the Scriptures call her not Pharaohs sonnes daughter, but Pharaohs daughter. Amenophis indeed is placed next before Busiris or Orus the second by and o∣thers: but whether hee were a king or onely a Regent I cannot coniecture. For Hero∣dotus, Dtodorus, and the ancient Historians name the sonne of , Pheron. Per∣haps his name was Pharaoh Amenophis: and his daughter by the Aegyptians called ra∣ther the neece or grandchilde, then the daughter of Pharaoh, because of the glory of Sesostris, and the disreputation of his sonne. If so, and if that Busiris or Orus the se∣cond marrying her pretended any title by her, then is our coniecture strengthened, and then was she both daughter, grandchild, and wife vnto Pharaoh: and suruining him, Queene of the land, 12. yeeres. But if she were the daughter of the 2. & sister of Athoris, or Rathoris, as many thinke, to whose coniecture I will not oppose mine, then may it seeme, that either her brethren were degenerate, or too yong to rule, when her Father died. §. VIII. Of the two brethren of Queene THERMVTIS: and what king it was, vnder whom MOSES was borne: and who it was that perished in the red Sea. SHee had two brethren: the one was Rathoris or Athoris, who succee∣ded her; the other Telegonus, who is onely named by Eusebius: but his linage and off-spring described by Reineccius. Rathoris after his sisters death reigned 9. yeeres: whom Chencres, thought to be his sonne, reigned 10. and then perished in the red Sea. During the reign of Chen∣cres, Eusebius saith, that Telegonus begat Epaphus vpon Io: of which Historie elsewhere he reporteth otherwise. After the death of Chencres (whom some call Acencheres: but all or most do stile a fighter against God) Acherres reigned 8. yeeres: and then Cherres 15. This descent seemes from Father to sonne. In the 11. yeere of Cherres it is said by Euseb. that Epaphus reigning in the lower part of Aegypt, built Memphis. This is an argument of that which otherwise was not vnlikely: viz. That Aegypt was greatly brought out of order by the plagues which God had laide vpon it, and the destruction of her king and armie in the red Sea: else could it not haue had two reigning in it at once; the later of whom, or his posteritie seemes to haue ta∣ken all from Cherres the grand-child of Chencres. For whereas Armais is said to haue reigned 4. yeeres after Cherres: and Armesis one after Armais: these two kings are by Eusebius and others accounted as one; and his reigne said to haue beene 5. yeeres. His name is called , otherwise Danaus: and his pedigree thus described by in Historia Iulia, Telegonus: Epaphus: Lybia, who had Agenor, Belus, and Busiris. T Aegyptus or Ramesses who gaue name to the Countrie, hauing ex∣pelled his brother Danaus, reigned, and begat Lynceus, marri∣ed to Hypermnestra. Danaus or Armeus expel∣led by his brother Ae∣gyptus, after hee had reigned fiue yeeres, be∣came king of Argos in Greece: was Father to Hypermnestra. How it might come to passe that the Nephews sons of Epaphus should haue occu∣pied the kingdome after Cherres, it is hard to say: considering that Epaphus himselfe is reported by Eusebius to haue been borne in the time of Chencres. But forasmuch as the Historie of Epaphus his birth, is diuersly related by Eusebius, it may suffice, that Be∣lus the father of Danaus & Aegyptus, otherwise called Armeus and Ramesses, was equal∣ly distant from Busiris or Orus the second, with Cherres the grand-child of Chencres. And that the posteritie of Telegonus did marrie very yong, it appeares by the Historie of these two brethren, Danaus & Aegyptus: of whom the former had 50. daughters, the later 50. sons: perhaps, or rather questionlesse by diuers women: yet surely they began to beget children in their first youth: Howsoeuer it were, the generall con∣sent of writers is, that or Danaus did succeede Cherres: and (according to Eusebius and good Authors approuing him) reigned fiue yeeres. Ramesses followed, who reigned 68. yeeres. This Ramesses or Aegyptus is that Armesesmiamum or Arme∣sesmiamus, vnder whom, in the opinion of Mercator, and of Bunting that followes Mer∣cator, Moses was borne: and the cruell Edict made of drowning the Hebrew children. The length of his reigne seemes to me the chiefe, if not the onely ground of Merca∣tors Exod. 4. 19. opinion. For whereas the Lord said to Moses, Goe, returne to Aegypt, for they are all dead which went about to kill thee: Mercator heereupon conceiues, that it was one and the same king vnder whom Moses was borne, and vnder whom he slew the Aegypti∣an at the 40. yeere of his age: and fled into the wildernesse, and there abode for feare: all which Circumstances could agree with none, but this Ramesses, who reigned so long: wherefore desirous rather to hold a true Paradox, then a common errour, hee placeth one (whose name is found in the list of Aegyptian kings, but the time vncertaine wherein he reigned) in an age 112. or 113. yeeres more ancient than others left him in: and so continuing the Catalogue of his successours from Themosis (whom Eus. cals Amasis ) downwards with no other variation of the length of each mans reigne, than is the difference betweene Manetho and Euseb. hee findes Moses borne vnder Armesesmiamum: and Israel deliuered in the dayes of his sonne A∣menophis. The very name of Alisfragmuthosis seemes to him with little alteration to sound like Pharatates, of which name one was thought to haue flourished either as a king, or a man about the time of Isaac. For (saith he) from Alisfragmuthosis to Phragmuthosis, Pharmuthosis, Pharetasis, or Pharatates, the change is not great. Merca∣tor was a man of excellent learning and industrie: and one to whom the World is bound for his many notable workes: yet my assent heerein is with-held from him, by these reasons. First, I see all other writers agree, that Chencres was the king who was drowned in the red Sea: Secondly, the place Exod. 4. all are dead, &c. may bet∣ter be vnderstood of Busiris and all his children, then of one king alone: Thirdly, S t Cyrill in his first booke against Iulian the Apostata, saith that Dardanus built Dardania, when Moses was 120. yeeres old: Ramesses, which was this Armesesmiamum, being then king of Aegypt. After Ramesses, Amenophis reigned 19. yeeres: who is thought by Mercator, and by pronounced, to be the King that perished in the red Sea: of which our opinion being alreadie laied open, I thinke it most ex∣pedient to referre the kings ensuing to their owne times (which a Chronolo∣gicall Table shall lay open) and heere to speake of that great deliuerance of Israel out of Aegypt: which for many great conside∣rations depending thereupon, wee may not lightly ouer∣passe. CHAP. III. Of the deliuery of Israel out of Aegypt. §. I. Of the time of MOSES birth, and how long the Israelites were op∣pressed in Aegypt. TRue it is that the Historie it selfe is generally and well knowne: yet concerning the time of Moses his birth, who was the excellent and famous instrument of this and other great workes of the Highest, the different o∣pinions are very neere as many, as the men that haue written of that . L. Viues in his annotations vpon S. Augustine citeth many of their coniectures: as that of Porphyrie out of Sanchoniato, that Moses liued in the time of Semiramis: but if hee meant the first Semiramis, it was but a fond conceit: for besides that the same is contrarie to all Stories Diuine and humane; while that Semiramis liued, shee commanded Syria, and all the parts thereof absolutely: neither were the , or Moabites, or Edomites, while she ruled, in rerum natura. A second opinion he remembreth of Appion, taken from Ptolomie a Priest of Men∣des, who saith that Moses was borne while Inachus ruled the Argiues, and Amesis in Aegypt. The third opinion is taken out of Polemon, in his Greeke Historie the first booke: that Moses was borne while Apis the third King ruled Argos. A fourth is borrowed from Tatianus Assyrius, who though hee cite some autho∣rities, that Moses liued after the Troian warre, is himselfe of opinion, that Moses was farre more ancient, prouing it by many arguments. Fiftly, he setteth downe the testimonie of Numenius the Philosopher, who tooke Musaeus and Moses to be one: confirming the same out of Artapanus, who confes∣seth that Moses was called Musaeus, by the Grecians: and who farther deliuereth that he was adopted by Chenephis, or Thermutis, the daughter of Aegypt: the same which Eupolemus calleth Meris; others (as Rabanus Maurus ) Thermothes. Euscbius also affir∣meth, Euseb. de prepar. Euang. l. 3. c. 3. that by Eupolemus in his first booke de bono, Moses vir Deo coniunctissmus is cal∣led . Eusebius in his Chronologie, finds that Moses was borne while Amenophis ruled Aegypt. The ancient Manethon cals that Pharao, which liued at Mo∣ses birth, or Thmosis: the same perchance which Appion the Grammarian will haue to be Amosis, and elsewhere Amenophis the Father of Sethosis: to whome Lysimachus and Cornelius Tacitus giue the name of Bocchoris. To mee it seemeth most probable, that while Saphrus, called also Spherus or , gouerned Assyria; Or∣thopolis Sicyonia; and Criasus the Argiues; that then ( Sesostris the second ruling in Aegypt) Moses was borne. For if wee beleeue S Augustine, it was about the end of Cecrops time, that Moses led Israel out of Aegypt. MOSES ex Aegypto popu∣lum Aug. l. 18. c. 11. de ciuit. Dei. 2514. Deinoussimo tempore CECROPIS Atheniensium : MOSES (saith he) led the people of God out of Aegypt, about the end of CECROPS time King of the Athenians. In this sort therefore is the time of Moses birth, and of his departure out of Aegypt best proued. S. August. affirmes (as before remembred) that Moses was borne: Saphrus gouerning Assyria; and that hee left Aegypt about the end of Cecrops time. Now Saphrus ruled 20. yeeres; his successor Mamelus 30. yeeres; Sparetus after him 40 yeeres: in whose fourth yeere Cecrops began to gouerne in Attica: Ascatades fol∣lowed Sparetus, and held the Empire 41: So as Moses being borne while Saphrus ruled Assyria; Orthopolis Sicyonia; and Criasus Argos (for these three kings liued at once at his birth, saith S. Augustine, as Cecrops did when he departed Aegypt) it will follow that the birth of Moses was in the nineteenth yeere of the Assyrian Saphrus: for take one yeere remaining of 20. (for so long Saphrus reigned) to which adde the thirtie yeres of Mamelus, and the 40. yeres of Sparetus, these make 71. with which there were wasted three yeeres of Cecrops his 50. yeeres: then take nine yeeres out of the reigne of Ascatades, who was Sparetus successour, those nine yeeres added to 71. make 80. at which age Moses left Aegypt: and adde these nine yeeres to the three yeeres of Cecrops formerly spent, there will remaine but foure yeeres of Cecrops his 50: and so it falleth right with S. Augustines words, affirming that towards the end of Cecrops his time, Moses led the people of Israel out of Aegypt. Now the time in which the Hebrewes were opprest in Aegypt, seemeth to haue had beginning some eight or nine yeeres before the birth of Moses, and 54. yeere, or ra∣ther more, after Ioseph: betweene whose death and the birth of Moses, there were consumed 64. yeeres: some of which time, and 80. yeeres after, they liued in great Exod. 1. seruitude and miserie. For as it is written in Exodus: They set taske-masters ouer them, to keepe them vnder with burdens: and they built the Cities Pithom and Ramases, &c. And by crueltie they caused the children of Israel to serue; and made them weary of their liues, by sore labour in clay and bricke, and in all worke of the field, with all manner of bondage. All which laid vpon them by a mastering power and strong hand, they endured to the time by the wisedome of God appointed: euen from 54. yeeres, or not much more after the death of Ioseph, who left the World when it had lasted 2370. yeeres, to the 2370. eightieth yeere of Moses, and vntill hee wrought his miracles in the field of Zoan, which he performed in the Worlds age 2514. towards the end thereof, according 2514. to Codoman, or after our account, 2513. And because those things which we deli∣uer of Aegypt, may the better bee vnderstood, I thinke it necessary to speake a few words of the principall places therein named, in this discourse. §. II. Of diuers Cities and places in Aegypt, mentioned in this Story, or else∣where in the Scripture. THis Citie which the Hebrewes call Zoan, was built seuen yeeres after Numb. 33. 30. Hierem. 2. 43, 44, 46. Hebron. Ezekiel calleth it Taphnes; and so doth Hieremie; the Septua∣gint, Tanis; Iosephus, Protaidis; after the name of an Aegyptian Queene; Antonius giues it the name of Thanis; Hegesippus, Thamna; and William Iosep. l. 1. c. 9. Tyr. de Bell. sacr. l. 19. c. 23. Tyrius, Tapius. It adioyneth to the land of Gosen, and is the same, where∣in Hieremie the Prophet was stoned to death, for preaching against the Aegyptian and Iewish Idolatry. Zoan or Tahnes was in Moses time the Metropolis of the lower Aegypt, in which their Pharaohs then commonly resided; and not vnlikely to be the same Citie, where Abraham in his time found him. But Eusebius out of Artapanus affirmeth, that A∣braham read Astronomie in Heliopolis, or On, to Pharetates King of Aegypt. Alex. Poly∣histor. out of Eupolemus hath it otherwise, saying, that Abraham instructed the Ae∣gyptian Priests, and not the King; both which authorities Eusebius citeth. The Sep∣tuagint, Euseb. de . Euang. l. 9. c. 4. Gen. 12. 15. Esai. 19. 11. and the Vulgar edition, for Zoan write Heliopolis. Pagnin, Vatablus, Iunius, and our English call it On; and Ptolomie, Onium. There are two Cities of that name; the one on the frontier of the lower Aegypt, towards the South; the other some what lower on the Easter-most branch of Nilus falling into the Sea at Peleusium. And it it may be that Heliopolis to the South of the riuer Tratan, was the same which Vata∣blus Ezech. 3. 17. and our English call Auen. Of the latter it is, that the Scriptures take certaine knowledge: the same, which Pomp. Mela, and Plinie, call Solis opptdum; Tyrius in the Holy Warre, Malbec; the , Bahalbeth; and Sethi, Fons Solis. Of this He∣liopolis, or On, was Priest, or Prince, whose daughter Ioseph married. In the Iosep. t. 1. bell. . c. 1. Territory adioyning Iacob inhabited, while he liued in Aegypt. In the confines of this Citie, Onias, the high Priest of the Iewes, built a Temple, dedicated to the eternall God; not much inferiour to that of Hierusalem ( Ptolomie Philopater then gouerning in Aegypt) which stood to the time of Vespasian, 333. yeeres after the foundation by Onias, whom Iosephus falsly reporteth, herein to haue fulfilled a prophecie of . c. 19. In die illa erit Altare Domini in medio terrae Aegypti; In that day shall the Altar of the Lord bee in the middest of the Land of Aegypt. Antiochus Epiphanes at that time of the building tyrannizing ouer the Iewes, gaue the occasion the erecting of this Temple in Aegypt. Lastly, there it was that out Sauiour CHRIST IESVS remained, while Ioseph and the Virgin Mary feared the violence of Herod: neere which (sayth Brochard) the fountaine is still found, called Iesus well, whose streames doe afterward Broch. . sanct. water the Gardens of Balsamum, no where else found in Aegypt. And hereof see more in Brochard, in his description of Aegypt. There is also the Citie of Noph, remembred by Esai and Ezekiel; the same which Esa 19. 13. . 34. Hosea 9. 6. lib. 2. the Prophet calleth Moph: which latter name it tooke from a Mountaine ad∣ioyning, so called, which Mountaine Herodotus remembreth. And this is that great Citie, which was called Memphis; and so the Septuagint write it. It is knowne to the Arabians by the name of Mazar. The Chaldeans name it Alchabyr; and Tudalen∣sis, Mizraim. Pelusium, which Vatablus, Pagnin, Iunius, and our English write, Sin; the G. Tyr. l. 20. c. 17 lib. 2. c. 5. call Sais; and Montanus, Lebna; is not the same with Damiata, as Gul Tyrius witnes∣seth. In the time of Baldwin the third, Pelusium was called Belbeis. Belbeis (saith Ty∣rius) quae dicta est Pelusium; Belbeis, that in times past was called Pelusium. The Citie of No, the Septuagint call Diospolis. Of which name there are two or Ezech. 30. 15, 16 three in Egypt. Hierome conuerts it Alexandria, by anticipation, because it was so called in the future. , for so Hicrome and Zeigler write it, is the same which the Hebrewes call Ezech. 30. 17. Pibeseth. To make the storie the more perceiuable, I haue added a description of the land of Gosen, in which the Israelites inhabited; with those Cities and places so often re∣membred in the Scripture: as of Taphnes or Zoan, Heliopolis or Bethsemes, Balsephon, Succoth, and the rest; together with Moses passage through the Desarts of Arabia the Stonie. For all storie without the knowledge of the places, wherein the actions were performed, as it wanteth a great part of the pleasure; so it no way enricheth the knowledge and vnderstanding of the Reader; neither doth any thing serue to retain, what we reade, in our memories, so well as these pictures and descriptions doe. In which respect I am driuen to digresse in many places, and to interpose some such , other wise seeming impertinent: taking for my authority, after many others more ancient, that great learned man, Arias Montanus; who in his Preface to the Storie of the Holy Land, hath these words: Si enim abs{que} locorum obseruatione res gestae narrentur, sine cognitione legantur, confusa perturbata e∣runt , vt ex ijs nihil non obscurum, nihil non difficile elici possit; If narration (saith he) be made of those things which are performed, without the obseruation of the places, where∣in they were done: or if Histories be read without Topographicall knowledge; all things will appeare so intricate and confused, as wee shall thereby vnder stand nothing but obscurely, nor draw thence any knowledge, but with the greatest difficultie. §. III. Of the cruelty against the Israelites yong children in Aegypt: and of MOSES his preseruation, and education. BVt to returne to the story it selfe. It appeareth that notwithstanding the labour and , which the Israelites endured, yet they decreased not in numbers: in so much as Pharaoh considering the danger of dis∣contented pouertie, and the able bodies of an oppressed multitude, how perillous they might bee to his estate, by suggestion of the Deuill resolued to slaughter all the male children of the Hebrews, as soone as they should be borne. To which end he sent for Sephora and Thua, women the most famous and ex∣pert amongst them, quae praeerant (saith Commestor) multitudini obstetricum, who com∣mand giuen them ouer all mid-wiues; by whom (as it seemeth) he gaue order to all the rest for the execution of his Edict. For to haue called all the mid-wiues of together, had been a strange Parliament. Now whether these two, before named, were of the Hebrews, or of the , it is diuersly disputed. S. Augustine calls Ver. 16. Ioseph. ant. l. 2. c. 5. them Hebrews, because it is written Exodus the first, The King of Aegypt commanded the midwiues of the Hebrew women, &c. But Iosephus, Abulensis, and Pererius beleeue Abul. & Perer. in Exod. them to be Aegyptians. Whosoeuer they were, when it pleased God to frustrate the execution of that secret murder, to the end the world might witnesse both the wic∣kednesse of the Aegyptians, and the iust cause, thereby made manifest, of his future indignation and reuenge: Pharaoh finding those women filled with pietie, and the feare of God, commanded others of his people to execute his former intent; and Ver. 22. publikely, or howsoeuer, to destroy all the male Hebrew children borne within his dominions. Now besides the doubts, which Pharaoh had of the multitudes of the Hebrewes, the greatest part of whom hee might haue assured, by affoording them the iustice, which euery King oweth to his vassals, and the rest he might haue imployed or sent . ant. l. 2. c. 5 away at his pleasure; Iosephus giueth another cause of his rage against them, name∣ly, That it was prophetically deliuered him by an Egyptian Priest, that among the Hebrewes there should bee borne a childe; who growing to mans estate, should be∣come a plague and terrour to his whole Nation. To preuent which, (and presuming that he could resist the ordinance of God, by a meane, contrarie to the lawes of Hea∣uen and of nature) hee stretched out his bloudie and mercilesse hand to the exe∣cution of his former intent. The same preuention Herod long after practised, when fearing the spirituall kingdome of Christ, as if it should haue beene temporall, he cau∣sed all the male children at that time borne to bee slaughtered. And that Pharaoh had some kinde of foreknowledge of the future successe, it may be gathered by these his owne words, in the tenth verse of the of Exodus. Come, let vs worke wisely with Exod. 10. 5. them, lest they multiplie; and it come to passe, that if there bee warre, they ioyne themselues also vnto our enemies, and fight against vs, and get them out of the Land. But wee see, and time hath told it vs from the beginning, how God derideth the wisedome of the worldly men, when forgetting the Lord of all power, they relie on the inuenti∣ons of their owne most feeble, and altogether darkened vnderstanding. For euen by the hands of the dearely beloued daughter of this tyrant, was that great Prophet and minister of Gods meruailous workes taken out of , being thereinto turned off, in an Arke of reedes, a sucking and powerlesse infant. And this Princesse ha∣uing beheld the child his for me and beautie, though but yet in the blouth, so pier∣ced her , as she did not onely preserue it, and cause it to be fostered; but commanded that it should bee esteemed as her owne, and with equall care to the sonne of a King nourished. And for memory that it was her deede, shee called the childe Moses, as it were, extractus, or ereptus, taken out, to wit, out of the water: or, after Iosephus and Glicas, Moy, a voice expressing water, and hises, as much to say, as that which is drawne out of water, or thence taken. Clemens Alexandrinus was of Strom. l. 1. opinion, that Moses was circumcised, before he was put into the Arke of Reedes, and that Amram his father had named him Ioachim. In his youth hee was carefully bred, by the care, and at the charge of Daughter, and by men of the most vnder∣standing, taught and instructed: quem regio more educauit, sapicntibus Ae∣gyptiorum Phil. de . Magistris, à quibus erudiretur, saith BASIL; Vnto whom shee gaue princely e∣ducation, appointing ouer him wise Masters of the Aegyptians for his instructers. There∣by (say Iosephus and Philo) hee became excellently learned in all the doctrine of the Aegyptians; which also the Martyr Stephen, in the seuenth of the Actes confirmeth; And MOSES was learned in all the wisedome of the Aegyptians. Which wisedome or sa∣pience, such as it was, or at least so much thereof as Six. Senensis hath gathered, wee haue added, betweene the death of Moses, and the reigne of Iosua. §. IIII. Of MOSES his flying out of Aegypt; and the opinions of certaine ancient Historians of his warre in AEthiopia; and of his marriage there: PHILO his iudgement of his Pastorall life: and that of PERERIVS of the Bookes of GENESIS and . WHen Moses was growne to mans estate, Iosephus and Eusebius, out of Artapanus, tell vs of ten yeeres warre that hee made against the : of the besieging of Saba, afterward by Cambyses, called Meroe; and how he recouered that Citie by the fauour of Tharbis, a Daugh∣ter of Aethiopia, whom he tooke to wife. So hath Commestor a prettie tale of Moses, How after the end of that warre, Tharbis resisting his returne into Egypt, Moses most skilfull in Astronomie, caused two Images to bee ingrauen in two precious stones, whereof the one increased memorie; the other caused forgetful∣nesse. These he set in two rings; whereof he gaue the one, to wit, that of obliuion, to his wife Tharbis, reseruing the other of memorie for himselfe: which ring of for∣getfulnesse, after shee had a while worne, shee beganne to neglect the loue shee bare her husband: and so Moses without danger returned into Egypt. But leauing these fancies to the Authors of them: It is true, that about the 40. yeere of Moses age, when hee beheld an Egyptian offering violence to one of the oppressed Hebrewes, moued by compassion, in respect of his brother, and stirred vp by disdaine against the other, in the contention he slew the Egyptian. Soone after which act, finding a disposition in some of his owne Nation to accuse him, for whose defence hee had thus greatly endangered his owne life: by the ordinance and aduice of God, whose chosen seruant he was, hee fled into Arabia Petraea, the next bordering Countrie to Egypt; where wandring all alone, as a man left and forsaken, in a place vnknowne vnto him, as among a Nation of barbarous strangers; and who in future times were the irreconciliable enemies of the Hebrewes: it pleased God (working the greatest things by the weakest worldly meanes) to make the watering of a few sheepe, and the assisting of the Daughters of the , an occasion whereby to pro∣uide him a wife of one of those, and a father in law, that fed him, and sustained him in a Countrie neerest Egypt, fittest to returne from: necessarie to bee knowne, because interiacent betweene Egypt and Iudaea, through which he was to leade the Israelites; and wherein God held him, till the occasion which God presented, best serued. And lastly, where the glory of the world shined least, amidst mountainous Desarts, there the glorie of God, which shineth most, couered him ouer, and appeared vnto him, not finding him as a Kings sonne, or an adopted child of great Pharaohs daughter, but as a meeke and humble sheepe-heard, sitting at a mountaine foote; a keeper and commander of those poore beasts onely. In that part of , neere Madian, hee consumed 40. yeeres. And though (as Philo in the story of Moses life obserueth) he did not neglect the care of those flocks, committed to his charge, but that he excelled all others in that Pastorall knowledge; yet in that solitary Desart hee enioyed himselfe: and being separate from the presse of the world, and the troublesome affaires thereof, hee gaue himselfe to contempla∣tion, and to make perfect in himselfe all those knowledges, whereof his younger yeeres had gathered the grounds and principles: the same Author also iudging, that his Pastorall life did excellently prepare him for the execution of the Principalitie, which heafterward obtained. Est enim (saith PHILO) ars Pastoralis, quasi praeludium adregnum, hocest, adregimen hominum, gregis mansuetissimi. Quemadmodum bellicosa in∣genia praeexercent se in venationibus, experientia in feris, quod postea in militia & bello per∣fectura sunt; brutis praebentibus materiam exercitij, tam belli quàm pacis tempore. At verò praefectur a pecoris, habet quiddam cum regno in subditis; idec{que} Reges cogno∣minantur Pastores populorum, non contumeliae sed honoris gratia; The art of keeping sheepe is, as it were, an introductorie exercise vnto a Kingdome, namely, the rule ouer men, the most gentle flocke: Euen as warlike natures doe before-hand exercise themselues in hunting, practising on wild beasts those things, which after they will accomplish in warfare: those brute beasts affording matter, wherein to traine themselues, both in time of warre and of peace. But the gouernement of gentle cattell, hath a kinde of resemblance vnto a Kingly rule ouer subiects; therefore, Kings are stiledsheep-heards of the people, not in way of reproch, but for their honour. That Moses, in this time of his abode at Madian, wrote the Booke of Iob, as Pererius supposeth, I cannot iudge of it, because it is thought, that Iob was at that time liuing. Neither dare I subscribe to Pererius opinion, That Moses, while heeli∣ued Perer. in 3. c. Exod. in that part of Arabia, wrote the bookes of Genesis; although I cannot denie the reason of Pererius coniecture, That by the example of Iobs patience hee might strengthen the oppressed : and by the promises of God to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, put them in assurance of their deliuerie from the Aegyptian slauery, and of the Land of rest, and plentie promised. Of his calling backe into Aegypt by the Angel of God, and the maruailes and wonders which hee performed, thereby to perswade Pharaoh, that he was the mes∣senger of the most High, the particulars are written in the first fourteene Chapters of Exodus; and therefore to treate of all the particulars therein contained, it were needlesse. But for the first, it is to be noted, that when Moses desired to be taught by Exod. c. 3. . 13. 14. & 15. God, by wat name hee should make him knowne, and by whom hee was sent; he receiued from God so much, as man could comprehend of his infinite and euer∣being nature. Out of which he deliuered him in the first part of his answere, a name to be considered of by the wisest: and in his second, to bee vnderstood by all. For there is nothing that is, or hath being of it selfe, but the eternall: which truely is; which is aboue all; which is immutable. The bodies of men are changed euery moment: their substance wasteth, and is repaired by nutriment; neuer continuing at one stay, nor being the same so long as while one may say, Now. Likewise, what∣soeuer is consumed in the longest continuance of time, the same in euery shortest piece of time suffereth decay; neither doth any thing abide in one state. Vna est . ad Dam. Dei & solanatura, quaeverè est: id enim quod subsistit, non habet aliundè, sed suum est. Cae∣tera quaecreata sunt, etiamsividentur esse, non sunt, quia aliquando non fuerunt, & potest sum non esse, quod non fuit; It is the one and onely nature of God, which truly is, for hee hath his being of himselfe, and not from any thing without him. Other things that are crea∣ted, although they seeme to be, yet they are not; for sometimes they were not: and that which hath not beene, may againe want being. And with this, in respect of the Diuine nature, the saying of Zeno Eleates excellently agreeth: Tota rerum natura vmbra est, inanis, fallax; The whole nature of things is but a shadow, either emptié or deceitfull: in com∣parison of whom (saith Esay) all Nations are as nothing, lesse then nothing, and . . 13. vanitie. Of the tenne plagues wherewith the Aegyptians were strucken, the first was by changing the Riuers into bloud: God punishing them by those waters, into which their Forefathers had throwne, and in which they had drowned, the innocent chil∣dren of the Hebrewes. To which this place of the Reuelation may bee fitly applied: And I heard the Angell of the water say, Lord, thou art iust, which art, and which wast: and C. 16. v. holy, because thou hast iudged these things; for they shed the bloud of the Saints and Prophets, and therefore hast thou giuen them bloud to drinke. The rest of the Plagues by Frogges, Lice, Flyes, or stinging Waspes; by the death of their Cattaile; by leprous Scabbes, by-Haile and Fire; by Grashoppers; by darknesse; after which Pharaoh forbad Moses his presence: moued the hardned heart of the vnbeleeuing King no longer, then the paine and perill lasted, till such time as his owne first-borne, and the first-borne of all his Nation perished. He then, while he feared his owne life, (a time wherein wee remember God perforce) stood vpon no condition: whereas before, hee first yeelded but to the departure of the men; then of the men, women and children, reseruing their bestiall; but hee was now content for the present, that the Isrelites should not only depart with all their owne, but with a part of the Siluer, Gold, and Iewels of his owne people: of which (the feare being past) hee suddainly repented him, as his pursuit after them proued. For when euery one of the Hebrewes had (according to direction from Moses recei∣ued) slaine a Lambe, without spot or blemish, for the Passeouer, a Sacrament of the most cleane and vnspotted Sauiour) and with the bloud thereof coloured the poste and linterne of the doores; the Angell of God in the dead of the night smote euery first-borne of Aegypt, from the sonne of the King, to that of the Begger and Slaue: the children of the Israclites excepted. At which terrible iudgement of God, Pha∣raoh being more then euer amazed, yeelded, as before is sayd, to their departure. The Aegyptians (saith Epiphanius) did in after-times imitate this colouring with Epiphan. l. 1. cont. . bloud, which the Israelites vsed after the Passeouer; ascribing an exceeding vertue to the Red Colour: and therefore they did not only marke their Sheepe and Cattell, but their Trees bearing Fruit, to preserue them from lightning and other harmes. §. V. Of PHARAOHS pursuit of the Israelites: and of their possage towards the Red Sea, so farre as Succoth. NOw, when the people were remooued, and on their way, (his heart being hardened by God) hee bethought him aswell of the Honour lost, as of the shame remaining after so many Calamities and Plagues, in suffering them to depart with the spoiles of his people, and in de∣spight of himselfe. And-hauing before this time great Companies of Souldiers in readinesse, hee consulted with himselfe, what way the Israelites were like to take. Hee knew that the shortest and fairest passage was through the Coun∣trey of the Philistims. But because these people were very strong, and a warlike Nation, and in all probabilitie of his Allies, hee suspected that Moses meant to find some other outlet, to wit, through the Desart of Etham; and there, because the Countrey was exceeding Mountainous, and of hard accesse, and that Moses was pestered with multitudes of Women, Children, and Cattell, hee thought it impossi∣ble for the Israelites to escape him that way. In the meane-while hauing gathered together all the Chariots of Aegypt, and 600. of his owne, and Captaines ouer Exod. 14. v. 7. them; hee determined to set vpon them in the Plaines of Gosen, which way soeuer they turned themselues. For it was the ancient manner to fight in those Chariots, armed with broad and sharpe Hookes on both sides, in fashion like the Mowers Sythe. Which kind of fight in Chariots, but not hooked, the Brittaines vsed a∣gainst the Romanes, while they made the Warre for the Conquest of this Land. Of this Armie of PHARAOH, IOSEPHVS affirmeth, that it consisted of 50000. Ios. ant. l. 2. c. 6. Horse, and 20000. foot; which, were it true, then it cannot be doubted, but that Pharaoh intended long before to assaile the Hebrewes at their departure, or to destroy them in Gosen; and refused them passage, till such time as hee had prepared an Armie, to set on them. For, as it is written in the first of Exodus, hee doubted two things, eyther that the Hebrewes might ioyne themselues to his enemies within the Land, or being so multiplied, as they were, might leaue his seruice, and get themselues thence at their pleasure. But the plagues which God grieued him withall, enforst him at this time to giue an assent to their departure: perchance fore-running his intent. But were it otherwise, and Iosephus partiall in this affaire, yet by the wordes of the Text it appeareth, that he gathered all the Chariots of Aegypt: which could not bee done Exod. 14. 7. in haste. For Moses made but three dayes march, ere Pharaoh was at his heeles; and yet the last day he went on sixteene miles: which, in so hot a Countrey, and to driue their Cattell and Sheep with them, pestered with a world of Women and Children, was a march witnessing the dread of a powerfull Enemie at hand. Now, as Moses well knew, that hee went out with a mightie hand, and that God guided his vnder∣standing in all his Enterprizes: so he lay not still in the ditch crying for helpe, but v∣sing the vnderstanding which God had giuen him, hee left nothing vnperformed, be∣comming a naturall wise man, a valiant and a skilfull Conducter; as by all his actions and counsailes from this day to his well appeared. When Moses perceiued that Pharaoh was enraged against him, and commanded him not to dare to come thenceforth into his presence: after hee had warned Israel of the Passeouer, he appointed a generall Assembly or Rende-vous of all the at Ramases, in the Territorie of Gosen; a Citie standing indifferent to receiue from The Territory of Gosen was afterward cal∣led Ramases, the name of this City, as appeareth in . 47. & Num. 33. all other parts of the Countrey the dispersed Hebrewes: and gaue commandement, that euery Family should bring with them such store as they had, of Dow and Paste, not staying to make it into bread: knowing then that Pharaoh was on foot, and on his way towards them. Which done, and hauing considered the great strength of Horse-men and Chariots, of which kind of defence Moses was vtterly vn∣prouided (though as it is written, the Israelites went vp armed) hee marched from Exod. 13. Ramases Eastward, towards the Desarts of Etham, and incamped at Succoth, which he performed on the fifteenth day of the Moneth Abib. Which Moneth from that time forward they were commanded to account, as the first Moneth of the yeere. Whether in former times they had beene accustomed to begin their yeere in some o∣ther Moneth, following the manner of the Aegyptians, and were now recalled by Exod. 23. v. 16. &c. 34. v. 22. Moses to the rule of their Forefathers, it is vncertaine. Certaine it is, that they had, and retained, another beginning of their politike yeere, which was not now abroga∣ted, but rather by some solemnities thereunto annexed, was confirmed, and still con∣tinued in vse. Wherefore in referring things done, or happening among them, vnto the beginning, middest, or ending of the yeere; that distinction of the Sacred, and the Politike yeere is not to bee neglected. Concerning the number of dayes in eue∣ry Moneth, and the whole forme of their yeere, like enough it is that Moses himselfe in fortie yeeres space, did sufficiently instruct the Priests, to whose care the ordering thereof (as common opinion holds) was in trust: but that any rule of framing their Kalendar, was made publike, before the captiuitie of Babylon, I doe not find. Now because time and motion beginne together, it will not, I thinke, bee any great breach of order, to shew here at their first setting forth, what was the forme of the Hebrew yeere: with the difference betweene them and other Nations, in ordering the accompt of time. †. VI. Of the Solarie and Lunarie yeeres: and how they are reconciled: with the forme of the Hebrew yeere, and their manner of intarcalation. The Hebrew Moneths are thus named. The first Moneth, Nisan, or Abib. 1. March. The second, Iar, or Tiar, Zio, or Zin. 2. April. The third, Siuan, or Sinan, or Siban. 3. Maie. The fourth, Tamuz. 4. Iune. The fifth, Ab. 5. Iulie. The sixth, Elul. 6. August. The seuenth, Tysri, or Ethauin, or Ethanim. 7. September. The eighth, Marchesuan, or Mechasuan, or Bul, or with Iosephus, Marsonane. 8. October. 1. Ant. c. 4. The ninth, Chisleu, or Casleu. 9. Nouember. The tenth, Tebeth, or Thobeth. 10. December The eleuenth, Sebeth, or Sabath. 11. Ianuarie. The twelfth, Adar, and Ve Adar. 12. February. VE Adar was an intercalarie Moneth, added, some yeeres, vnto the other twelue, to make the Solarie and Lunarie yeere agree; which (besides the generall inconuenience that would otherwise haue risen, by ca∣sting the Moneths of Summer into the Winter season, to the great con∣fusion of all account) was more necessarily to bee regarded of the He∣brewes, because of the diuine Precept. For God appointed especiall Feasts to be cele∣brated Deut. 16. precisely in such a Moneth of the yeere, and withall on a set day, both of the Moone and of the Moneth; as the Feast of the first fruits; the new Moones, and the like: which could not haue so beene kept, if eyther the day of the Moone had fallen in some other part of the Moneth, or the Moneth it selfe beene found farre distant from his place in the season of the yeere. Other Nations, the better to obserue their Solemnities in the due time, and to ascertaine all reckonings and remembrances, (which is the principall commoditie of time, that is the measure of endurance) were driuen in like manner to make their yeeres vnequall, by adding sometimes, and sometimes abating one or more dayes, as the errour committed in foregoing yeeres required. The errour grew at first, by not knowing what number of dayes made vp a compleat yeere. For though by the continuall course of the Sunne, causing Summer and Winter duly to succeed each other, it is plaine enough euen to the most sauage of all people, when a yeere hath passed ouer them; yet the necessitie of ordinarie occurrences, that are to bee num∣bred by a shorter Tally, makes this long measure of whole yeeres insufficient for the smaller sort of more daily affaires. Therefore men obserued the Monethly conspi∣cuous reuolution of the Moone, by which they diuided the yeere into twelue parts, subdiuiding the Moneth into 29. dayes and nights, and those againe into their quar∣ters 30. & 29. and houres. But as the markes of time are sensible and easily discerned: so the exact calculation of it is very intricate, and worketh much perplexitie in the vnder∣standing. Twelue reuolutions of the Moone, containing lesse time by eleuen dayes or thereabout, than the yeerely course of the Sunne, through the Zodiacke, in the space of sixteene yeeres, euery Moneth was found in the quite contrarie part of the yeere, to that wherein it was placed at the first. This caused them to adde some daies to the yeere, making it to consist of twelue Moneths, and as many daies more, as they thought would make the courses of the Sunne and Moone to agree. But herein were committed many new errours. For neither did the Sunne determine his yeerely reuolution by any set number of whole dayes; neyther did the Moone change alwayes at one houre; but the verie minutes and lesser fractions were to bee obserued by him, that would seeke to reduce their motions (which motions also were not still alike) into any certaine rule. Here lay much wisedome and deepe art, which could not soone bee brought to perfection. Yet as making an estimate at ran∣dome, the Athenians held the yeere to containe 360. dayes, wherein most of the Greekes concurred with them. That 360. dayes filled vp the Graecian yeere (besides many collaterall proofes) it is manifest by that which Plinie directly affirmeth, tel∣ling . l. 34. c. 6. of the Statues, erected in honour of Demetrius Phalereus, which were (sayth he) 360. whilest as yet the yeere exceeded not that number of dayes. By this account neyther did any certaine age of the Moone beginne or end their Moneths; neyther could their Moneths continue many yeeres, in their owne places: but must needes bee shifted by little and little, from Winter to Summer, and from Summer to Win∣ter, as the dayes forgotten to be inserted into the Almanacke by men, but not for∣gotten by the superiour bodies in their courses, should occupie their owne roomes in their due turnes. Now, because the solemnitie of the Olympian Games was to be held at the full Moone, and withall on the 15 day of the Moneth (which an swereth in a manner to our Iune) they were carefull to take order, that this Moneth might euer beginne with the new Moone; which they effected by ad∣ding some two daies to the last Moneth of euery yeere: those Games being held once in foure yeeres. This intercalation not to make the matter euen; which caused them sometimes to omit one day in the fourth yeere, which was the second of the Moneth Boedromian; (agreeing neerely with our August) sometimes not to omit it, or (which is all one) to insert another for it into the fourth Lunarie yeere, accounting by the Moone, after a manner that was not vulgar. All this notwithstan∣ding, their Moneth of Iune would euery yeere haue growne colder and colder, had they not sought to keepe all vpright, by intercalating in each other Olympiad, that is, each eighth yeere one whole Moneth, which they called the second Posideon or De∣cember; which was the deuice of Harpalus, who also taught them to make one Moneth of 29. dayes, another of 30. and so successiuely through the whole yeere. Thus with much labour they kept their yeere as neere as they could, vnto the high way of the Planets; but these markes which they obserued, were found at length to bee deceitfull Guides. For it was not possible so to fashion this eighth yeeres inter∣calation, that it should not deceiue them in 11. houres and 18. minutes at the least, or some wayes in 34. houres and 10. minutes, or 36. and 41. minutes; which diffe∣rences would, in few Ages, haue bred much confusion. The first that introduced a good methode, likely to continue, was Meton the Athenian, who not regarding the Olympiads, and the eighth yeeres intercalation, deuised a Cycle of 19. yeeres, wherein the Moone hauing 235. times runne her circuit, met with the Sunne in the same place, and on the same day of the yeere, as in the 19. yeere before past shee had done. This inuention of Meton was entertained with great applause, and passing from Greece to Rome, was there inserted into the Kalendar in Golden Letters, being called the Golden Number, which name it retaineth vnto this day. Hereby were a∣uoyded the great and vncertaine intercalations that formerly had beene vsed; for by the intercalation of 7. Moneths in the 19. yeeres, all was so euen, that no sensible difference could bee found. Yet that errour which in one yeere could not be percei∣ued, was very apparent in a few of those Cycles; the new Moones anticipating in one Cycle 7. houres, and some minutes of the precise rule. Therefore Calippus deuised a new Cycle containing foure of Metons, that is to say, 76. yeeres; and afterwards Hip∣parchus, a Noble Astrologer, framed another, containing foure of Calippus his Periods, each of them finding some errour in the former obseruations, which they diligently corrected. The last reformation of the Kalendar was that which Iulius Caesar made, who by aduice of the best Mathematicians, then to be found, examining the courses of those heauenly bodies, reduced the yeere vnto the forme which is now in vse with vs, containing 365. dayes and sixe houres, which houres in foure yeeres make vp one whole day, that is intercalated euery fourth yeere, the 24. of Februarie. The correction of the Iulian yeere by Pope Gregorie the 13. Anno Domini 1582. is not as yet entertained by generall consent; it was indeed, but as a note added vnto the worke of Caesar: yet a note of great importance. For whereas it was obserued, that the Sunne, which at the time of the Nicene Councell, Anno Dom. 324. entred the Aequinoctiall on the 21. day of March, was in the yeere 1582. ten dayes sooner found in that time, Pope strooke out of the Kalendar ten dayes, following the fourth of October, so that in stead of the fifth day was written the fifteenth; by which meanes the moueable Feasts depending on the Sunnes entrance into Aries, were a∣gaine celebrated in such time, as at the Nicene Councell they had beene. And the better to preuent the like alterations, it was by the Councell of Trent ordained, that from thence forward in euery hundreth yeere, the Leape day should be omitted, ex∣cepting still the fourth hundred: because the Sunne doth not in his yeerely course take vp full sixe houres aboue the 365. dayes; but faileth so many minutes, as in 400. yeeres make about three whole dayes. But the Cycle of 19. yeeres, which the Hebrewes vsed, was such as neyther did need any nice curiositie of houres, minutes, and other lesser Fractions to helpe it; neyther did in summing vp the dayes of the whole yeere, neglect the dayes of the Moone, confounding one Moneth with another. For with them it fell out so, that alwayes the Kalends or first day of the Moneth was at the new Moone, and because that day was festiuall, they were very carefull aswell to obserue the short yeere of the Moone, passing through all the 12. Signes in one Moneth, as that longer of the Sunne, which is needfully regarded in greater accounts. First, therefore they gaue to Nisan their first Moneth, which is about our March or April, 30. dayes; to their second Moneth 29. dayes; and so successiuely 30. to one, 29. to another. Hereby it came to passe, that euery two Moneths of theirs contained somewhat e∣uenly two reuolutions of the Moone, allowing 29. dayes, 12. houres, and odde mi∣nutes, from change to change. The spare minutes were bestowed among the super∣fluous or Epact dayes; which made vp 7. Moneths in 19. yeeres; to 6. of which 7. were commonly giuen 30. dayes; to one of them 29. dayes, or otherwise as was found requisite. Their common yeere (as appeareth by the seuerall dayes of each Moneth) contained 354. dayes, which faile of the yeere, wherein the Sunne finisheth his course, 11. whole dayes, with some fractions of time. But these dayes, and other broken pieces, howsoeuer they were neglected in one yeere, yet in the Cycle of 19. yeeres were so disposed of by conuenient Intercalations, that still at the end of that Cycle, both the Sunne and Moone were found on the same day of the yeere, Moneth and weeke, yea commonly on the same houre of the day, where they had beene at the beginning of it 19. yeeres before. Diuers haue diuersly set downe the forme of the Hebrew yeere, with the manner of their Intercalations. SIGONIVS tells vs, that euery second yeere they did adde Sig. derep. Hebr. lib. 3. c. 1. a Moneth of 22. dayes; euerie fourth yeere a Moneth of 23. in the regard of 11. dayes and a halfe wanting in 12. Moones to fulfill a yeere of the Sunne. But herein SIGONIVS was very much deceiued. For the Moone doth neuer finish her course in 22. or 23. dayes: and therefore to haue added so many dayes to the end of the yeere, had the way to change the fashion of all the Moneths in the yeeres following, which could not haue begunne as they ought, with the new Moone. Genebrard saith, . . l. 2 that euery third yeere, or second yeere, as need required, they did intercalate one Moneth, adding it at the yeeres end vnto the other 12. This I beleeue to haue beene true; but in which of the yeeres the intercalation was (if it bee worthy of considera∣tion) me thinkes they doe not probably deliuer, who keepe all farre from euennesse vntill the very last of the 19. yeeres. For (to omit such as erre grossely) some there are who say, that after three yeeres, when besides the dayes spent in 36. courses of the Moone, 33. dayes are left remaining, that is, 11. dayes of each yeere; then did the Hebrewes adde a Moneth of 30. dayes; keeping three dayes, as it were in plussage vnto the next account. The like, say they, was done at the end of the sixt yeere; at which time, besides the Intercalarie Moneth, remained sixe daies, namely, three sur∣mounting that Moneth, and the Epact of three yeeres, besides the three formerly reserued. Thus they goe on to the 18. yeere; at which time they haue 18. daies in hand: all which with the Epact of the 19. yeere make vp a Moneth of 29. daies, that being intercalated at the end of the Cycle makes all euen. Whether this were the practice, I can neither affirme nor denie; yet surely it must needes haue bred a great confusion, if in the 18. yeere euery Moneth were remoued from his owne place by the distance of 48. daies, that is, halfe a quarter of the yeere and more; which inconuenience by such a reckoning was vnauoydable. Wherefore, I preferre the common opinion, which preuenteth such dislocation of the Moneths, by setting downe a more conuenient way of Intercalation in the 8. yeere. For the 6. daies remaining after the two former Intercalations made in the third and sixth yeeres, added vnto the 22. daies, arising out of the Epacts of the seuenth and eighth yeeres, doe fitly serue to make vp a Moneth, with the borrowing of one day or two from the yeere following; and this borrowing of two daies is so farre from causing any disorder, that indeed it helpes to make the yeeres ensuing vary the lesse from the proper season of euery Moneth. This may suffice to bee spoken of the Hebrew Moneths and Yeeres, by which they guided their accounts. §. VII. Of the passage of Israel from Succoth towards the Red Sea: and of the diuers wayes leading out of Aegypt. FRom Succoth in the morning following, Moses led the Israelites towards the Desart of Etham, to recouer the Mountaine foot, by the edge of that Wildernesse, though hee intended nothing lesse then to goe out that way, of all other the neerest. But being assured of the multitude of Horsemen and armed Chariots, that followed him, hee kept himselfe from being incompassed, by keeping the rough and Mountainous ground on his left hand. At Etham hee rested but one night, and then hee reflected backe from the en∣trance thereof, and marched away directly towardes the South; the distance be∣tweene it and Succoth being about eight mile. That hee forbare to enter Arabia be∣ing then in sight thereof, it seemeth to proceed from three respects; the first two naturall; the third diuine. For Pharaoh being then at hand, and hauing receiued in∣telligence of the way which Moses tooke, perswaded himselfe, that the numbers which Moses led, consisting of aboue a Million, if not two Millions of soules, (for as It is probable that all those Aegyptians and others brought by the Hebrews to the know∣ledge of the true God, fol∣lowed Moses at his departure. it is written Exod. the 12. Great multitudes of sundry sorts of people went out with them) could not possibly passe ouer those Desart and high Mountaines with so great multi∣tudes of Women, Children, and Cattell, but that at the very entrance of that fast∣nesse he should haue ouer-taken them, and destroyed the greatest numbers of them. For these his owne wordes: They are tangledin the Land, the Wildernesse hath shut them in, doe shew his hopes and intents; which Moses by turning another way did fru∣strate. Secondly, Moses by offering to enter Arabia that way, drew Pharaoh to∣wardes the East-side of the Land of Gosen, or Rameses: from whence (missing Moses there) his pursuit after him with his Chariots was more difficult, by reason of the roughnesse of the way; and howsoeuer, yet while the Hebrewes kept the Mountaine foot on the left hand, they were better secured from the ouer-bearing violence both of the Horse and Chariots. Thirdly, Moses confidence in the Al-powerfull God was such, by whose spirit, only wise, he was directed, as hee rather made choice to leaue the glory of his deliuerance and victorie to Almightie God, than eyther by an escape the next way, or by the strength of his multitude, consisting of 600000. men, to cast the successe vpon his owne vnderstanding, wise conduction, or valour. The third day he marched with a double pace from Etham towards the Valley of Pihacheroth, 16. mile distant; and sate downe betweene two ledges of Mountaynes adioyning to the Red Sea, to wit, the Mountaynes of Etham on the North, and towards the South: the same which Osorius calleth Climax: on the top whereof there stood a Climax is ra∣ther so called in respect of a passage vp and downe, then that it is any proper name. Temple dedicated to . And, as Phagius noteth, the word so compounded, is as much to say, as, Dominus speculae, siue custodiae; Lord of the watch-towre. For the Aegyp∣tians beleeued, or at least made their slaues beleeue, that if any of them offered to escape that way into Arabia, this Idoll would both arrest them, and force them to returne to their Lords and Masters. For the Aegyptians had gods for all turnes. AEgyptij foecundi; The Aegyptians were fruitfull in gods, saith Saint Hierome. But Moses, who incamped at the foot of this Mountayne with a million of soules, or as other conceiue, with two millions, found this Lord of the watch-towre asleepe, or out of countenance. Now these two passages leading out of Aegypt into Arabia vpon the firme land, Moses refused, as well that of Pelusium and Casiotis, the fayrest and shortest of all o∣ther, Exod. 13. v. 17. in respect of , as the other by Etham, from which he reflected, for the reasons before remembred, and tooke the way by the Valley of Pihacheroth, between the Mountaynes, which made a straight entrance towards the Sea. After whom Pharaoh made so great speede with his Horse-men and Chariots, as he gaue the He∣brewes no time at all to rest them after so long a march; but gate sight of them, and they of him, euen at the very brinke and wash of the Sea: insomuch as the He∣brewes being terrified with Pharaohs sudden approch, beganne to despaire, and to mutine, at that time when it behoued them most to haue taken courage for their owne defence; laying it to Moses charge, that themselues foresaw those perills in which they were wrapped. And feare, Which, saith the booke of WISEDOME, is the Cap. 17. 11. betraying of those succours which reason offereth, made them both despaire in Gods for∣mer promises, and to be forgetfull of their owne strength and multitudes. §. VIII. Of their passage ouer the Red Sea: and of the Red Sea it selfe. BVt Moses who feared nothing but God himselfe, perswaded them to be confident in his goodnesse, who hath neuer abandoned those, that assuredly trust in him; vsing this comfortable and resolued speech: Feare not, &c. for the Aegyptians whom yee haue seene this day, yee shall Exod. 14. v. 13. neuer see them againe. The Lord shall fight for you. After which Mo∣ses calling on God for succour, receiued encouragement, and commandement to goe on, in these wordes: Wherefore cryest thou vnto me? speake vnto the children of Is∣rael Exod. 14. v. 16. that they goe forward; and lift thou vp thy rod, and stretch out thy hand vpon the Sea, and diuide it, and let the children of Israel goe on drie ground through the middest of the Sea. MOSES obeying the voice of God, in the darke of the night finding the sands vncouered, past on towards the other side and coast of Arabia: two parts of the night being spent ere he entred the Foord, which it pleased God by a forcible Easterne winde, and by Moses rod to prepare. Pharaoh followed him euen at the heeles, finding the same drie ground which Moses trod on. Therefore, as it is written: The Angell of God which went before the Host of Israel, remoued, and went behinde them: also the piller of the cloud went from before them, and stood behinde them; which is, that it pleased God therein either by his im∣mediate power, or by the ministerie of his Angell, to interpose his defence betweene the Hebrewes and their Enemies; to the end that the Aegyptians might hereby be 24. v. 7. blinded, in such sort, as they could not pursue Israel with any harmefull speede. But in the morning watch Moses seized the other banke of Arabia side: and Pharaoh (as the dawne of day beganne to illighten the obscure ayre) finding a beginning of the Seas returne, hasted himselfe towards his owne Coast: But MOSES stretched forth Exod. 14. v. 27. his hand, and the Sea returned to his force, that is, the Sea moued by the power of God, ranne backe towards the land with vnresistable furie and swiftnesse, and ouer∣whelmed the whole Armie of Pharaoh, so as not one escaped. For it is written, that God tooke off their Chariot wheeles, that is, when the waters began to couer the sands, the Aegyptians being strucken with feare of death, ranne one athwart another, and missing the path by which they had past on after the Hebrewes, their wheeles stucke fast in the mudde and quick-sands, and could not be drawne out: the Sea comming against them with supernaturall violence. Lyranus vpon Exod. 14. and others, following the opinions or old Traditions of the Hebrewes, conceiued, that after Moses had by the power of God diuided the Red Sea, and that the children of Israel were fearefull to enter it, Aminadab Prince or Leader of the Tribe of Iuda first made the aduenture, and that therefore was that Tribe euer after honored aboue the rest, according to the prophecie of IACOB, Gen. 49. 8. Thy fathers sonnes shall bow downe vnto thee. But Hierome vpon the 11. of Hosee condemnes this opinion. And though it be true, that Iuda had the first place in all their marches in the Desart, and, as we now call it, led the Vangard; (where∣vpon it may be inferred, that he also led the way through the Red Sea) yet that Mo∣ses himselfe was the Conducter of Israel at that time, it is generally receiued. For, as it is written in the 77. PSALME: Thou didst leade thy people like sheepe by the hand of MOSES and AARON. The Hebrewes haue also another fancie, that the Red Sea was diuided into twelue parts, and that euery Tribe past ouer in a path apart, because it is written in the 135. Psalme, according to the vulgar: Diuisit mare rubrum in diuisiones; He diuided the Red Sea in diuisions. Also that the bottome of the Sea became as a greene Field or Pa∣sture. But Origen, Epiphanius, Abulensis, and Genebrard, fauouring this conceit, had forgotten to consider, that there were not twelue Pillers, nor twelue Armies of the Aegyptians. It is written in the 77. Psalme, v. 16. Thy way is in the Sea; not thy wayes; and in the last of the booke of Wisedome, vers. 7. In the Red Sea there was a way. Now this Sea, through which Moses past, and in which , otherwise cal∣led Chenchres, perished in the 16. yeere of his reigne, is commonly knowne by the name of the Red Sea, though the same differ nothing at all in naturall colour from other waters. But as Philostratus in his third booke noteth, and our selues know by experience, it is of a bluish colour, as other Seas are. It entreth at a narrow strait betweene Arabia the Happy and Aethiopia, or the land of the Abysins: the mouth of the indraught from the Cape, which Ptolemie calleth Possodium, to the other Land of Aethiopia, hath not aboue sixe leagues in breadth, and the same also filled euery∣where with Ilands, but afterwards it extendeth it selfe 58. Leagues from Coast to Coast, and it runneth vp betweene Arabia the Happy, and Arabia Petraea, on one side, and Aethiopia and Aegypt on the other, as farre as Sues, the vttermost end and in∣draught of that Sea: where the Turke now keepeth his fleet of Gallies. The Cosmo∣graphers commonly giue it the name of the Arabian Gulfe: but the North part to∣wards Sues, and where Moses past, is called Heropolites of the Citie Hero, sometime Troy, and of later times Sues. Plinie calls it Cambisu, by which name it was knowne, . l. 6. c. 29. saith he, before it was called Hero many yeeres. The Arabians call this Sea towards the North Apocopa, Eccant, and Eant. Artemidorus writes it : King Iuba Laeniticum, others more properly Elaniticum, of the Port and Citie : which the 3. King. 9. . Ant. 8. c. 2. Septuagint call Elath: Ptolemie, Elana: Plinie, Laena: Iosephus, Ilana, and Marius Niger, Aila: there is also Ilalah in Assyria, to which Salmanassar carryed the Israclites captiue, Kings 2. c. 8. v. 11. which Ilalah in Assyria, the Septuagint call Elaa: and in the first of Chron. the 5. Ala. But as for this Red Sea or the parts thereof, thus diuersly named, the Moores and Arabians (Vassals to the Turke) know it by no other appellation, then the Gulfe of Meca, after the name of Mahomets Towne Mecca. The Greekes write it the Sea Erythraeum, of a King called Erythras, or Erythraeus: and because Ery∣thros in the Greeke signifieth Red: hence it is, that, being denominated of this Ery∣thraeus, the sonne of Perseus and Andromeda, yet it tooke the name of the Red Sea, as Quin. Curtius coniectureth: which Arianus and Strabo confirme. But it seemeth to Arian. de gest. Alex. Mag. l. 8. Strabo, l. 6. me by the view of a discouerie of that Sea in the yeere 1544. performed by Steaen Gama, Viceroy of the East India for the King of Portugall, that this Sea was so called from a reflection of rednesse, both from the bankes, clifts, and sands of many Ilands, and part of the Continent bordering it. For I finde by the report of Castro, a princi∣pall Commander vnder Gama (which discourse I gaue Master Richard Hacluit to pub∣lish) that there is an Iland called Dalaqua, sometime Leques, contayning in length Leagues, and 12. in breadth, the earth, sands, and clifts, of which Iland, being of a reddish colour, serue for a foile to the waters about it: and make it seeme altogether of the same colour. Secondly, the same Castro reporteth, that from 24. degrees of Septentrionall Latitude, to 27. (which make in length of Coast 180. mile, lying as it doth Northerly and Southerly) all the clifts and bankes are of red earth, or stone, which by reflection of the Sunne-beames, giue a kinde of reddish luster to the wa∣ters. Thirdly, those Portugals report, and we know it by many testimonies, that there are found in the bottome of this Sea towards the shore, great abundance of red stones, on which the greatest store of Corrall growes, which is carryed into most parts of Europe, and elsewhere. There are also on the Ilands of this Sea many red Trees, saith Strabo, and those growing vnder water, may also be a cause of such a co∣lour. Of these appearances of rednesse by the shaddowes of these stones, sands, earth, and clifts, I suppose that it first tooke the name of the Red Sea, because in so many places it seemeth to be such: which Iohannes Barros in his second Decade, eight Booke and first Chapter, confirmeth. The breadth of this Sea from Elana, or Ezion Gaber adioyning, now Toro, called by the ancient Cosmographers Sinus Elaniticus, which washeth the banks of Madian or Midian, is for 16. or 17. Leagues together, along Northward towards Sues, some three Leagues or nine English mile ouer, and from this Port of Toro to Sues, and the end of this Sea it is in length about 28. Leagues, of which the first 26. haue nine miles breadth, as aforesaid, and afterward the lands both from Aegypt and A∣rabia, thrust themselues into the Sea, and straighten it so fast, as for sixe miles toge∣ther, it is not aboue three mile ouer; from thence vpward the land on Aegypt side, falleth away and makes a kinde of Bay or Coue for some ten miles together, after which the land growes vpon the Sea againe, and so bindes it into the very end there∣of, at foure miles breadth or thereabout, in which tract it was that Moses past it o∣uer, though others would haue it to be ouer-against Elana or Toro; but without iudgement: for from Ramases to Pihacheroth and Baalzephon, there is not aboue 30. miles interjacent, or 35. miles at most, which Moses past ouer in three dayes: and betweene the land of Aegypt opposite to Elana or Toro, the distance is aboue 80. miles. For Ramases, to which Citie Moses came (being the Metropolis of Gosen) when he left Pharao at Zoan, and tooke his last leaue, standeth in 30. degrees fiue minutes of Septentrionall Latitude: and Migdol, or the Valley of Pihacheroth, at the foot of the Mountayne Climax, or Baalsephon, in nine and twentie and a halfe, which made a difference of fiue and thirtie English mile, the way lying in effect North and South. §. IX. That the passage through the Red Sea was miraculous, and not at a low Ebbe. THe Aegyptians, and of them the Memphites, and other Heathen Wri∣ters, who in hatred of the Hebrewes haue obiected that Moses past o∣uer the Red Sea at a low ebbe, vpon a great spring-tyde, and that Pha∣rao conducted more by furie then discretion, pursued him so far, as be∣fore he could recouer the coast of Aegypt, he was ouer-taken by the floud and therein perished, did not well consider the nature of this place with other circumstances. For not to borrow strength from that part of the Scriptures, which makes it plaine, that the Waters were diuided, and that God wrought this miracle by an Easterly winde, and by the hand and rod of Moses (which authoritie to men that beleeue not therein perswadeth nothing) I say, that by the same naturall reason vnto which they fasten themselues, it is made manifest, that had there beene no o∣ther working power from aboue, or assistance giuen from God himselfe to Moses, and the children of Israel than ordinarie and casuall, then could not Pharao and all his Armie haue perished in that pursuit. For wheresoeuer there is any ebbing of the Sea in any gulfe, or indraught, there doe the waters fall away from the Land, and runne downeward towards the Ocean, leauing all that part towards the Land as farre as the Sea can ebbe, or fall off, to be drie Land. Now Moses entring the Sea at Migdol vnder Baalzephon (if he had taken the aduantage and opportunitie of the tyde) must haue left all that end of the Red Sea towards Sues, on his left hand drie and vncouered. For if a passage were made by falling away of the water, ten or twelue mile farther into the Sea then Sues, much more was it made at Sues, and betweene it and where Moses past: who entred the same so farre below it, and towards the body of the same Sea. It followeth then, that if all that part of the Sleeue or , had beene by the ebbe of a spring-tyde discouered, when Pharao found the floud increasing, he needed not to haue returned by the same way toward Aegypt side, but might haue gone on in his returne before the tyde, on his right hand: and so taken ground againe at the end of that Sea, at Sues it selfe, or elsewhere. But the Scriptures doe truely witnesse the contrarie, that is, That the Sea did not fall away from the Land, as naturally it doth; but that Moses past on betweene two Seas, and that the waters were diuided. Otherwise, Pharao by any returne of waters could not haue perished, as he did: and therefore the effects of that great Armies destruction, proue the cause to haue beene a power aboue na∣ture, and the miraculous worke of God himselfe. Againe, those wordes of the Scrip∣tures, that God caused the Sea to runne backe by a strong East-winde, doe rather proue the miracle, than that thereby was caused an ebbe more then ordinarie: for that Sea doth not lye East and West, but, in effect North and South, And it must haue beene a West and North-west winde, that must haue driuen those waters away through their proper Channels, and to the South-east into the Sea. But the East-winde blue athwart the Sea, and cut it asunder: so as one part fell backe towards the South, and mayne body thereof: the other part remayned towards Sues, and the North. Which being vnknowne to Pharao: while he was checkt by that Sea, which vsed in all times before to ebbe away, the floud prest him and ouer-whelmed him. Thirdly, seeing Iosephus auoweth, that Moses was not only of excellent iudgement generally, but al∣so, so great a Captayne, as he ouer-threw the Aethiopians in many battels, being im∣ployed by Pharao, and wan diuers Cities seeming impregnable: it were barbarous to condemne him of this grossenesse, and distraction: that rather then he would haue endured the hardnesse of a Mountaynous passage at hand (had not God him to take that way, and foretold him of the honor which he would there winne vpon Pharao) he would haue trusted to the aduantage of an ebbing water. For he knew not the contrarie, but that Pharao might haue found him, and prest him, as well when it flowed as when it ebbed, as it seemeth he did. For the people, beholding Pharaos approch, cryed out against Moses, and despaired altogether of their safetie: and when Moses prayed vnto God for helpe, he was answered by God: Wherefore cryest thou vnto me? speake vnto the children of Israel that they goe forward, and lift thou vp thy rod, and stretch out thy hand vpon the Sea, and diuide it: which proues that there was not at the time of Pharaos approch any ebbe at all; but that God did disperse and cut through the weight of waters, by a strong East-winde, whereby the Sands discouered themselues betweene the Sea on the left hand toward Sues, from whence the waters moued not, and the Sea which was towards the South on the right hand, So that the waters were a wall vnto them on the right hand, and on the Cap. 14. v. 22. left hand, that is, the waters so defended them on both sides, as the Aegyptians could onely follow them in the same path; not that the waters stood vpright as walls doe, as some of the Schoole-men haue fancied. For had Pharaoh and the Aegyptians per∣ceiued any such buildings in the Sea, they would soone haue quitted the chance and pursuit of Israel. Furthermore, there is no man of iudgement, that can thinke, that Pharaoh and the Aegyptians, who then excelled all Nations in the obseruations of heauenly Motions, could be ignorant of the fluxes, and refluxes of the Sea, in his owne Countrie, on his owne Coast, and in his owne most traded and frequented Ports and Hauens, and wherein, his people hauing had so many hundreds of yeeres experience of the tydes, he could not be caught, as he was, through ignorance, nor by any foreknowne or naturall accident, but by Gods powerfull hand only; which then falleth most heauily on all men, when looking through no other spectacle but their owne prosperitie, they least discerne it comming, and least feare it. Lastly, if the Armie of the Aegyptians had beene ouer-taken by the ordinarie returne of the floud, before could recouer their owne Coast; their bodies drowned would haue beene carryed with the floud which runneth vp to Sues, and to the end of that Sea, and not haue beene cast ashore on that coast of Arabia where Moses landed, to wit, vpon the Sea-banke ouer against Baalzephon, on Arabia side: where it was that the Israelites saw their dead bodies; and not at the end of the Red Sea, to which place the ordinarie floud would haue carryed them: Which floud doth not any where crosse the Channell, and runne athwart it, as it must haue done from Aegypt side to Arabia, to haue cast the Aegyptians bodies there; but it keepes the naturall course towards the end of that Sea: and to which their carkasses should haue beene carried, if the worke had not beene supernaturall and miraculous. Apollonius in the liues of the Fathers affirmeth, that those of the Aegyptians which stayed in the Countrie, and did not follow Pharaoh in the pursuit of Israel, did euer after honor those Beasts, Birds, Plants, or other Creatures, about which they were busied at the time of Pha∣raohs destruction: as he that was then labouring in his Garden, made a God of that Plant or Roote, about which he was occupyed: and so of the rest. But how those multitudes of gods were erected among them, a more probable reason shall be gi∣uen elsewhere. Orosius in his first Booke and tenth Chapter against the Pagans, tells vs, that in his time, who liued some 400. yeeres after Christ, the prints of Pha∣raohs Chariot wheeles were to be seene at a low water on the Ae∣gyptian sands: and though they were sometime defaced by winde and weather, yet soone after they ap∣peared againe. But hereof I leaue euery man to his owne beliefe. CHAP. IIII. Of the iournying of the Israelites from the Red Sea, to the place where the Law was giuen them: with a discourse of Lawes. §. I. A transition, by way of recapitulation of some things touching Chronologie: with a continuance of the storie, vntill the Amalekites met with the Israelites. BVT to goe on with the storie of Israel, in this sort I collect the times. Moses was borne in the yeere of the World 2434. Saphrus then gouerning Assyria; Orthopolis Sycionia, or Peloponnesus; Criasus the Argiues; Orus Aegypt, and Deucalion Thessalie. He fled into Acts 7. 14. 2474. Midian when he had liued 40. yeeres, in the yeere of the World 2474. and two yeeres after was borne. He returned by the commandement and or∣dinance of God into Aegypt, and wrought his mira∣cles in the fields of Zoan, in the yeere 2514. in the 2514. last Moneth of that yeere. On the 14. day of the first Hebrew moneth Abib, or the 15. of that moneth, beginning the day (as they) at Sunne setting, in the yeere of the World 2514. was the celebration of the Passeouer: Pag. 254. and in the dead of the night of the same day were all the first-borne slaine through Aegypt, or in all those parts where the inhabited. The 15. day of the first moneth of the Hebrewes called Abib, being about the beginning of the yeere of the World 2514. Moses with the children of Israel remoued from the generall . 12. assembly at Ramases, and marched to Succoth. . 33. And departing thence they made their third Station at Etham: and iournying from Exod. 13. Etham, they incamped in the Valley of Pihacheroth, or Migdol, vnder the Mountayne Num. 33. Baalzephon; and in the same night after mid-night, they past the Red Sea: Pharaoh Exod. 14. and his Armie perishing in their returne, about the first dawne of the day. Moses Num. 33. hauing recouered the bankes of Arabia, gaue thankes vnto God, for the deliuerie of Exod. 14. Israel; and making no stay on that coast, entred the Desarts of Arabia Petraea, called Sur. But finding no water in that passage, he incamped at , in the Desart of Etham, which in Exod. 15. v. 22. is also called Sur, 25. miles from the Sea: where the Num. 33. children of Israel prest with extreme thirst, murmured against Moses the second time; first at Pharaohs approch in Pihachcroth, and now in Arabia. But Moses taking Exod. 15. the branches of a tree, growing neere a Lake of bitter water, and casting the same . 33. thereinto, made the same sweet: a playne type and figure of our Sauiour; who vpon the tree of the Crosse changed the bitternesse of euerlasting death into the sweet∣nesse of eternall life. Plinie remembers these bitter Fountaynes in his sixth Booke and 29. Chapter. From whence to Delta in Aegypt, Sesostris first, Dartus after him, and lastly Ptolemie the second, began to cut an artificiall Riuer, thereby by Boats and small Shipping to trade and nauigate the Red Sea, from the great Cities vpon Nilus. From he remoued to Elim, the sixth Mansion, a march of eight miles: where . 15. finding twelue Fountaynes of sweet water, and three-score and ten Palme trees, he Num. 33. rested diuers dayes. Whether this Helim were the name of a Towne or Citie in Moses time, I affirme. And yet the scarcitie of waters in that Region was such, as Helim, which had twelue Fountaines, could hardly bee left vnpeopled. William, Arch∣Bishop of Tyre, in his Historie of the Holie Warre, found at Helim the ruines of a great and ancient Citie. And at such time as Baldwine the first past that way into Aegypt, Ingressus (saith he) Helim, Ciuitatem am populo Israelitico aliquādo Will. Tyr. l. . 11. cap. 19. familiarem; ad quam cum peruenisset, loci illius incolae, Regis aduentu praecognito, naui∣culam ingredientes in mare vicinum se contulerunt; Entring Helim a very ancient Citie, well knowne sometime to the people of Israel; whither, when he came, the inhabitants, fore∣warned of the Kings approch, tooke Boate, and shifted themselues into the Sea, lying neere them. From Elim hee returned againe towards the South, and sate downe by the banks of the Red Sea: the seuenth Mansion. For it seemeth that he had knowledge of Amalech, who prepared to resist his passage through that part of Arabia. And Moses who had not as yet trained those of the Hebrewes, appointed to beare armes: nor assured the minds of the rest, who encountring with the least miserie, were more apt to returne to their quiet slauerie, than either to endure the wants and perils which euery where accompanied them in that passage, or at this time to vndertake or sustaine so dangerous an enemie: he therefore made stay at this Mansion, vntill the fifteenth of the second Moneth called Zim, or Iiar: and made Exod. 16. the eight Mansion in the Desart of Zin; where the children of Israel mutinied a∣gainst Moses the third time, hauing want of foode. In the sixteenth Chapter of Exodus, Moses omitteth this retrait from Elim to the red Sea, but in the collection of euery seuerall incamping, in the 33. of Numbers, it is set downe. Here it pleased God to send so many flights of Quailes, as all the Countrie about their incamping was couered with them. The morning following it also rained , being the sixteenth of their Moneth, which serued them in stead of bread. Exod. 16. For now was the store consumed which the people carried with them out of Ae∣gypt. And though they had great numbers of Cattel, and Sheepe among them, yet it seemeth that they durst not feede themselues with many of those: but re∣serued them both for the milke to releeue the children withall: and for breede to store themselues when they came to the Land promised. From hence towards Raphidim they made two remoues of twentie mile: the one to Daphca, the other to , distant from Raphidim sixe miles. Here being againe prest with want of water, they murmured the fourth time, and repented them of their departure from Aegypt, where they rather contented themselues to be fed and beaten after the manner of beasts, than to suffer a casuall and some∣time necessarie want, and to vndergoe the hazzards and trauailes which euery manly minde seeketh after, for the loue of God and their owne freedomes. But Moses with the same rod which hee diuided the Sea withall, in the sight of the Elders of Israel, brought waters out of the Exod. 17. Rocke, where with the whole multitude were satis∣fied. §. II. Of the Amalekites, Madianites, and Kenites, vpon occasion of the battell with the Amalekites, and IETHROES comming: who being a Kenite, was Priest of Madian. ANd while Moses incamped in this place, the Amalekites who had knowledge of his approch, and ghessed that he meant to leade the children of Israel through their Countrie (which being barren of it selfe, would bee vtterly wasted by so great a multitude of People and Cattel) thought it most for their aduantage to set vpon them at Raphidim: where the want of water, and all other things needful for the life of man infeebled them. On the other side Moses perceiuing their resolutions, gaue charge to Iosua, to draw out a sufficient number of the ablest Hebrewes, to incounter A∣malech. Exod. 17. Betweene whom and Israel, the victorie remained doubtfull, for the most part of the day: the Hebrewes and Amalekites contending with equall hopes and repulses for many houres. And had not the strength of Moses praiers to God been of farre greater force, and more preualent, than all resistance and attempt made by the bodies of men; that valiant and warlike Nation had greatly indangered the whole enterprise. For those bodies which are vnacquainted with scarcitie of food, and those minds whom a seruile education hath dulled, being beaten, & despaired in their first attempts, wil hardly, or neuer be brought again to hazard themselues. After this victorie Iethro repaired to Moses, bringing with him Moses his wife, and his two Sonnes, which either Iethro forbare to conduct, or Moses to receiue, till he had by this ouerthrow of Amalech the better assured himselfe of that part of Arabia. For it is written in the 18. of Exod. v. 1. When IETHRO the Priest of Mi∣dian, MOSES Father in law, heard all that God had done for MOSES, &c. of which, the last deed, to wit, the ouerthrow of Amalech, gaue Iethro courage and assurance, he then repaired to his sonne in law Moses, at Sinai; where amongst other things, he aduised Moses to appoint Iudges, and other Officers, ouer Israel; being himselfe vnable to giue order in all causes and controuersies, among so many thousands of people, full of discontentment and priuate controuersie. This Iethro, although he dwelt amongst the Midianites, yet he was by Nation a Kenite, as in the fourth of Iudges v. 11. & 17. it is made manifest; where it is writ∣ten; Now HEBER the Kenite, which was of the children of HOBAB, to wit, the sonne of IETHRO, the father in law of MOSES, was departed from the Kenites, and pitched his Tents vntill the Plaine of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh. Likewise in the first of Sa∣muel, Saul commanded the Kenites to depart from among the Amalekites, lest hee C. 15. v. 16. should destroy thē with the Amalekites. For the Kenites inhabited the mountaines of Sin Kadesh: and the Amalekites dwelt in the Plaines, according to the saying of Balaam, speaking of the Kenites; Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou hast put thy nest Num. 24. v. 21. in the Rocke. And that Saul spared this Nation, he giueth for cause, that they shewed mercie to all the children of Israel, when they came vp from Aegypt. For these Kenites were a Nation of the Madianites, and the Madianites were of the issues Sam. 1. c. 15. Gene. 25. of Madian, one of the sixe sonnes which Abraham begat on Kethura: and might also take that name of Kenites from Kethura, of whom they descended by the Mother, who as it seemeth kept the knowledge of the true God among them, which they receiued from their parent Abraham. For Moses, when he fled out of Aegypt into Midian, and married the daughter of Iethro, would not (had he found them Idola∣ters) haue made Iethroes Daughter the Mother of his children. And although the Kenites are named amongst those Nations, which God promised, that the seede of Abraham should roote out, and inherite their lands; yet it cannot bee meant by these; who are descended from Abraham himselfe: but by some other Nation, bearing the same name; and in all likelihood of the race of Chus. For in the fifteenth of Genes. vers. nineteenth these Kenites or Chusites are listed with the Hittites and Perizites, with the Amorites, Canaanites, Gergesites, and Iebusites, which were indeede afterwards rooted out. But these Kenites, descended from A∣braham, Gen. . had separated themselues from among the rest, which were altogether idolatrous. For, as is before remembred, Heber the Kenite, which was of the chil∣dren Iudg. 4. of Hobab, was departed from the Kenites, that is to say, from those Kenites of Canaan, and inhabited in Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh or Kadesh. Againe, Moses nameth that Nation of the Kenites, before Midian, or any of Abrahams other sonnes were borne: which he did (referring myselfe to better iudgement) rather, because they were more ancient, than by anticipation. And as of the Kenites, so we may consider of the Madianites, parted by Moses in∣to Gen. 25. . fiue Tribes. For some of them were corrupted, and Heathens; as those of Ma∣dian by the Riuer Zared, afterwards by Moses. But the Madianites neere the bankes of the Red Sea, where Moses married his wife Zipora, and with whom he left her and his children, til after the ouerthrow of Amalech, seeme likewise not to haue beene corrupted. For these Madianites with the Kenites assisted Israel, and guided them in the Desarts. But the Madianites in Moab, and to the North of the Metropolis of Arabia, called Petraea, were by Israel rooted out, when those adioy∣ning to the Red Sea were not touched. And though it may be doubted, whether those of Madian, of whom Iethro was Priest, and the other Cities in Moab were the same, yet the contrarie is more pro∣bable. For Moses would not haue sent 12000. Israelites, as farre backe as the Red Sea, from the Plaines of Moab, to haue destroied that Madian, where his wiues kin∣dred inhabited: seeing himselfe comming with 600000. able men, was encountred by Amalech, in that passage. Neither could Moses forget the length of the way through those discomfortable Desarts, wherein himselfe and Israel had wandered 40 yeare. That Iethro, or Iothor, Raguel, or Reuel, and Hobab, were but one person, the Scriptures teach vs. For the Vulgar and Septuagint, which call him Raguel; and our English Reuel; Exod. 2. 18. calls him Iethro, or Iothor, Exod. 3. & v. 1. c. 4. v. 18. & c. 18. 1. & 6. 9. 10. & 12. and in Numbers c. 10. v. 29. Hobab. Others take Iethro and Hobab to be the same, but not Raguel. §. III. Of the time when the Law was giuen: with diuers commendations of the inuention of Lawes. THe rest of the moneths of this yeare 2515. were spent in the Desart of Sinai, neere the mountaine of Sinai or Horeb, the twelfth Mansion. Eusebius thought that Sinai or Horeb were distinct mountaines: Hie∣rome, to be but one, of a double name. And so it appeareth by many Scriptures. For in Exod. 3. . 1. it is called Horeb: and in Exod. 24. v. 16. it is written Sinai. In the 100. Psalme v. 19: Horeb: in Exod. 19. 11. Sinai. And so it is called, Galatians 4. 24. and againe, Deut. 4. 10. & 15. & Deut. 5. 2. Horeb. And so is it in the first of Kings 8. 6. and the 2. of Chron. 5. 10. and in Malachie 4. 4. Finally, in Ecclesiasticus the 48 7. they are named as one. Which heardest (saith Ecclesiasticus) the rebuke of the Lord in Sinai, and in Horeb the iudgement of the vengeance. Some what they are disioyned at the top by the report of Peter Belonius: who in the yeare 1588. past out of Aegypt into Arabia, with Monsieur de Fumet of France, and trauai∣led to the top both of Sinai and Horeb: Sinai being by farre the higher hill. From the side of Horeb (saith he) there falleth a very faire spring of water into the Valley adioyning: where he found two Monasteries of Christian Marronites, containing some 100. Religious persons of diuers Nations, who had pleasant gardens, delicate fruits, and excellent wine. These (saith the same Author) giue entertainment to Pet. Bel. lib. 2. c. 62. all strangers, which passe that way. Now, that there was some such Torrent of water neere Sinai in Moses time, it is very probable: First, because he incamped thereabout almost a yeare, and drew no water, as in other places, by miracle: secondly, because it is written Exod. 32. 20. that when Moses had broken the golden Calfe to powder, which Aaron set vp in his absence, he cast the powder thereof into the water, and made the children of Israel to drinke thereof. On this mountaine, the Law by the Angell of God was giuen to Moses, where he staied a whole yeare, wanting some ten or twelue daies: for he remoued not till the 20. day of the second moneth of the second yeare; and he arriued about the 45. day after the egression: the Law being giuen the 50. day. At this Mansion all was done, which is written from the beginning of the 29. Chapter of Exodus, to the end of that booke; all in Leuiticus; and all in Numbers, to the 10. Chapter. Whereof (because there is no storie nor other passage) I will omit the repetition, and in place thereof speake somewhat of the Law, and the kinds and vse thereof: whereby, if the Reader finde the storie any way disioyned, he may turne ouer a few leaues, and, omitting this, finde the continuation thereof. We must first consider, that as there can be neither foundation, building, nor con∣tinuance of any Common-wealth, without the rule, leuell, and square of Lawes: so it pleased God to giue thereby vnto Moses the powerfullest meane (his miracu∣lous grace excepted) to gouerne that multitude which he conducted; to make them victorious in their passage, and to establish them assuredly in their conquest. For as the North starre is the most fixed directour of the Sea-man to his desired Port: so is the Law of God the guide & conducter of all in generall, to the hauen of eternall life: the Law of nature, from God his eternall law deduced, the rule of all his Creatures: the Law humane, depending on both these, the guard of Kings, Magistrates, and vertuous men; yea, the very spirit, and the very sinewes of euery estate in the world, by which they liue and moue: the Law, to wit, a iust law, be∣ing resembled to an Heart without affection, to an Eie without lust, and to a Mind without passion; a Treasurer, which keepeth for euery man what he hath, and distributeth to euery man what he ought to haue. This benefit the Ancient, though barbarous, esteemed so highly, that among them, those which were taken for the first makers of Lawes, were honoured as Gods, or as the sonnes of Gods: and the rest, that made either additions or corre∣ctions, were commended to all posteritie for men of no lesse vertue, and no lesse li∣berally beneficiall to their Countries, than the greatest & most prosperous Con∣querours that cuer gouerned them. The Israelites, the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, receiued their Lawes from one: as the Israelites from Moses; the Lace∣daemonians from Lycurgus; the Athenians from Solon; the Romanes sometime from their first Kings, from their Decemviri, from their Senatours, from their Lawyers, and from the people themselues: others from the Prince, Nobilitie, and People; as in England, France, and in other Christian Monarchies and Estates. §. IIII. Of the name and meaning of the words, Law, and Right. THe word Lex, or Law, is not alwaies taken alike, but is diuersly, and in an indifferent sense vsed. For if we consider it at large, it may be vnderstood for any rule prescribing a necessarie meane, order, and methode, for the attaining of an end. And so the rules of Grammar, or other Arts, are called Lawes. Or it is taken for any priuate ordi∣nance of Superiours to Inferiours: for the commandements of Tyrants, which they cause to be obserued by force, for their decrees doe also vsurpe that title, ac∣cording to the generall acceptation of the word Law: of which Esay, Woe vnto Esay 10. them that decree wicked decrees, and write grieuous things. Likewise, the word is vsed for the tumultuarie resolutions of the people. For such constitutions doth Ari∣stotle also call lawes, though euill and vnsufficient. Mala lex est quae tumultuariè posi∣ta Ethic. l. 4. c. 1. est; It is an ill law that is made tumultuously. So as all ordinances, good or euill, are called by the name of lawes. The word Law is also taken for the morall habit of our minde, which doth (as it were) command our thoughts, words, and actions: framing and fashioning them according to it selfe, as to their patterne and platforme. And thus the law of the flesh which the Diuines call legem fomitis, is to be vnderstood. For euery law is a kind of patterne of that which is done according vnto it: in which sense as Gen. 6. 5. Item 8. . else∣where, this morall habit or disposition of the heart is called the frame or figmen∣tum of the heart: so in S t . Paul to the Romanes it is called a Law. But I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my minde, and leading me captiue vnto the law of sinne. Againe, the nature and inclinations of all creatures are sometime cal∣led So Virgil, has le∣ges , foe∣dera certis im∣posuit natura lo∣cis; Where al∣so it is to bee noted that hee ioynes leges & foedera toge∣ther: as in the Scripture the law is oft times called the co∣uenant. lawes, so farre as they agree with the reason of the law eternall; as the law of a Lyon, to be fierce or valiant. Also prinate contracts among Merchants and other Tradesmen, doe often put on the name of lawes. But law commonly and properly is taken, for a right rule, prescribing a necessarie meane, for the good of a Common-wealth, or Ciuill com∣munitie. The rest, to wit, the commandements of Tyrants, &c. which haue not the common good for their end, but being leges iniquae, are by Thomas called vio∣lentiae magis quàm leges; rather compulsions then lawes: And whatsoeuer is not iust, S t . Augustine doth not allow for lawes, howsoeuer established: for he calls them iniquae hominum constituta, quae nec iura dicenda, nec putanda sunt; The vniust constitu∣tions of men which are neither to be termed nor thought lawes. For saith ARISTOTLE, Legaliaiusta sunt factius, & conseruatiua foelicitatis; Iust lawes are the workers and pre∣seruers of happinesse: because by them we are directed ad vitam quietam, to a quiet life, according to Cicero. Yea, to life euer lasting, according to the Scriptures. For the end of the law, saith Plato, is God and his worship. Finis legis Deus & cultus eius. Plato in Dial. 1. de Leg. Lex, or the Law is so called by the Latines à legendo, or à ligando, of reading or binding: Leges quia lectae & , saith Varro; For after Lawes were writ∣ten and published, all men might reade them, and behold in them whereto they were bound. The other Etymologie, à ligando, is no lesse agreeable with the nature of a Law: whence in the Scripture it is called also a yoke, and a band: as confregerunt iugum, diruperunt vincula: they haue broken the yoke, they haue broken the bands. Hierem. 5. 5. And in the second Psalme, Dirumpamus vincula eorum, & proijciamus à nobis funes Psalm. 2. ipsorum; Let vs breake their bands in sunder, and cast away their cords from vs. The Couenant it is called, because of the conditionall promises of God: and be∣cause of Gods peoples voluntarie submission of them selues vnto it: for which word the Septuagint, and the Epistle to the Hebrewes, vse the word , a Testa∣ment or last will: which name it hath, because it is not otherwise effectuall for our saluation, but in respect of the death of the Testator, for without the death of the Testator, the Testament is of no force: as Hebr. 9. 17. it is said, Testamentum in mortuis ratumest. The Hebrewes call the law Thorah of teaching, because euery man is thereby taught his dutie, both to God and Men. The Greekes call it Nomos of distributing, because it distributeth to euery man his owne due; the power of the law is the power of God: Iustice being an attribute proper vnto God himselfe. Imperium legis imperium Dei est; The raigne of the law, is the raigne of God. Law in generall is thus defined by the Philosophers: Lex est vitae regula, praecipiens quae sunt , & quae fugienda; Law is the rule of life, commanding what to follow, and what to , or Lex est omnium diuinarum & humanarum Regina; Law is the Queene or Princesse of things both humane and diuine. But this description is grounded vpon the opinion of ineuitable fate. Law is the very wisedome of Na∣ture: the reason and vnderstanding of the prudent: and the rule of right and wrong. For as a right line is called Index sui & curui, the demonstrance of it selfe, and of the crooked: so is the law, the Iudge and measure of right and wrong. M r . Hooker calls the Law a directiue rule to goodnesse of operation: and though law as touching the substance and essence, consist in vnderstanding: Concludit ta∣men actum voluntatis; Yet it comprehends the act of our will. The word Ius is also di∣uersly taken, as sometime for the matter of the law and for common right: some∣time for the law it selfe: as Ius Ciuile, or Ius gentium. Isidore distinguisheth the two Isid. . generall words Ius and Fas: whereof Ius, saith he, hath reference to men, Fas to God. Fas lex diuina, Ius lex humana. To goe ouer another mans field, is permitted, by Gods law, not by mans; and therefore in a thing out of controuersie, Virgil vsed both those words: as Fas & iura sinunt, God and men permit. The word Ius or Right, is deriued or taken from the old substantiue Nowne iussus, a bidding or commandement: or perhaps from the Greeke , which is the name of Iupiter, or of the Latine genitiue case Iouis, because as the Scripture speaks, the iudgement is Gods. For as it is certaine that ius-iur andum came of Iouis-iurandum, . 1. 17. 2. Cbron. 19. 6. (for so we finde it written in Nonius out of the ancient, in which sense the Scrip∣ture calls it iuramentum Iehouae) so also we may say, that Ius came of Iouis, quia Iouis Exod. 22. 11. 1. Reg. 2. 43. est: because as God is the Author, and Patterne, and Maintainer of right, so also in his Vicegerents the Magistrates, he is the pronouncer and exequutor of right. Of this Ius the iust are denominated, iustus à iure, and iustitia à iusto; The right giues name to the righteous: and iustice takes her name from the iust. §. V. Of the definition of Lawes, and of the law eternall. BVt because lawes are manifold, and that euery kinde hath a proper and peculiar definition, it agreeth with order, first to diuide and di∣stinguish them. I meane those sorts of lawes, from whence all other particulars are drawne: leauing the indiuiduals of humane lawes to their infinite and horrible confusion. Lawes are of 3. kindes. Eternall, or vncreated. Naturall, Nationall, or Internall. Law impo∣sed or of ad∣dition, com∣monly called positiue. Lawes positiue or imposed explica∣ting, and perfe∣cting the Law of Nature, are dou∣ble. Diuine which hath two parts. Written. The written is also double. The law of Moses. The Gospell. Vnwritten. As the doctrine and religion of the Patriarks before the writ∣ten law of Moses, which some call Cabala. Humane which is al∣so twofold. Written. Which Cicero in his second booke of inuention cal∣leth Ius legiti∣mum, diuided into the Ecclesiasticall, and Secular. Vnwritten. As the lawes of custome and vse. The law eternall is thus defined by THOMAS. Lex aeternus est aeternus diuinae sa∣pientiae P. 2. q. 9. . 1. conceptus, secundum quod ordinatur ad adgubernationem ab ipso praecognita∣rum; The eternall law is the eternall conceipt of Gods wisedome, as it is referred to the go∣uernement of things foreknowne by himselfe. Or Lex aeterna est summa atque aeterna Th. q. 93. . 1. ratio diuine sapientiae: quatenus res omnes ad destinatos fines it a dirigit, vt illis iuxta conditionem sarum modum adferat; It is the high and eternall reason of sapience: as it all things in such sort to their proper ends, imposing a kinde of necessitie according to their seuerall natures, or conditions. Now the difference lieth in this: That as the same diuine vnderstanding directeth all these to their proper ends; so it is called prouidence: but as it imposeth a according to the natures of all things which it directeth, so it is called a law. Of this eternall law Cicero tooke knowledge, when in his booke of Lawes, hee wrote in this manner. Erat ratio , natura, & ad rectè faciendum impellens & à auocans: quae non tum incipit lex esse cum scripta est: sed tum cum ortaest. Orta autem simul est cum mente : lex vera atque princeps, apta ad in∣bendum & ad vetandum ratio est recta summi louis; That perfect reason and nature of things incouraging or impelling to rightfull actions, and calling vs backe from euill, did not (saith he) then begin to be a law when it was written: but when it had being. Being and beginning it had together with diuine vnderstanding, and therefore a true law and a fit Princesse to command and forbid, is the right reason of the most high God. This eternall law, (if we consider it in God, or as God,) is alwaies one and the same; the nature of God being most simple: but as it is referred to diuers obiects, so the reason of man finds it diuers and manifold. It also seemeth one law in respect of things ne∣cessarie, as the motions of the heauens; stabilitie of the earth, &c. but it appeareth otherwise to things contingent: another law to men: another to other creatures, hauing life, and to all those that be inanimate. By this eternall law all things are directed, as by the counsaile and prouidence of God: from this law all lawes are deriued, as from the rule vniuersall: and there∣to referred, as the operation of the second to the first. The eternall, and the diuine Law, differ only in consideration; the eternall di∣recting Tho. & Aug. more largely, aswell euery creature, to their proper and naturall ends, as it doth man to his supernaturall: but the diuine law to a supernaturall end only: the Naturall law is thence deriued, but an effect of the eternall: as it were a streame from this fountaine. The Law humane or temporall is also thence drawne: in that it hath the forme of right reason: from which if it differ, it is then impositio iniqua, a wicked imposition: and only borroweth the name of a law. To this eternall law all things are subiected, aswell Angels and Men, as all other creatures, or things created; whether necessarie or contingent, naturall, or morall, and humane. For the law eternall runneth through all the vniuersall, and there∣fore it is the law also of things which are simple, naturall, and inanimate. Hence it is, that all things created are commanded to praise God their Creatour and Directour: as Praise him all yee his Angels: praise yee him Sunne and Moone, all Psalm. 148. bright Starres: heauens of heauens, for he hath established them for euer and euer. He hath made an which shall not passe: Praise yee the Lord from the earth yee Dragons and all depths: Fire, and haile, snow, and vapours, stormie winds, which his Word: mountaines, and bils: fruitfull trees and all Cedars: Beasts, and all Cattell, &c. Now as the reasonable Creatures are by this eternall law bound, by the glorie and proposed vnto them (beatitude being both the attractiue, and the end) so all other naturall things and creatures, haue in themselues, and in their owne natures, an o∣bedience formall to it, without any proper intention, knowne cause, or end propo∣sed. For beasts are led by sense, and naturall instinct: things without life by their created forme, or formall appetites, as that which is heauie to fall downeward: things light to mount vpward, &c. and fire to heate whatsoeuer is apposed. This kinde of working the Aristotelians ascribe to common nature: others to fate; a dif∣ference vsed in termes onely; it being no other then Gods generall prouidence: for as it is truly said of God, that he is omnia super omnia: so are all things which appeare in themselues thence deriued: there-vnder subiected: thence-from by his eternall law and prouidence directed, euen from the greatest to the least of his creatures, in heauen and in earth. The Schoolemen are very curious and ample in the consideration of these lawes: and in discourse of the profit, and of the matter, and obiect of the eternall law. But as the profit is manifest in the good of all creatures, who haue thence-from, either reason, sense, vegetation, or appetition, to conduct them: so is the obiect and mat∣ter of the law, the whole creature. For according to Saint AVGVSTINE, Lex ae∣terna . 1. de lib. arb. cap. 6. est, qua iustum est vt omnia sint or dinatissima; The law eternall is that, whereby it is iust, that all things should be disposed in the best and goodliest order. Lastly, it is disputed, whether the eternall law be immutable, yea or no? But the resolution is, that it changeth not; for which S t . Augustine vseth a sufficient argu∣ment in his first Booke of Free-will the sixth Chapter. For the law of Moses which had a time prefixed, was eternally by God ordained to last vntill the time of the Paedagogia of Gods people, or introduction to Christ should be expired; which time of expiration some thinke our Sauiour noted to be come, when on the Crosse he said, Consummatum est. But I rather thinke these words of our Sauiour to haue no Iohn 18. 30. Psal. . 22. other signification, then that now the prophecie of their giuing him Vineger to drinke was fulfilled. For so S. Iohn expounds it, when he saith v. 28. That Christ see∣ing all (other) things to be fulfilled, Vt consummaretur Scriptura, That the Scripture in this also might be fulfilled, said, I thirst: though I denie not, but at the same time also the date of the Law was expired, to wit, of the law ceremoniall, and of so much of the iudicial, as appertained peculiarly to the Iewes, and agreeth not with the law of the new Testament and Gospell of Christ. For the immutable law of God, though prescribing things mutable, is not therefore changed in it selfe; but the things pre∣scribed change according to this eternall ordinance, of which the Wisedome of SA∣LOMON, And being one she can doe all things, and remaining in her selfe reneweth all. §. VI. Of the Law of Nature. OF the law of Nature as it is taken in generall, I finde no definition a∣mong the Schoolemen: only as it is considered in man, it is called the Aug. in Epist. ad Hil. 89. & in . . tract. 49. impression of diuine light, and a participation of the eternall law in the rea∣sonable creature. Lex naturalis est impressio diuini luminis in nobis, & par∣ticipatio legis aeternae in rationali creatura. VLPIAN defines the natu∣rall Vlp. de Iustitia & Iure. l. 1. tit. 1 law to be the same which nature hath taught all liuing creatures; Ius naturale est quod Natura omnia animalia docuit: and he afterward addeth, Ius ictud non humani gene∣ris proprium, sed omnium animalium quae terra mari{que} nascuntur, commune est; The law of nature is not proper to man alone, but the same is common to all liuing crea∣tures, as well to birds, as to those which the Land and Sea produceth. But this definition is not generall, but of the naturall law in things of life. The law of nature in generall, I take to be that disposition, instinct, and formall qualitie, which God in his eternall prouidence hath giuen & imprinted in the na∣ture of euery creature, animate, and inanimate. And as it is diuinum lumen in men, inlightning our formal reason; so is it more then sense in beasts; and more then ve∣getation in plants. For it is not sense alone in beasts, which teacheth them at first sight, & without experience or instruction, to flie from the enemies of their liues: seeing that Bulls & Horses appeare vnto the sense more fearefull and terrible, then the least kinde of Dogs, and yet the Hare and Deere feedeth by the one, and flieth from the other, yea though by them neuer seene before, and that as soone as they fall from their Dammes. Neither is it sense which hath taught other Beasts to prouide for Winter, Birds to build their nests, high or low, according to the tem∣pestuous or quiet seasons: or the Birds of India to make their nests on the smallest twigs which hang ouer Riuers, & not on any other part of the tree, or else where: to saue their egs and yong ones from the Monkies, and other beasts, whose weight such a twig will not beare: and which would feare to fall into the water. The in∣stances in this kind are exceeding many which may bee giuen. Neither is it out of the vegetable or growing of plants, that some trees, as the female of the Palmitto, will not beare any fruit except the male grow in sight. But this they doe by that law, which the infinite and vnsearchable wisedome of God had in all eter∣nitie prouided for them, and for euery nature created. In man this law is double, corrupt, and incorrupt; corrupt, where the reason of man hath made it selfe sub∣iect, and a Vassal to passions, and affections brutall: and incorrupt, where time and custom hath bred in men a new nature, which also, as is aforesaid, is a kind of Law. For it was not by the law of Nature incorrupt, which S t . Augustine calleth the law Supra §. 4. ex loco ad Rom. 7. 23. of reason, but by a nature blinded and corrupted, that the Germans did anciently allow of theft: and that other Nations were by law constrained to become Idola∣ters; that by the lawes of Lycurgus it was permitted to men to vse one anothers wife, and to the woman to choose them others besides their husbands, to beget Theod. l. 9. de cu∣randis affect: . Acosta. them with child: which law in those parts hath lasted long, and is not forgotten to this day. The Scythians, and the people of both Indies, hold it lawfull to burie with them the best beloued wiues: as also they haue many other customes remem∣bred by G. Valentia, against nature and right reason. And I know not from what authoritie it is that these lawes some men auow to be naturall: except it be of this corrupt nature, as (among others) to pay guile with guile: to become faithlesse among the faithlesse: to prouide for our selues by ano∣ther mans destruction: that iniurie is not done to him that is willing: to destroy Nemo iure na∣turae cum alteri∣us locupletior debct. those whom we feare, and the like. For taking the definition of naturall lawes, ci∣ther out of S t . Augustine or Aquinas, (the one calling it the impression of diuine light; the other, the dictate or sentence of practique reason) the same can teach vs, or incline vs to no other thing, then to the exercise of Iustice & vprightnesse: and not to of∣fer or performe any thing toward others, saue that which we would be content should be offered or performed toward our selues. For such is the law of nature to the mind, as the eie is to the bodie; and that which according to Dauid sheweth vs Psalm. 4. good, that is, the obseruation of those things which lead vs therby to our last end; which is eternall life: though of themselues not sufficient without faith and grace. Now, that which is truly and properly the law of Nature, where the corruption is not taken for the law, is, as aforesaid, the impression of Gods diuine light in men, and a participation of the law increated and eternall. For without any law written the right reason and vnderstanding, which God hath giuen vs, are abilities within our selues, sufficient to giue vs knowledge of the good and euill, which by our gra∣titude to God, and distribution of right to men, or by the contrarie, wee prepare and purchase for our selues. For when the Gentiles (saith S. PAVL) which haue not the Rom. 2. ver. 14. Law, doe by nature those things contained in the law: they hauing not the law, are a law vnto themselues. Now, to loue God by whom we are, and to doe the same right to all men, which we desire should be done vnto vs, is an effect of the purest reason: in whose highest Turrets, the quiet of conscience hath made her resting place, and habitation. In arce altissima rationis quies habitat; Therefore, the Gentiles (saith S. PAVL) which shew the effects of the law written in their hearts, haue their consciences Rom. 2. ver. 15. for a witnesse of those effects: and the reprobate their thoughts to accuse them. And it is most true, that whosoeuer is not a law vnto himselfe (while he hopeth to abuse the world by the aduantage of hypocrisie) worketh nothing else, but the betraying of his owne soule, by craftie vnrighteousnesse, purchasing eternall per∣dition. For it helpeth vs not to hide our corrupt hearts from the worlds eie, seeing from him, who is an infinite eie, we cannot hide them: some Garlands wee may gather in this May-game of the world, Sed flos ille, dum loquimur, arescit; Those flowers wither while we discourse of their colours, or are in gathering them. That wee should therefore inhabit and dwell within our selues, and become fearefull wit∣nesses of our secretest euils, did that reuerend Philosopher Pythagor as teach in this golden precept: Nil turpe committ as, neque coram alijs, neque tecum, maximè omnium verere teipsum; Commit nothing foule or dishonest, saith he, neither to be knowne to o∣thers, nor to thine owne heart: but aboue all men reuerence thine owne conscience. And this may be a precept of nature and right reason: by which law, men, and all crea∣tures, and bodies, are inclined to those operations, which are answerable to their owne forme; as fire to giue heate. Now, as the reasonable minde is the forme of man, so is he aptly moued to those things which his proper forme presenteth vn∣to him: to , to that which right reason offereth; and the acts of right reason, are the acts of vertue: and in the breach of the rules of this reason, is man least excu∣sable: as being a reasonable creature. For all else, both sensitiue, growing, and in∣animate, obay the law which God imposed on them at their first creation. The Earth performeth her office, according to the Law of God in nature: for it bringeth forth the bud of the hearbe which seedeth seede, &c. and the Beast, Gen. 1. which liueth thereon. He gaue a Law to the Seas, and commanded them to keepe their bounds: which they obay. He made a decree for the raine, and a way for the Iob. c. 28. lightning of the thunders. He caused the Sunne to moue, and to giue light, and to serue for signes and for seasons. Were these as rebellious as man, for whose sake they were created, or did they once breake the law of their natures and formes, the whole world would then perish, and all returne to the first Chaos, darkenesse, and confusion. By this naturall Law, or Law of humane reason, did Caine perceiue his owne wickednesse, and offence, in the murther of Abel: for he not onely feared the dis∣pleasure of God, but the reuenge of Men: it being written in his reason, that whatsoeuer he performed towards others, the same by others might bee done vnto him againe. And that this iudgement of well and euill doing, was put into our natures by God, and his eternall law, before the law written: Moses in the person of God witnesseth, Gen. the fourth: If thou doe well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doe not well, sinne lyeth at thy dore. The Schoolemen are large also in this question of the naturall Law: the same being opened amply by Reinerius, Antoninus, and Valentia. But it is not my purpose to write a volume of this subiect. But this law which Thomas Aquinas calleth an act of reason taken properly, and not a habite, as it is an euident naturall iudgemēt of practique reason: they diuide into indemonstrable, or needing no demonstration (as that good is to be followed, and euill eschewed) and demonstrable, which is euidently proued, out of higher and more vniuersall propositions. Againe, as it answereth the naturall appetite, prescri∣bing things to be desired as good, or to be auoided as euill (as of the first, to desire to liue, and to satisfie hunger, &c. and of the second, to eschew paines, sorrow, and death) in this consideration they diuide it, according to the diuers kinds of appe∣tites that are in vs. For in euery man there are 3. sorts of appetites, which answere Tho. q. 94. art. 2. the three degrees of naturall Law. The first is, to be that which we are; in which is comprehended the desire, both to liue, and to preserue our being & life, also the desire of issue, with care to prouide for them: for the Father after his death liues in his children; and therefore the desire of life comprehends the desire of children. And to these appetites are referred the first indemō strable lawes of nature, for the most part. For it needs no proofe, that all creatures should desire to be, to liue, and to be defended, and to liue in their issue, when they cannot in themselues. And as man is a being, Ens or Res: so hee doth desire good, and shunne euill. For it is com∣mon to all things, to desire things agreeable to their owne natures, which is, to desire their owne good. And so is Good defined by Aristotle, to be that which all Ethic. l. 1. c. 1. desire. Which definition Basil vpon the 44. Psalme approueth: Rectè quidem Bonum definierunt, Quod omnia expetunt; Rightly haue some men defined Good, or Goodnesse, to be that which all things desire. The second kinde of appetite is of those things which appertaine to vs, as wee haue sense. Whence, by the law of Nature, wee desire the delights of euery sense; but with such moderation, as may neither glut vs with satietie, nor hurt vs with excesse. For as Sense it selfe is for the preseruation of life and being: so is it meete, euen by the law of nature, that the sensitiue appetite should not carrie vs to the destruction, either of our life or being. And although (seeing both these kinds of appetites are in beasts) we may well say, that Nature hath giuen diuers lawes vnto them: In which sense the Ciuilians define Naturallright, or Ius naturale, to bee the same which Nature hath taught all liuing creatures; Yet the Schoolemen admit not, that the instincts of beasts can be properly called a Law, but onely a , or Right, which is the matter, & aime of euery Law. For so they distinguish it; where Vlpian affirmeth, that Ius naturale is that, which Nature hath taught all liuing creatures. In this place (saith Valentia) Ius is not to be taken for a Law, but for the matter of the Law. And yet where Vlpian also distinguisheth the right belonging to liuing creatures in generall, from the right belonging to men; calling the one Ius naturae, the other Ius gentium: the Diuines vnderstand the law of nature more largely, that is, for all euident dictates, precepts, or biddings of diuine reason: both in beasts and men; and restraine the law of Nations to a kinde of humane right. The third appetite is of those things which appertaine properly to man, as he is a liuing creature reasonable: as well with relation to God, and to our Neigh∣bour, as for our selues: and the lawes of this appetite are the Commandements of our religion. Now although there are many other branches and diuisions of this law of na∣ture answering the diuision of matter, which it prescribeth, and as manifold, as the morall actions are which it commandeth or forbiddeth: yet is the law of nature but one law, according to Aquinas: first, because it hath one fountaine or roote in the naturall or motiue facultie, which is but one, stirring vp to good, and declining the contrarie: secondly, because all is contained in that generall naturall precept, That good is to be followed, and ill auoided: and thirdly, because all the parts are reduced to one and the same last end. That this law of nature bindeth all creatures, it is manifest: and chiefly man; because he is indued with reason; in whom as reason groweth, so this band of obseruing the law of nature increaseth, Postquam ratio ad perfectum venit, tunc fit Basil. quod scriptum est, mandato, peccatum reuixit; When reason grew to perfection, then it came to passe, which was written by S. PAVL, When the Commandement came, sinne reuiued. Neither is it a small warrant for this law of nature, when those which breake the same, are said by S. PAVL, To be deliuered ouer into a reprobate sense (or Rom. 1. 28. minde) to doe those things which are not conuenient: and againe, that their consciences Rom. 2. 15. beare witnesse, and their thoughts accuse them. For, though this law of nature stretch not to euery particular: as to command fasting and the like: yet, it commandeth in generall all good, and whatsoeuer is agreeable to right reason. And therefore, said DAMASCENE; homines facti sunt mali, declinando in id quod contra naturam est; Men (saith he) are made euill, by declining vnto that which is contrarie to nature: and L. 2. Fid. . c. 30. S. AVGVSTINE, Omne vitium naturae nocet, ac per hoc contra naturam est; Euery vice doth wrong to nature, and is therefore contrarie vnto it. Neither yet are the rules of this law of nature so streight, but that they suffer ex∣ceptions in some particulars. For whereas by this law all men are borne Lords of the earth, yet it well alloweth inequalitie of portions, according to vnequal merit: by taking from the euill, and giuing to the good: and by permitting and comman∣ding that all men shall enioy the fruits of their labours to themselues: according to the rules of justice and equitie. And though the law of nature command, that all things bee restored which are left in trust, yet in some causes this her law she suffereth to be broken: as to denie a mad man his weapons, and the like, which he left in keeping while hee was sober. But the vniuersall principles can no more be changed, than the decrees of God are alterable: who according to S t . PAVL, abideth faithfull, and cannot denie himselfe. 2. Tim. 2. §. VII. Of the written Law of God. AFter the eternall, and naturall, the law Positiue or imposed is the next in order, which law, being nothing but an addition, or rather explica∣tion of the former, hath two kinds: Diuine, and Humane. Againe, the diuine positiue law is double; the old and new: The old was gi∣uen vnto Moses in Mount Sinai or Horeb, at such time as the world had stood 2513. whole yeeres: and in the 67. day of this yeere when as Ascatades or Ascades gouerned the Assyrians, Marathus the Sycionians, Triopus the Argiues, Ce∣crops Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 1. Attica, and Acherres Aegypt: to wit, after the promise to A raham 430. yeeres. And this, it seemes, was the first written law which the world receiued. For the very word Nomos, signifying a law, was not then, nor long after inuented by the Graecians: no not in Homers time: who liued after the fall of Troy 80. yeeres at least: and Troy it selfe was cast downe 335. yeeres, after Moses led Israel out of Aegypt. This law, it pleased God to ingraue in stone, that it might remaine a lasting booke of his exprest will in the Church; and that the Priests and people might haue, whereof to meditate, till the comming of Christ: and that so these children of Israel, though bred among an Idolatrous people in Aegypt, might be without ex∣cuse: the slight defences of ignorance being taken from them. The reason knowne to vs why this law was not written before, is, that when the people were few, and their liues long, the Elders of families might easily with∣out any written law instruct their owne children: and yet as they increased, so doubtlesse they had, besides the law of Nature, many precepts from God, before the law written. But now at length, forasmuch as the law of nature did not define all kinds of good, and euil; nor condemne euery sinne in particular: nor sufficiently terrifie the consciences of offenders: nor so expound diuine worship, as for those after-ages was required, who gaue euery day lesse authoritie than other to the na∣turall law; In these respects it was necessarie, that the law should be written, and set before the eies of all men: which before, they might, but would not reade, in their owne consciences. The Schoolemen, and the Fathers before them, inlarge the causes and necessitie, why the law was written, whereof these are the chiefest. The first, for restraining of sinne, directly grounded vpon this place of DAVID, The law of the Lord is vndefiled, conuerting soules: The testimonies of the Lord are faith∣full giuing wisedome to children. For the humane law, saith S t . Augustine, meeteth not with all offences, either by way of prohibition or punishment; seeing there∣by it might take away something seeming necessarie, and hinder common profit: but the diuine law written, forbiddeth euery euill, and therefore by Dauid it is called vndefiled. Secondly, it for the direction of our minds. For the lawes of men can onely take knowledge of outward actions, but not of internall motions, or of our disposition and wil: and yet it is required, that we be no lesse cleane in the one, than in the other. And therefore were the words conuerting our soules, added by Dauid: wherein are all our outward acts first generated, according to the Cabalists. Actiones hominum nullae essent, nisi prius in mente dicerentur; The actions of men (say they) would be none at all, were they not first conceiued in the minde. Thirdly, it leadeth vs to the knowledge of truth, which by reason of diuersitic of opinion, and difference of peculiar lawes among sundrie Nations, we cannot bee assured of; but the law of God bindeth all men, and is without errour: and there∣fore also said DAVID, That the testimonie of the law of God is faithfull: giuing wisedome to children. §. VIII. Of the vnwritten law of God, giuen to the Patriarks by Tradition. NOw, that in all this long tract of time, betweene the creation and the written law, the world and people of God were left altogether to the law of reason and nature, it doth not appeare. For the Patriarks of the first age receiued many precepts from God himselfe, and whatsoeuer was first imposed by Adam, the same was obserued by Seth, who in∣structed Enos: from whom it descended to Noah, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, and Moses. Yea many particular Commandements afterward written, were for∣merly imposed and deliuered ouer by Tradition, which kinde of teaching the Iewes afterward called Cabala, or Receptio: precepts receiued from the of their Priests and Elders: to which the Iewes after the law written; added the interpretation of se∣cret mysteries, reserued in the bosomes of their Priests, and vnlawfull to be vttered to the people. But the true Cabala was not to be concealed from any; as being in∣deede the diuine law reuealed to the Patriarks, and from them deliuered to the po∣steritie, when as yet it was vnwritten. The Commandements which God gaue vn∣to Adam in the beginning, were, that he should impose names to all beasts, accor∣ding to their natures; to whose perfection of vnderstanding they were sufficiently knowne. For finding the reason of his owne name Adam of Adamah, Earth, or red clay, hee gaue other names significant, not only to beasts, but to his Children and Nephewes, which afterward his issues imitated; as the name of Seth signifieth, as some take it, one that was laid for the ground or foundation of the Church, or rather, one giuen in recompence for Abel that was slaine: and Enosh signifieth man or miserable, &c. Further, God commanded Adam to till the ground, and to liue by the labour thereof: God also gaue him the choise of all fruits, but the for∣bidden, and in Adam also was marriage first instituted: all men thence-after being commanded to cohabite with their Wiues, rather than with their Father and Mother. That murther and crueltie was also forbidden, both before the law written, and before the floud it selfe, it is manifest. God himselfe making it appeare, that it was one of the greatest causes of the destruction of mankinde by the generall floud. For God said vnto NOA, An end of all flesh is come before mee: for the earth is filled with crueltie through them: and behold, I will destroy them The common reading is cum terra: but God did notdestroy the earth; and why may not this praepositi∣on in this place haue the same force, which it hath according to Iunius, Gen. 4. 1. Item. 44. 4. and Deut. 34. 1. especially, see∣ing these words are but a repe∣tition of that which is saide, v. 7. ho∣minem de super∣ficie terrae. from the earth. That offence therefore, for which all perished, could not be vnknowne to all that perished: Gods mercie and iustice interposing betweene the vntaught, and reuenge. This com∣mandement God repeated to Noi, after the waters were dried vp from the earth. Whoso sheddeth mans bloud, by man shall his bloud be shed: for in the Image of God hath he made man. Gen. 9. v. 6. Also the law of honouring and reuerencing our parents, was obserued among the faithful, and the contrary punished by the fathers curse: as, Cursed be Canaan, a seruant Gen. 9. 25. of seruants shall he be vnto his brethren. Againe, we finde that the vnnaturall sinne of the Sodomites was punished in the highest degree; as with fire from Heauen. The sinne of Adulterie and Rauishment, was before the law no lesse detested than the rest, as appeareth by that reuenge, taken for Dina's forcing: and by the Gen. 34. 25. iudgement which Iuda gaue against Tamar, That she should be burnt: and by the Gen. 38. 24. repentance of Pharaoh and Abimelech, against whom this sentence was pronounced, Thou art but dead, because of the Woman which thou hast taken: for she is a mans Wife: To these we may adde the ordinance of Sacrifice, of distinction of cleane and vn∣cleane beasts; of , of the Brother to raise vp seed to his brother that left a Widow childlesse, and diuers other constitutions, partly Morall, and partly Ceremoniall, which being deliuered before the written law, were after by it confir∣med. So that this Diuine Law imposed, of which the Law of Moses containeth that which is called The old Testament, may be said, not only to haue been written in the hearts of men, before it was ingrauen in stone, but also in substance to haue beene giuen in precept to the Patriarks. For as S. Paul witnesseth of himselfe, I knew not sinne, but by the Law: so euer the Law naturally preceded, and went before offen∣ces, though written after offences committed. It is true, that all the creatures of God were directed by some kind of vnwritten law; the Angels intuitiuely; Men by Reason; Beasts by sense and instinct, without discourse; plants by their vegetatiue powers; and things inanimate by their neces∣sary motions, without sense or preception. §. IX. Of the Morall, Iudiciall, and Ceremoniall Law, with a note prefixed, How the Scripture speaketh not alway in one sense, when it nameth the Law of MOSES. NOw as the word ( Law) in generall, as is afore said, hath diuers signifi∣cations, and is taken for all doctrine which doth prescribe and re∣straine: so this Law, called the Law of Moses in particular, is taken by S. Paul diuersly; as sometime for all the old Testament, as, Now wee Rom. 3. v. 19. know whatsoeuer the Law saith, it saith to them which are vnder the Law. When it is opposed, or differenced from the Prophets and Psalmes, it is there ta∣ken for the fiue Bookes of Moses. For so Saint Luke hath distinguished them; as, All must be fulfilled which are written of mee in the Law, in the Prophets, and in the Luc. 24. 44. Psalmes. When it is opposed to the Gospell, then it is taken for the Law Morall, Ceremo∣niall, and Iudiciall; as, Therefore we conclude, that a man is iustified by faith without the Rom. 3. 28. workes of the Law. When it is opposed to Grace, it signifieth the declaration of Gods wrath, and our guilt of condemnation; or the extremity of the law, and summum ius: as, For ye are Rom. 6. 4. Gal. 3. 18. not vnder the Law, but vnder grace. When it is opposed to the Truth, namely, where the Ceremonies or signes are taken for the things signified; as the Sacrifice for Christ, and the like: then it signi∣fieth but shadowes and figures; as, The Law was giuen by MOSES, but grace and truth Iohn 1. 17. came by IESVS CHRIST. Lastly, when it is opposed to the time of Christs comming, it signifieth the whole policie of the Iewes Common-weale; as, Before faith came, wee were kept vnder the Gal. 3. 23. Law, &c. or the Law of the order and institution of the Aaronicall Priesthood; as, Luc. 16. 6. All the Prophets and the Law, or the Priests, prophecied vnto IOHN. And if the Heb. 7. 12. & 10. 1. Priesthood bee changed, the Law also, to wit, of the Priesthood, must needes bee changed. The word ( Law) is sometime also taken by the Figure Metonymia, for Interest, Authority, and Empire, or for constraining force; as The Law of the Spirit of life, Rom. 8. 2. the law or the force of sinne and death, the enforcements of concupiscence, &c. Rom. 7. 23. But the Written Law of MOSES, or the Law of the Old Testament, of which we now speake, is thus defined. The Law is a doctrine, which was first put into the of men by God, and afterwards written by Moses, or by him repeated, commanding Holinesse and Iustice, promising eternall life conditionally, that is, to the obseruers of the law, and threatning death to those which breake the law in the least. For according to Saint Iames, Whosoeuer shall keepe the whole, and faileth in Iames 2. 10. one point, is guilty of all. The definition vsed by the Schoolemen, in which both the Old and New law are comprehended, is thus giuen. Lex diuina est diuinam decre∣tum, hominibus praescribens modum necessarium vt aptè peruenire possint ad supernatura∣lem beatitudinem, quae est vltimus humanae vitae finis; The diuine law (say they) is the decree of God, prescribing vnto men a necessary meane, where by they may aptly attaine su∣pernaturall beatitude, which is the last end of mans life. The law of Moses hath three parts: Morall, Ceremoniall, and Iudiciall. The Morall part commandeth this or that good to be done, and this or that euill to be auoided, in particular; as also it declareth, for whose sake it is to be done; as Doe this, for I am the Lord, whereas the law of nature commands it but in generall. Againe, the Morall law entreateth of vertue and goodnesse; The Ceremoniall of diuine seruice, and of holines; (for external worship, and the order of hallowing our selues vnto God is called Ceremony) and the Iudiciall teacheth the particular gouern∣ment, fit for the Common-wealth of the Iewes, and prescribeth orders for iustice and equity. And therefore was it said of Saint Paul, The commandement is iust, ho∣ly Rom. 7. 17. and good: iust, or iustice being referred to the Iudiciall: holy, or holinesse to the Ceremoniall; good, or honest to the Morall. The Iudiciall part is touching the go∣uernment of the commonwealth of the Iewes, in which many things must needs be proper to that estate, as such as were instituted either in respect of place or persons. The Ceremoniall is diuided into foure parts, according to the foure kindes of things of which it speaketh, to wit, Sacrifice, Holy things, Sacraments, and Ob∣seruances. To Sacrifices belong beasts, and the fruits of the earth; to Holy things the Tabernacle, Temple, Vessels, Altars, and the like; to Sacraments, Circumcisi∣on, the Passeouer, & such like. For the Obseruances, they consisted either in prohi∣bition of certaine meats, as not to the bloud and fat of beasts: or in some other outward things, as in washings, purifyings, anointings, and attire, as not to weare mixt garments of Linnen and Woollen; as also it prohibiteth other vnnatural and vnproper commixtions, as Thou shalt not yoke together in a plough an Oxe and an Asse, or cast mingled seed in one field. It also exhorteth naturall compassion, and forbid∣deth cruelty euen to beasts, birds, and plants, whereby the creatures of God might be destroyed without any profit to man. For so some referre these precepts, Thou shalt not kill the bird sitting on her nest; nor beate downe the first buddes of the tree, nor muzzell the labouring Oxe, and the like, to the Ceremoniall Law. Neither is there any of these three parts of the Law of Moses, but it hath as yet in some respects, the same power which it had before thocomming of Christ. For the Morall liueth still, and is not abrogated or taken away: sauing in the ability of iustifying or condemning; for therein are wee commanded to loue and worshp God: and to vse charitie one towards another: which for euer shall be required at our hands. Therein also are we in particular directed, how this ought to be done: which power of directing by speciall rules and precepts of life, it retaineth still. For these things also are commanded in both Testaments to be obserued: though prin∣cipally for the feare of God in the one, and for the loue of God in the other. The Ceremoniall also liueth in the things which it fore-signified. For the sha∣dow is not destroyed, but perfected, when the body it selfe is represented to vs. Be∣sides, it still liueth, in that it giueth both instruction and testimony of Christ, and in that it giueth direction to the Church, for some Ceremonies and Types of holy signification, which are still expedient; though in a farre fewer number than before Christs comming and in a farre lesse degree of necessity. Lastly, the Iudiciall liueth in substance, and concerning the end, and the naturall and vniuersall equity thereof. But the Morall faileth in the point of iustification, the Ceremoniall as touching the vse and externall obseruation (because Christ himselfe is come, of whom the ce∣remonies were signes and shadowes) and the Iudiciall is taken away, as farre forth as it was peculiar to the Iewes Common-weale, and policie. §. X. A proposall of nine other points to be considered, with a touch of the fiue first. AS for that which remaineth in the generall consideration of the diuine written Lawe, it may in effect bee reduced into these nine points. 1. The dignitie and worth of the law. 2. The Maiestie of the law-giuer. 3. The propertie and peculiaritie of the people receiuing it. 4. The conueniencie of the time in which it was giuen. 5. The efficacie and power thereof. 6. The difference and agreement of the old and new Testament. 7. The end and vse of the Law. 8. The sense and vnderstanding of the Law. 9. The durance and continuance thereof. 1. The dignitie of the Law is sufficiently prooued by S. Paul, in these wordes: Wherefore the Lawe is holy, and the Commandement is holy, and iust, and good: which three attributes are referred, as aforesaid, to the Morall, Ceremoniall, and Iudi∣ciall. 2. The Maiestie of the Law-giuer is approued in all his creatures: who as he hath giuen all things their liues, and beings, so he onely gaue the law, who could onely giue the end and reward promised, to wit, the saluation of mankinde: but he gaue it not to Moses immediatly, but by the ministery of Angels: as it is said. And the Law was ordained by Angels, in the hand of a Mediatour: and in the Acts, Hee gaue Gal. 3. v. 19. the Law by the ordinance of Angels. 3. The proprietie and peculiarity of the people, receiuing this Law, is in three respects. First, in that they were prepared: Secondly, in that they were a Nation apart and disseuered: Thirdly, in that they were the children of the promise made to Abraham. Prepared they were, because they had the knowledge of one God, when all other Nations were Idolaters. A Nation apart and seuered they were, be∣cause of Gods choice and election. Children of the promise they were, for the pro∣mise was made by God vnto Abraham, and his seed: not vnto his seedes, as to and Iacob, but to his seede, as to Iacob, or Israel singularly, of whom Christ. Now to Gal. 3. v. 6. ABRAHAM and his seede were the promises made: he saith not to the seeds, as speaking of many, but to thy seede, as of one, which is Christ. 4. The conueniencie of the time, in which it was giuen, is noted by S. Augu∣stine: that it was about the middle time, betweene the Law of Nature, and Grace: the law of Nature continued from Adam to Moses: the law written in the Com∣mandements receiued by Moses in the worlds yeere 2514. continued to the Bap∣tisme of Iohn: from which time begun the Law of Grace, which shall continue to the worlds end. Other reasons for the conueniencie are formerly giuen. 5. The fifth consideration is of the efficacie of this law, the same being a dispo∣sition to, or signe of our iustification: but not by it selfe sufficient, but as a figure of Christ in ceremonies, and a preparation to righteousnesse in morall precepts. For through the passion of Christ were sinnes forgiuen, who taketh away the sinnes of the world: and therefore S. Paul calleth the rudiments of the law beggerly and weake, Gal. 4. beggerly as containing no grace, weake as not able to forgiue and iustifie. The bloud Heb. 9. of Goates and Bulles, and the of an Heifer could only cleanse the body; but they were figures of Christs bloud, which doth cleanse the inward soule. For if the Gal. . law could iustifie, then Christ died in vaine. §. XI. Of the sixth poynt, to wit, of the difference and agreement of the Old and New Testament. THe Old and New Testament differ in name, and in the meane and way proposed for attaining to saluation; as the Old by workes, the New by grace: but in the thing it selfe, or obiect and remote end, they agree: which is mans happinesse and saluation. The Old Testament, or Law, or Letter, or the Witnesse of Gods will, was called the Old, because it preceded the New Testament; which is an expli∣cation of the Old: from which the New taketh witnesse. Yet the new of more ex∣cellencie, in that it doth more liuely expresse, and openly and directly the wayes of our redemption. It is also called the Old, to shew that in part it was to bee abrogated: In that he the New Testament, he hath abrogated the Old. For the old Heb. c. 8. v. 13. law, though greatly extolled by the Prophets, and deliuered with wonderfull mira∣cles, yet was it constituted in a policie perishable: but the New was giuen in a pro∣mise of an euerlasting Kingdome, and therefore called in the Apocalyps, a Testament and Gospel for euer during. The Old Testament is called the Law, because the first and chiefe part is the Law of Moses, of which the Prophets and Psalmes are Commentaries, explicating that Law. The New Testament is called the Gospel, because the first and chiefe part there∣of is the glad tidings of our Redemption: the other Bookes, as the Epistles, or Let∣ters of the Apostles, and the Acts or Story of the Apostles, are plentifull interpreters thereof: The word Euangelion signifying a ioyfull, happie and prosperous message, or (as Homer vsed it) the reward giuen to the Messenger, bringing ioyfull newes. It is also sometime taken for a sacrifice, offered after victory, or other pleasing successe, as by Xenophon. In the Scriptures it hath three significations; First, for glad tidings in generall, as in Esay the 52. v. 7. concerning peace: Secondly, by an excellencie it is restrained, to signifie that most ioyfull message of saluation, as in . 2. 10. whence also by figure it is taken for the History of Christ: and so wee vnderstand the foure Act. . Gospels. Lastly, for the preaching and diuulging the doctrine of Christ, as Cor. 1. 9. v. 14. and Cor. 2. 8. v. 18. The agreement of both Testaments (taken, I thinke, as they are diuided in vo∣lumes) is by Danaeus comprised in these foure. In their Author. In the substance of the Couenant, or things promised. In the foundation, to wit, Christ. In the effects, that is, in righteousnesse and iustification. In the Author they agree, because both are of God, and therefore both one Te∣stament and will of God in substance of doctrine. For as there was euer one Church, so was there one Couenant, one Adoption, and one Doctrine. As the old Law doth point at Christ, so doth the new Law teach Christ: the old proposing him as to come, the new as already come; one and the same thing being promised in both; both tending to one, and the same end: euen the saluation of our soules: which according to S. Peter is the end of our faith. For although it bee said, that Moses did promise by obseruing the law an earthly Kingdome, a land flowing with milke and honie, the propagation of children, and other worldly blessings: yet all these were but figures to teach, and pledges to assure the Fathers of those spirituall blessings by Christ; for by the earthly hee raised their mindes to the hope of heauenly. And the Fathers notwithstanding these worldly goods, did yet acknowledge themselues strangers, and pilgrims, expecting the heauenly Hierusalem: according to this place of the He∣brewes: All these died in faith, and receiued not the promises, but saw them a farre off, and C. 11. v. 13. them: confessing that they were strangers and pilgrimes on the earth. To which purpose also Saint AVGVSTINE: Omnino veterem legem intelligunt, non at∣tendentes Lib. de Ciuit. Dei 18. 6. 15. per promissa terrena aeterna promitti: Few (saith hee) doe vnderstand the olde law: not attending that by things earthly eternall are promised. And S. HIEROME: No∣luit In Sophon. c. 3. v. 9. pascere more corporalibus donis opibusque, vt somniant: God would not feede the Iewes as beasts with corporall gifts and riches, as themselues dreame. And this may be gathered out of Gods owne words, Ego sum Deus tuus, & erovobis in Deum; I am thy God, and I will be your God. For the words, I will be your God, prooue that it was not for the present, or for perishable things, that God gaue them this promise; but in respect of the future: to wit, the safetie of their soules. For as God created both body and soule, so hath he of his goodnesse, not left the better part vn∣cared for, which liueth euer. The agreement betweene the Old and New Testament in substance, inferres al∣so the agreement in foundation. For Christ is called the foundation of the law, laid both by the Apostles and Prophets: in whom all the promises of God in the Old and New, are assured: the fathers hauing eaten the same spirituall foode, which wee eate in our Sacraments. The agreement in effects is, in that the knowledge of our sinne and miserie, which is taught vs by the law, maketh way, and as it were, serueth in subordination to the Gospel, the proper effects whereof are mercie and saluation: to which the Law ser∣uing as an introduction (for to those which acknowledge their sinne and miserie, God sheweth his mercie and saluation) may be said to agree with the Gospel in the effect. For otherwise if we seuer the law from subordination to the Gospel, the ef∣fects are very different: the one sheweth the way of righteousnesse by workes, the other by faith; the Law woundeth, the Gospel healeth: the Law terrifieth, the Gospel allureth; Moses accuseth, Christ defendeth: Moses condemneth, Christ pardoneth. The Old restraineth the hand, the New the minde. Data est lex quae non sanaret (saith S. AVGVSTINE) sed probaret; The Law was giuen, not to helpe but to discouer sicknesse: and S. CHRYSOSTOME, Data est lex, vt se homo inueni∣ret, Homil. ad Rem. non vt moribus sanaretur, sed vt medicus ; The law was giuen that man might finde and know his owne imperfection: not that his disease was thereby holpen: but that he might then seeke out the Phisician. For Christ came to saue the world, which the law had condemned. And as Moses was but a seruant, and Christ a Sonne, so the greatest benefit was reserued to bee brought, as by the worthiest person, sayth Cyril: Heb. 7. for this law made nothing perfect, but was an introduction of a better hope. §. XII. Of the rest of the points proposed. THe seuenth consideration is of the end, and vse of the law: which is to bring vs to Christ: for finding no righteousnesse in our owne workes, we must seeke it in some other. But this is the last, and remote, and vtmost end: the next and proper end of the law, is to prescribe righteousnesse, and to exact and perfect obedience to God. Cursed is he which Leuit. . . continueth not in all the things of this law. The second end of the law, is to render vs inexcusable before God: who know∣ing so perfect a law, doe not keepe it: the law requiring a perfect and intire, not a broken or halfe obedience: but both inward and outward righteousnesse, and per∣formance of dutie to God and Men. The third and chiefe end of the law is, as hath beene said, to send vs to Christ, and his grace, being in our selues condemned and lost. For the law was deliuered with thunder, and with a most violent and fearefull tempest, threatning eternall death. The fourth end of the law was to designe, and preserue, the place of the Church and true people of God: and to hold them in one Discipline, and awe, till the com∣ming of Christ: after whom the Church was to be dispersed ouer the whole world. These be the ends of the Morall law. The end and vse of the Ceremoniall law, is to confirme the truth of Christ, and the new Testament. The vse of the Iudiciall, to teach vs naturall equitie, and right, whereto we must conforme our selues. The sense and vnderstanding of the law is double, literall and spirituall: by the literall we are taught the worship and seruice of God: by the spirituall, the figures and mysticall fore-speakings of Christ. Lastly, for the durance or continuance of the law, the same had being vntill the Gen. 49. 10. passion of Christ: before which time, and while Christ taught in the world, both the The Scepter shall not de∣part from Iu∣da, not a Law∣giuer from be∣tween his feet, vntill come. old and the new were in force. But after that the true sacrifice was offered vpon the Altar of the Crosse, then the Iewish sacrifices and , which were Types and figures of Christ ( Christ being the body of those shaddowes) ceased to binde the con∣sciences any longer: the mysterie of our redemption being now by Christ and in him finished. In token whereof the vaile of the Temple rent asunder; noting that the ceremoniall vailes and shaddowes were now to be remoued, not that the morall law of the Commandements was hereby abolished, or weakened at all: otherwise then that it had not power to condemne according to the Iewish doctrine, as aforesaid. For the obseruing of the law was by Christ himselfe seuerely commanded: our loue to∣wards God being thereby to be witnessed. And herein Dauid so much reioyced, as he preferred the obseruation of the law, before all that the world could . In via tuorum delectatus sum, in omnibus diuitijs; I haue beene delighted in thy law as in all manner of riches: And againe. The law of thy is good for me aboue thousands of gold and siluer. This is the loue of God (saith S. IOHN) that wee keepe his 1. 5. Commandement. And that there is no excuse for the neglect of the things comman∣ded in the law, God himselfe in Deuteronomie witnesseth. This Commandement Deut. 30. 11. 12. 13. & 14. (saith hee) which I command thee this day, is not hidde from thee, neither is it off. It is Rom. c. 10. v. 6. 7. 8. not in heauen that thou shouldest say, Who shall goe vp for vs to heauen, and bring it vs, and cause vs to heare it that we may doe it? neither is it beyond the Sea, that shouldest say, who shall goe ouer the Sea for vs, and bring it vs? &c. but the word is very vnto thee, euen in thy mouth and in thy heart for to doe it. Behold (saith MOSES) I haue set before thee this day, life and death, good and euill, in that I command thee this day to loue the Lord thy God, to walke in his , and to keepe his Commandements, and his Ordinances, and his Lawes, that thou maiest liue, &c. Neither is it said in vaine in S. MATTHEVV. Si Cap. 9. v. 17. vis ad vitam ingredi, serua mandata; If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the Commandements: and in S. IOHN: Scio quia vita est; I know that his Commande∣ment C. . v. 50. is life . And if this be the charitie of God, or of Men towards God, as S. Iohn hath taught, to wit, that we keepe his Commandements: certainely he is but a lyar, that professeth to loue God, and neglecteth to obserue the word of his will, with all his power. And though I confesse it is not in mans abilitie, without the speciall grace of God, to fulfill the law ( Christ onely as man excepted) yet if wee rightly consider the mercifull care which God had of his people in those his Com∣mandements, we shall finde in our selues, how we borrow libertie, and rather let slip our affections, and voluntarily loosen them from the chaines of obedience, to which the word of God and diuine reason hath fastened them, than that we are ex∣cusable by those difficulties and impossibilities, which our minde (greedie of li∣bertie) proposeth to it selfe. For this is the loue of God, that wee keepe his Commande∣ments, and his Commandements are not grieuous, 1. IOHN 3. verse 12. and if wee examine precept apart, and then weigh them each after other, in the bal∣lance of our consciences; it is not hard for any man to iudge, by what easie perswa∣sions, wee steale away from our owne power, as vnwilling to vse it against our plea∣sing desires. §. XIII. Of the seuerall Commandements of the Decalogue: and that the difficultie is not in respect of the Commandements, but by our default. FOr by the first wee are commanded to acknowledge, serue, and loue one God. Now, whereby are we inticed to the breach of this precept? seeing euery reasonable man may conceiue and know, that infinite power cannot be diuided into many infinites: and that it is of necessi∣tie, that by this almightie Vnitie, all things haue beene caused, and are continued. And if brute beasts had this knowledge of their Creatour, and how in Psal. 147. . 9. his prouidence he hath also prouided for euery of them, which giueth to beasts their foode, &c. there is no doubt but that they would also serue and loue him only. The second precept is the forbidding of Idolatrie, and worship of Images: the making whereof, out of doubt, was not the inuention of an ill intent in the begin∣ning, Glossa in verb. Calum. seeing this is generally true. Omnia mala exempla bonis initijs orta sunt; All ill examples did spring and arise from good beginnings. For their first erection was to keepe the memorie of men famous for their vertue: vntill (saith Lactantius) the Deuill crept into them, and (hauing blotted out the first intent) working in weake and ignorant soules, changed the nature of the one, and the reason of the other, to serue himselfe thereby. For what reasonable man, if he be not forsaken God, will call on those , deafe, dumbe, and dead stocks, more worthlesse then the most worthlesse of those, that hauing life and reason, implore their helpe, which haue neither: yea, of more vilde prize and baser, then the basest of beasts, who haue sense and estimation? for what doe wee thereby (saith the Wisedome of SALOMON) but call to the weake for helpe, pray to the dead for life, require aide of him that hath no ex∣perience, Wisd. 13. 19. assistance in our iournies of him that cannot goe, and successe in our affaires of him that hath no power? And whether the Idolater, or the blocke, to which hee prayeth, be more senselesse: Dauid maketh a doubt. For (saith he) they that make them are Psal. 35. 18. like vnto them, and so are all the rest that trust in them. The breach of the third Commandement is neither perswaded by worldly plea∣sure, nor worldly profit: the two greatest inchanters of mortall men. No, wee are no way allured to this horrible disdaine of God, vnlesse the hate of good men, and Gods curse, bee accounted an aduantage. For as our corruptest nature giues vs no∣thing towards it, so can it satisfie no one appetite, except sorrow, and Hell dwell in our desire. And therefore this strange custome hath the Deuill brought vp among men, without all subtletie of argument, or cunning perswasion, taking thereby the greatest and most scornefull aduantage ouer vs. For slaughter sa∣tisfieth hatred, Theft giues satisfaction to neede, Adulterie to lust, Oppression to : but this contemptuous offence of blasphemie, and the abuse of Gods name, as it no helpe to any of our worldly affections, so the most saluage Nations of the world doe not vse it. The fourth Commandement, to keepe the Sabbath day holy, hath neither paine, burthen, nor inconuenience. For it giueth rest to the labourer, and consolation to their Masters. And that this law was imposed on man for his benefit, Moses teacheth in the reason of the law: as in Exod. 23. 12. And in the seuenth day thou shalt rest, that thine Oxe and thine Asse may rest, and the of thy maide, and the stranger may be refreshed. The first of the second Table to honour our Parents, with whom we are one and the same, is a gratitude which nature it selfe hath taught vs towards them, who af∣ter God gaue vs life and being, haue begotten vs, and borne vs, cherished vs in our weake and helpelesse infancie, and bestowed on vs the haruest and profit of their la∣bours and cares. Therefore, in the Temporall and Iudiciall ordinances, cursing of parents, or the offering them violence, was made death. The next is, that thou shalt not Murther, that is, thou shalt not doe the acts fol∣lowing the affections of hatred. For the law of God, and after it our owne lawes, and in effect the law of all Nations, haue made difference between slaughter casu∣all, and furious. Affectio enim tua (saith BRACTON) imponit nomen operituo; It is the affection and will that makes the worke such as it is. And certainely whosoeuer cannot forbeare to commit murther, hath neither the grace of God, nor any vse of his owne will. The third of the second Table, commands vs from adulterie. Now, if the pre∣seruation , of Virginitie haue been possible, for thousands of Men and Women, who in all ages haue mastered their fleshly desires, and haue returned chast to the graue: It cannot be accounted a burthen, to forbeare the dishonour and iniurie, which we offer to others by such a violation, seeing marriage is permitted by the lawes of God, and Men, to all that affect it. And there is no man liuing whom the desire of beau∣tie and forme hath so constrained, but he might with forbeare the prosequuti∣on of this ill: did not himselfe giue sucke to this Infant, and nourish warmth till it grow to strong heate, heate till it turne to fire, and fire to flame. The fourth of the second Table, is, that we shall not . And if that kind of violent robberie had been vsed in Moses time, which many Ruffians practise now∣a-daies in England, and to the dishonour of our Nation more in England, than in any Region of the world among Christians, out of doubt, he would haue censured them by death, and not by restitution, though quadruple. For I speake not of the poore and miserable soules, whom hunger and extreme necessitie inforceth, but of those detested Theeues, who to maintaine themselues Lord-like, assault, robbe, and wound the Merchant, Artificer, and Labouring man, or breake by violence into o∣ther mens houses, and spend in Brauerie, Drunkennesse, and vpon Harlots, in one day, what other men sometime haue laboured for all their liues: whole families: and taking the bread and food from the mouthes of their children. And that this Commandement might easily be obserued; it would soone appeare, if Princes would resolue, but for a few to pardon none. For it is the hope of life, and the argument of sparing the first offence, that incourageth these Hell∣hounds. And if euery man may presume to be pardoned once, there is no state or Common-wealth, but these men would in a short time impouerish or destroy it. The fifth Commandement of this second Table, is, the prohibition of false wit∣nesse: from which if men could not forbeare, all surety of and life were taken away. And so much did God detest a false witnesse, and a false accuser, especially in matters criminall, that the law ordained him to suffer the same death or punish∣ment, which he sought by falsehood to lay on his brother. The last of the ten Commandements forbiddeth vs to couet any , which belongeth to another man, either the bodies of their wiues for concupiscence, or their goods for desire of gain. And this precept seemeth the hardest for men to ob∣serue; so esteemed by reason of our fraile affections: and yet if wee iudge hereof rightly, it may be doubted whether it extend to all our inconsiderate fancies and vaine thoughts. For although it be not to master all our sudden passions, yet we may restraine and hinder the growing, and farther increase, if wee please to in∣tend our strength, and seeke for grace. How the word Coueting reacheth to all those it is to be considered. For Concupiseentia, according to some, Est effraenatus habendi appetitus; An vnbrideled, or vnrestrained appetite of hauing: And as touching such an appetite, we cānot excuse our selues by any our natural frailty, or vnaduised error; But, as I suppose, the word Concupiscence is more largely taken, either for a determi∣nate and vnbridled intent, or for some vrging inclination thereunto. All the question is of the later sort: which is, Actus imperfectus, id est, non deliberatus ratione quae est principium proprium actus boni aut ; Such passions, or inclinations are vnper∣fect acts, that is, not deliberated vpon by reason, which is the proper principle of a good or vitious action. And sure, it may seeme, that so long as wee resist such motions, they harme vs not: as they say, Quamdiu refragamur nihil nocent: nocent autem cum eas do∣minari permittimus; As long as wee giue no ascent vnto them, it is thought by some that they hurt vs not: and that then onely they hurt, when we suffer them to beare sway. But these men, as it seemes, make nothing forbidden in this tenth precept, but what hath been forbidden in the other: for in euery Commandement, not only the outward act, but also the inward assent vnto cuill, though it breake not out into act, is forbidden: therefore, that wee may know the difference betweene this Commandement and the rest, the distinction of desires is to be held: that some are with assent, and vnbrid∣led; others bridled, and without assent. For so euen the Morall Philosopher can tell vs, that the Continent man hath euill desires, but without assent (for they are brid∣led by the strength of right reason) as on the other side the Incontinent hath good desires, but restrained and suppressed by contrarie passions. The euill desires when they are accompanied with assent, are in euery Commandement forbidden, toge∣ther with the outward act: and therefore, if wee will haue any thing proper to this Commandement, we must needes say, that the euill desires of the Continent man (that is, euen those which we resist and bridle) are heere forbidden. For though he that bridleth his cuill desires, be much better than he that yeeldeth vnto them: yet such a man, euen according to the Heathen Philosopher, is not worthy the name of a vertuous man. For Aristotle himselfe makes Continentia, not to be vertue, but only a degree vnto it: confessing, that though the Continent man do well in bridling his euill affections, yet he doth not all, seeing he ought not so much as to haue them at all. Neither is it much more, that true diuinitic deliuereth touching this matter. For, as he saith, that in the Continent man the hauing of these euill desires, though he resist them, is the cause that he cannot be called a vertuous man: so we, that the hauing of them is a sinne. Only in this we excell him heere: that we are able out of Diuinitie to giue the true reason of this doctrine: which is, that euery one sinneth, that doth not loue God with his whole heart and affection: whence it followeth that the euil desires of the Continent man; that is, of him which bridleth them, must needs be : seeing such desires, though bridled, are a-pulling away of a part of our heart and affection from God. Seeing therefore it hath pleased God, to make vs know, that by our faithfull in∣deuours to keepe his commandements, we witnesse our loue toward himselfe: wee may not safely giue libertie to our vanities, by casting backe vpon God (who is iu∣stice it selfe) that he hath giuen vs precepts altogether beyond our power, and com∣mandements impossible for vs to keepe. For as hee is accursed (saith S t . Hierome) that auowes that the law is in all things possible to bee obserued: so hee hath made this addition: Maledictus qui dicit impossibilia Deum ; Accursed is hee that saith that God hath commanded things (in themselues, and not through our fault) im∣possible. Now, as the places are many which command vs to keepe the law: so is our weakenesse also in the Scriptures laid before vs, and therefore it is thus safely to be vnderstood, that we should without , or without betraying of our selues, do our faithfull indeuours to obserue them: which if we doe vnfainedly, no doubt, but God will accept our desires therein. For that there is no man iust, Dauid witnesseth. Psal. 143. c. 8 v. 46. Pro. 20. v. 9. Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, for in thy sight no that liueth shall bee iustified. And in the first of Kings, There is no man that sinneth not: And againe, Who can say, I haue made my heart cleane? But seeing there is no sinne grieuous without de∣liberation; let euery mans conscience iudge him, whether he giue way willingly, or restraine himselfe in all that he can; yea, or no? For when a King giues to his sub∣ject a commandement vpon paine of losse of his loue, to perfome some seruice: if the subject neglecting the same, seeke to satisfie his Soueraigne with shifting excuses, out of doubt such a Prince will take himselfe to be therein. §. XIIII. If there were not any Religion nor Iudgement to come, yet the Decalogue were most necessarie to be obserued. ANd if we consider aduisedly and soberly, of the Morall law, or ten Commandements, which God by the hand of gaue vnto his people, it will appeare that such was his mercifull prouidence in the choise of them, as were there neither paine, nor profit adioyned to the obseruing, or not obseruing of them, were there no diuine power at all, nor any Religion among men, yet if we did not for our ownesakes striue to ob∣serue these lawes: all societie of men, and all indeuours, all happinesse and content∣ment in this life would bee taken away: and euery state and common-weale in the world fall to the ground and dissolue. Therefore, these lawes were not imposed as a burthen, but as a blessing: to the end that the innocent might bee defended, that euery man might enioy the fruits of his owne trauaile, that right might be done to all men from all men: that by iustice, order, and peace, wee might liue the liues of reasonable men, and not of beasts; of free-men, and not of slaues; of ciuill men, and not of saluages. And hereof making our humane reason only Iudge, Let vs see the inconueniences in this life which would follow by the breach and neglect of these lawes. As first, what would the issue be if wee acknowledged many Gods? would not a farre greater hatred, war, and bloud-shed follow, than that which the difference of ceremonie, and diuersitie of interpretation, hath already brought into the world, euen among those Nations which acknowledge one God, and one Christ? And what could it profit mankind to pray to Idols, and Images of gold, metall, dead stones, and rotten wood, whence nothing can be hoped, but the losse of time, and an impossibilitie to receiue thence-from, either helpe or comfort? The breach of the third Commandement bringeth there-with this disaduan∣tage, and ill to man, that whosoeuer taketh the name of God in vaine, shall not at any time benefit himselfe by calling God to witnesse for him, when hee may iustly vse his name. The the Sabbath holy, rest to men and beasts, and nature her selfe requireth intermission of labour. If we despise our Parents, who haue giuen vs being, we thereby teach our owne children to scorne and neglect vs, when our aged yeeres require comfort and helpe at their hands. If murther were not forbidden, and seuerely punished, the races of mankinde would bee extinguished: and whosoeuer would take the libertie to destroy others, giueth libertie to others to destroy himselfe. If adulterie were lawfull and permitted, no man could say vnto himselfe, This is my sonne: there could be no inheritance proper, no honour descend to , no indeuour by vertue and vndertaking to raise families: murthers and poisonings betweene man and wife would be daily committed: and euery man subiect to most filthie and vncleane diseases. If stealth and violent rapine were suffered, all mankinde would shortly after pe∣rish, or liue as the saluages, by rootes and acornes. For no man laboureth but to en∣ioy the fruits thereof. And such is the mischiefe of robberie, as where Moses for lesser crimes appointed restitution foure-fold, policie of State and necessitie hath made it death. To permit false witnesses, is to take all mens liues and estates from them by cor∣ruption: the wicked would sweare against the vertuous: the waster against the wealthie: the idle begger and loiterer, against the carefull and paineful labourer: all triall of right were taken away, and iustice thereby banished out of the world. The of that which belongs to other men, bringeth no other profit than a distraction of minde, with an inward vexation: for while wee couet what apper∣taines to others, we neglect our owne: our appetites are therin fed with vaine and fruitlesse hopes, so long as we doe but couet; and if we doe attaine to the desire of the one, or the other, to wit, the wiues or goods of our neighbours, wee can looke for no other, but that our selues shall also, either by theft or by strong hand, be de∣priued of our owne. Wherein then appeareth the burthen of Gods Commandements, if there be no∣thing in them, but rules and directions for the generall and particular good of all li∣uing? Surely, for our owne good, and not in respect of himselfe, did the most mer∣cifull and prouident God ordaine them; without the obseruation of which, the vertues of heauenly bodies, the fertilitie of the earth, with all the blessings giuen vs in this life, would be vnto vs altogether vnprofitable, and of no vse. For we should remaine but in the state of brute beasts, if not in a farre more vnhappie con∣dition. §. XV. Of humane Law, written and vnwritten. HVmane Law, of which now it followeth to speake, is first diuided into two, viz. Written, and Vnwritten. The vnwritten consists of vsage, approued by time: which calls Mores: and he defines Mores to be Consuetudines vetustate proatae, to be approued by antiquitie or vnwritten lawes. Now custome differeth from vse, as the cause from the effect: in that custome is by vse and continuance established into a law: but yet there where the law is defectiue, saith . And of customes there are two generall natures, containing innumerable parti∣culars, the first are written customes, receiued and exercised by Nations, as the cu∣stomes of Burgundie, and Normandie: the ancient generall custome of England, and the customes of Castill, and other Prouinces. The second are these pettie customes, vsed in particular Places, Cities, Hun∣dreds, and Mannors. The generall or Nationall customes are some written, others vnwritten. The particular or pettie customes are seldome written, but witnessed by testi∣monie of the inhabitants. The customes of the of Cornewall comprehending also the Stannerie of Deuon, as touching Tin, and Tin causes, are written in , but not in . But vse and time hath made these customes as lawes, Reg. . v. 2 q. . . 1. yet ought euery custome to be , as well as . tractu temporis quod de iure initio ; That which at first was not grounded vpon good right, is not made good by continuance of time. And (saith VLPIAN) quod ab . l. 29. initio est, non tractu temporis conualescere; of time amends not that which was naught from the first beginning. For these two defences are necessarie in all lawes of custome; the one, that it be not repugnant to the law diuine, and naturall: the other, that the cause and reason be strong, prouing a right birth, and necessarie continuance: it being manifest that euery custome, which is against the law, had his beginning from euill deedes, and therefore not without the former considerations to be allowed. And it is true, that all customes of this nature were but tolerated for a time, by the law-makers, though they haue beene since continued, because posteritie is not bound to examine by what cause their Ancestors were thereto mo∣ued. For non sufficit simplex toleratio. And it is in this sort ouer-ruled in the law; Per populum consuetudo contra induci potest, nisi de illius qui nouam le∣gem, & nouam constitutionem statuere potest, qui solus princeps est; The people cannot bring a new custome against law: saue by his will, who hath power to make a new law and ordinance, which is onely the Prince. Humane Law generally taken, to wit, humane law written, is by some defined to be the decree or doome of practique reason: by which humane actions are ruled and directed. calls the Law a common precept, the aduisement of Wise∣men, and the restraint of offences committed, either willingly or ignorantly. Isidore calls the Law a Constitution written, agreeing with Religion, fittest for Gouerne∣ment and common profit: And more largely, Omne id quod ratione consistit; All that stands with reason. Lastly, and more precisely it is thus defined. Humane Law is a righteous decree, Greg. de Val. ex Tho. q. 91. art. 3. & q. 94. art. 2. agreeing with the Law naturall, and eternall: made by the rationall discourse of those, that exercise publique authoritie: prescribing necessarie obseruances to the subiect. That euery law ought to be a righteous decree, S. Augustine teacheth, saying: Mihi lex esse non videtur, quae iusta non fuerit; It seemes to be no law at all to me, which is not iust: and iust it cannot be, except it agree with the law naturall and eter∣nall. For there is no law iust and legitimate (saith S. Augustine) which the Law∣makers haue not deriued from the eternall. Nihil iustum atque legitimum est, quod L. 1. de lib. . cap. 6. non ab aeternalege sibi homines deriuauerint. Secondly, it ought to be constituted by discourse of reason, whereby it is distin∣guished from the law naturall, to wit, the naturall, indemonstrable, or needing no demonstration from whence the law humane is taken and deduced. Thirdly, that it ought to bee made by an authorised Magistracie, it cannot bee doubted, be the Gouernment of what kinde soeuer. For it falleth otherwise vn∣der the Title of those decrees called Violentiae, or iniquae constitutiones; Violences, or wicked constitutions. Of humane Law there are foure properties, especially answering these foure 4. Parts. conditions in the former definition. First, as it is drawne out of the law of nature: so euery particular of the humane law may be resolued into some principle or rule Tho. q. 9. 5. art. 2. of the naturall. Secondly, it is to be considered as it is referred vnto, and doth respect the com∣mon good. Thirdly, it is to be made by publique authoritie. Fourthly, concerning the matter of the law, it prescribeth, and directeth, all hu∣mane actions. And so is the Law as large and diuers, as all humane actions are di∣uers, which may fall vnder it. For according to THOMAS, Alia lex IVLIA de Adulterijs, alia CORNELIA de Sicarijs; The law of IVLIAN against Adulterie is one, the CORNELIAN against , is another. Now the humane law, generally ta∣ken, is in respect of the first of these considerations, diuided into the law of Nations, and the Ciuill. The Law of Nations is taken lesse or more properly; lesse properly for euery law which is not of it selfe, but from other higher principles deduced: and so it see∣meth that Vlpian vnderstands it: for he defineth Ius gentium, or the law of Nations, to be that which is onely common amongst Men, as Religion, and the worship of God: which is not in the very nature of this law of Nations: but from the princi∣ples of the Scriptures, and other diuine Reuelations. But the law of Nations pro∣perly taken, is that dictate, or sentence, which is drawne from a very probable, though not from an euident principle, yet so probable, that all Nations doe assent vnto the conclusion, as that the free passage of Ambassadours be graunted betweene enemies, &c. which Nationall law, according to diuers acceptions, and diuers con∣siderations had of the Humane law, may be sometime taken for a Species of the Na∣turall, sometime of the Humane. Ius Ciuile, or the Ciuill Law, is not the same in all Common-wealths, but in di∣uers estates it is also diuers and peculiar, and this Law is not so immediately deriued from the Law of Nature, as the Law of Nations is: For it is partly deduced out of such principles as all Nations doe not agree in, or easily assent vnto; because they depend on particular circumstances, which are diuers, and doe not fit all estates. Hereof VLPIAN, Ius ciuile, neque in totum à naturali & gentium recedit, neque per om∣nia In Leg. 6. ta. ff. de Iustitia Iure. ei seruit: cum aliquid addimus vel detrahimus Iuri communi, Ius proprium, idest, Ciuile efficimus; The Ciuill law (saith he) doth neither wholly differ from the law of Na∣ture, and Nations, nor yet in all points obay it: therefore when wee adde ought to, or take from the Law that is common, we make a Law proper, that is, the Ciuill Law. The law now commonly called the Ciuill Law, had its birth in Rome; and was first written by the Decem-viri, 303. yeeres after the foundation of the Citie. It was compounded aswell out of the Athenian, and other Grecian lawes, as out of the anci∣ent Romane customes and lawes Regall. The Regall lawes were deuised by the first Kings, and called Leges Regiae, or Papyrianae, because they were gathered by Papyrius, Tarquin then raigning. For though so many of the former lawes as maintained Kingly authoritie were abolished, with the name; yet those of Seruius Tullius, for Dion. Hal. Commerce and Contracts, and all that appertained to Religion, and common vtili∣tie, were continued, and were a part of the lawes of the twelue Tables. To these C. Sigon. l. 1. out of . lawes of the twelue Tables were added (as the times gaue occasion) those made by the Senate, called Senatus-consulta: those of the common people, called Plebiscita: those of the Lawyers, called prudentum: and the Edicts of the Annuall Ma∣gistrate: which Edicts being first gathered and interpreted by Iulian, and presented to Adrian the Emperour, they were by him confirmed and made perpetuall lawes; and the Volume stiled Edictum perpetuum; as those and the like Collections of Iusti∣nian afterward were. The difference anciently between Lawes and Edicts, which the French call Regle∣ments, consisted in this, that lawes are the Constitutions made or confirmed by so∣ueraigne authoritie (bee the soueraigntie in the people, in a few, or in one) and are withall generall and permanent: but an Edict (which is but Iussum Magistratus, vn∣lesse by authoritie it be made a law) hath end with the Officer, who made the same, saith VARRO. Qui plurimum Edicto tribuunt, legem annuam esse ; They who ascribe the most vnto an Edict, say that it is a law for one yeere: Though Isidore doth also expresse by the word Constitutions or Edicts, those Ordinances called of Prero∣gatiues; as Constitutio vel Edictum est quod Rex, vel Imperator constituit, vel edicit; An Ordinance or Edict is that which a King or Emperour doth or daine or proclaime. Lastly, the Humane law is diuided into the Secular, and into the Ecclesiasticall, or Canon. The Secular commanding temporall good, to wit, the peace and tranquilli∣tie of the Common-wealth: the Ecclesiasticall the spirituall good, and right Gouern∣ment of the Ecclesiasticall Common-wealth, or Church, illud naturae legem, hoc diuinam spectas; That respecteth the Law of Nature, this the Law of God. And so may Ius Ciuile be taken two waies; first, as distinguished from the law of Nations, as in the first diuisi∣on; Secondly, as it is the same with the Secular, and diuers from the Ecclesiasticall. But this diuision of the Schoolemen is obscure. For although the Ciuill be the same with the Secular, as the Ciuill is a law, yet the Secular is more generall, & comprehen∣deth both the Ciuill, and all other lawes not Ecclesiasticall. For of Secular lawes, in vse among Christian Princes, & in Christian Common-weales, there are three kinds; the Ciuill which hath euerywhere a voyce; and is in all Christian estates ( England ex∣cepted) most powerfull; the Lawes of England called Common, and the Lawes of custome or Prouinciall. In Spaine besides the Law Ciuill, they haue the customes of Castill, and other Prouinces. In France besides the , the customes of Bur∣gundie, Art. 3. tit. 5. &. Cust. Bloys, Berri, Niuernois, and Lodunois, &c. Tous lieux situes & assis en Lodunois, seront gouernez selon les costumes du dit pays; All places lying within the precincts of Lodunois, shall bee gouerned according to the customes of that place. There are also in France the customes of Normandie, and these of two kindes; Ge∣nerall, and Locall; and all purged and reformed by diuers Acts of the three estates. The charters of confirmation of these ancient customes, before and since their re∣formation haue these words; Nos autem, praedictum, vsus laudabiles, & antiquas, &c. Laudamus, approbamus, & authoritate Regia confirmamus; The Register aforesaid, laudable vse, and ancient customes wee praise, , and by our Kingly authoritie confirme. The common law of England is also compounded of the ancient customes of the same, and of certaine Maximes by those customes of the Realme approoued. Vpon which customes also are grounded those Courts of Re∣cord, of the Chancerie, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, with other small Courts. These ancient customes of England haue beene approoued by the Kings thereof, from age to age: as that custome by which no man shall be taken, imprisoned, dis∣seised, nor otherwise destroyed, but he must first be put to answere by the law of the Land, was confirmed by the Statute of Magna Charta. It is by the ancient custome of England, that the eldest Sonne should inherite without partition. In Germanie, France, and elsewhere otherwise, and by partition. In Ireland it is the custome for all Lands (that haue not beene resigned into the Kings hands) that the eldest of the house shall enioy the inheritance during his owne life: and so the second and third eldest (if there bee so many brothers) before the Heire in lineall descent: this is cal∣led the custome of . For example, if a Lord of Land haue foure sonnes, and the eldest of those foure haue also a sonne, the three brothers of the eldest sonne, shall after the death of their brother, enioy their Fathers lands before the Grand∣childe: the custome being grounded vpon the reason of necessitie. For the Irish in former times hauing alwaies liued in a subdiuided Ciuill warre, not onely the greatest against the greatest, but euery Baron and Gentleman one against another, were inforst to leaue successors of age and abilitie to defend their owne Territories. Now as in Normandie, Burgundie, and other Prouinces of France, there are certaine peculiar, and pettie customes, besides the great and generall custome of the Land, so are there in England, and in euery part thereof. But the greatest bulke of our lawes, as I take it, are the Acts of Parliament: lawes propounded and approoued by the three estates of the Realme, and confirmed by the King, to the obedience of which all men are therefore bound, because they are of choise, and selfe-desire. Leges nulla alia Vlp. ff. de , Leg. 32. nostenent quàm quod iudicio populi receptae sunt; The lawes doe therefore binde the subiect, because they are receiued by the iudgement of the subiect. demum humanae Aug. de vera . cap. 31. habent vim suam, cum non instatutae, sedetiam firmatae approbatione com∣munitatis; Gratian. in dec. dist. 4. Cum in istis. It is then that humane lawes haue their strength, when they shall not onely be de∣uised, but by the opprobation of the people confirmed. Isidore fasteneth these properties to euery Christian law, that the same be honest, that it be possible, that it bee according to Nature, and according to the custome of the Countrie; also for the time and place conuenient, profitable, and manifest, and without respect of priuate profit, that it be written for the generall good. Hee also giues foure effects of the law, which Modestinus comprehends in two; to wit, obli∣gation, and instigation: the former binds vs by feare, to auoide vice; the later with hope, to follow vertue. For according to CICERO; Legem oportet esse vitiorum emendatricem{que} virtutum; It behooueth the law to be a mender of vices, and a commender of vertues. The part obligatorie or binding vs to the obser∣uation of things commanded or forbidden, is an effect common to all lawes: and it is two-fold, the one constraineth vs by feare of our consciences, the other by feare of externall punishment. These two effects the law performeth, by the exercise of those two powers, to wit, , and Directiue. The second of these two effects remembred by , is , or in∣couragement to vertue, as Aristotle makes it the end of the law, to make men ver∣tuous. For lawes being such as they ought to bee, doe both by prescribing and for∣bidding, vrge vs to well-doing; laying before vs the good and the cuill, by the one and the other purchased. And this power affirmatiue, commaunding good, and power negatiue, forbidding euill, are those into which the law is diuided, as touch∣ing the matter: and in which Dauid the body and sub∣stance Psal. 36. thereof: saying, Declina à malo, & fac ; Decline from euill, and doe good. §. XVI. That onely the Prince is exempt from humane lawes, and in what sort. NOw whether the power of the humane Law bee without exception of any person, it is doubtfully disputed among those that haue written of this subiect, as well Diuines as Lawyers: and namely, whether soue∣raigne Princes bee compellable; yea, or no? But whereas there are two powers of the law, as ; the one Directiue, the other Co∣actiue: to the power Directiue, they ought to be subiect, but not to that which con∣straineth. For as touching violence or punishments, no man is bound to giue a pre∣judiciall judgement against himselfe; and if equalls haue not any power ouer each other, much lesse haue inferiours ouer their superiours, from whom they receiue their authoritie and strength. And speaking of the supreme power of lawes, simply then is the Prince so much aboue the lawes, as the soule and body vnited, is aboue a dead and senselesse carcasse. For the King is truely called, Ius & lex animata: An animate and law. But this is true, that by giuing authoritie to lawes, Princes both adde greatnesse to them∣selues, and conserue it; and therefore was it said of Bracton out of IVSTINIAN: Meritò debet Rex tribuere legi quodlex attribuit ei: nam lex fasit vtipse sit Rex; Rightful∣ly ought the King to attribute that to the law, which the law first attributeth to the King; for it is the law that doth make Kings. But whereas Bracton this power to the humane law, he is therein mista∣ken. . l. 2. For Kings are made by God, and lawes diuine; and by humane lawes onely declared to bee Kings. As for the places remembred by the Diuines and Lawyers, which inferre a kinde of obligation of Princes, they teach no other thing therein, than the bond of conscience, and profit arising from the examples of vertuous Prin∣ces, who are to giue an account of actions actions to God onely. Tibi soli peccaui, DAVID; Against thee onely haue I sinned: therefore, the Psal. 50. . de Leg. Prince cannot be said to be said to the law; Princeps non subijcitur legi. For seeing according to the Schoolemen, the law humane is but organum & instrumen∣tum potestatis : non videtur posse eius obligatio ad se extendere, adquem ipsavis poteslatis human & non pertinet; sed vis potestatis humanae non se ad , in quo illa residet. Ergo lex condita per talem potestatem obligare potest ipsum conditorem. Omnis enim , est principium transmutandi aliud; humane law (say they) is but a kinde organ, or instrument, of the power that , it seemes that it cannot extend it selfe to binde any one whom no humane power can , or lay hold of: but the Gouernour himselfe, in whom the gouerning power doth reside, is a person that cannot by himselfe, or by his owne power be contolled. And therefore the law which is made by such a power, cannot binde the law-maker himselfe: for euery actiue abilitie is a cause or principle of alteration in another body, not in the body in which it selfe re∣sides. And seeing Princes haue power to deliuer others from the obligation of the law: Ergo etiam potest ipsemet Princeps siue legislator sua se voluntate pro libito ab obliga∣tione Greg. de . Leg. legis liberare; Therefore also may a Prince or law-maker at his owne will and pleasure deliuer himselfe from the bond of the law. Therefore in the rules of the law it is thus concluded. Subdititenentur leges obseruare necessitate coactionis, Princeps verò sola sua, & boni communis; The subiects are bound to fulfill the law by necessitie of compulsion, but the Prince onely by his owne will, and regard of the com∣mon good. Now concerning the politique lawes, giuen by Moses to the Nation of the Israe∣lites, whether they ought to be a President, from which no ciuill of other people should presume to digresse, I will not presume to determine, but leaue it as a question for such men to decide, whose professions giue them greater abilitie. Thus much I may be bold to affirme, that we ought not to seeme wiser than God himselfe, who hath told vs that there are no lawes so righteous, as those which it pleased him to giue to his Elect people to be gouerned by. True it is, that all Nations haue their seuerall qualities, wherein they differ, euen from their next borderers, no lesse than in their peculiar languages: which disagreeable conditions to gouerne aptly, one and the same law very hardly were able. The Roman ciuill lawes did indeede containe in order a great part of the then knowne world, without any notable in∣conuenience, after such time as once it was receiued and become familiar: yet was not the administration of it alike in all parts, but yeelded much vnto the naturall customes of the people, which it gouerned. For whether it bee through a long continued perswasion; or (as Astrologers more willingly graunt) some influ∣ence of the Heauens; or peraduenture some temper of the soile and climate, matter of prouocation to vice (as plentie made the luxurious: and opportunitie to steale, makes the Arabians to bee Theeues) very hard it were to forbid by law an offence so common, with any people, as it wanted a name, where∣by to be distinguished from just and honest. By such rigour was the Kingdome of Congo vnhappily from the Christian Religion, which it willingly at the first embraced, but after with great , because pluralitie of Wiues was denyed vnto them, I know not how necessarily, but more contentiously than seasonably. In such cases, me thinks, it were not to consider that the high God himselfe permitted some things to the , rather in regard of their naturall disposition (for they were hard-hearted) than because they were consonant vnto the ancient rules of the first perfection. So, where euen the generall nature of man doth condemne (as many things it doth) for wicked and vniust; there may the law, giuen by Moses, worthily bee deemed the most exact reformer of the euill, which forceth man, as as may by, to the will and pleasure of his Maker. But where nature or custome hath entertained a vicious, yet not into lerable habite, with so long and so publique approbation, that the opposing it would seeme as vn∣couth, as it were to walke naked in England, or to weare the English fashion of appa∣rell in Turkie: there may a wise and vpright Law-giuer, without presumption, omit somewhat that the rigour of Moses his law required; euen as the good King Hezekia did, in a matter meerely Ecclesiasticall, and therefore the lesse capable of dispensation, praying for the people; The good Lord bee mercifull vnto him, that prepareth 2. . cap. 30, v. 18. 19. his whole heart to seeke the Lord God, the God of his Fathers, though he bee not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuarie: which praier the Lord heard and granted. To this effect it is well obserued by Master Doctor Willet, that the morall Iudi∣cialls of Moses doe partly binde, and partly are let free. They doe not hold affir∣matiuely that we are tyed to the same of punishment now, which was in∣flicted then; but negatiuely they doe hold, that now the punishment of death should not be adiudged, where sentence of death is not giuen by Moses: Christian Magistrates ruling vnder Christ the Prince of peace, that is, of Clemencie and Mer∣cie, Isay 9. may abate of the seueritie of Moses law, and mitigate the punishment of death, but they cannot adde vnto it to make the burden more heauie: for to shew more ri∣gour than Moses, becommeth not the Gospell. But I will not wander in this copious argument, which hath beene the subiect of many learned discourses, neither will I take vpon mee, to speake any thing defini∣tiuely in a case which dependeth, still in some controuersie among worthie Di∣uines. Thus much (as in honour of the Iudiciall Law, or rather of him that gaue it) I may well and truely say, that the defence of it hath alwaies beene very plau∣sible. And surely howsoeuer they bee not accepted (neither were it expedient) as a generall and onely law; yet shall wee hardly finde any other ground, whereon the conscience of a Iudge may rest, with equall satisfaction, in making interpreta∣tion, or giuing sentence vpon doubts, arising out of any Law besides it. Hereof, perhaps, that Iudge could haue beene witnesse, of whom Fortescue that notable Bulwarke of our lawes doth speake, complaining of a judgement giuen against a Gentle-woman at Salisburie, who being accused by her owne Man, without any other proofe, for murdering her Husband, was thereupon condemned, and burnt to ashes: the man who accused her, within a yeere after being Conuict for the same offence, confest that his Mistris was altogether innocent of that cruell fact, whose terrible death hee then (though ouer-late) grieuously lamented: but this , saith the same Authour, Saepius ipse fassus est, quòd nunquam in vita sua animum . 5. 3. de facto ipse purgaret; Hee himselfe often confessed vnto mee, that hee should neuer during his life, be able to cleare his conscience of that fact. Wherefore that acknowledge∣ment which other Sciences yeeld vnto the Metaphysiques, that from thence are drawne propositions, able to prooue the principles of sciences, which out of the sci∣ences them selues cannot be proued, may justly be granted by all other politique in∣ftitutions, to that Moses; and so much the more justly, by how much the subject of the Metaphysiques, which is, Ens quatenus Ens; Being as it is being, is infinitely in∣feriour to the Ens ; The being of beings, the only good, the fountaine of truth, whose feare is the beginning of wisedome. To which purpose well saith Saint AVGVSTINE, Conditor legum temporalium sivir bonus est & sapiens, ipsam con∣sulit , de qua nulli animaeiudicare datum est; The Author of all lawes if he bee good and wise, doth therein consult the law eternall, to determine of which there is no power giuen to soule. And as well Prince Edward, in Fortescue his discourse, Nemo potest melius aut fun∣damentum ponere, quam posuit Dominus; Noman can lay a better or another foundation, than the Lordhath laid. CHAP. V. The Storie of the from the receiuing of the Law to the death of MOSES. §. I. Of the numbring and disposing of the Host of Israel, for their marches through the Wildernesse; with a note of the giuen to the worship of God, in this ordering of their troupes. WHEN Moses had receiued the Law from God, and published it among the people, and finish∣ed the tabernacle of the Arke and Sanctuarie; mustred all the Tribes and Families of Israel: and hauing seene what numbers of men fit to beare armes, were found in euery Tribe, from 20. yeeres of age vpwards; hee appoin∣ted vnto them, by direction from the Lord, such Princes and Leaders, as in worth and re∣putation were in euery Tribe most eminent. The number of the whole Armie was 603550. able men for the warres, besides women and children; also, besides the strangers which followed them out of Aegypt. This great Armie was diuided by Moses into foure grosse and mightie Battalions, each of which contained the strength of three whole Tribes. The first of these containing 186400. able men, consisted of three Regiments, which may well, in respect of their numbers, bee called Armies; as contayning the three whole Tribes of Iudah, Issachar, and Zabulon. In the Tribe of were 74600 fighting men, led by Naason: in Issachar 54400. led by Nathaniel: in Zabulon 57400. led by Eliab. All these marched vnder the Standard of the Tribe of Iudah, who held the Vauntguard, and was the first that mooued an marched, being lodged and quartered at their generall incamping on the East side of the Arime, which was held the first place, and of greatest dignitie. The second Battalion or Armie, called in the Scriptures the Host of Reuben, had joyned vnto it and Gad, in number 151450. All which marched vnder the Standard of Reuben. In the Tribe of Ruben were 46500. vnder : in Simeon 59300. : in Gad 45650. vnder Eliasaph, had the second place, and incamped on the South side of the Tabernacle. The third Armie marched vnder the Standard of Ephraim, to whom were ioy∣ned the Regiments of Manasse and ; who, ioyned together, made in num∣ber 108100. able men. These marched in the third place, incamping on the West quarter of the Tabernacle. Ephraim had 40500. vnder : Manasse 32200. vnder Gamliel: Beniamin 35400. vnder Abidam. The fourth and last Armie, or Squadron, of the generall Armie, contayning 157600. able men, marched vnder the Standard of Dan; to whom were joyned the two Tribes of Nephtali and Asher. And these had the Rereward, and moued last, incamping on the North side. Dan had 62700. vnder Ahiezer: Asher 41500. vnder Pagiel: Nephtali 53400. vnder Ahira. Besides these Princes of the Tribes, there were ordained Captaines ouer Thousands, ouer Hundreds, ouer Fifties, and ouer Tens; as it may appeare by that mutinic and in surrection against Moses, Num. 16. v. 1. & 2. For there arose vp against Moses 250. Captaines of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, and men of renowne: of which number were Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Which three principle Muti∣ners, with those 250. Captaines that followed them, were not any of the twelue Princes of the Tribes, or Generall Colonells before spoken of, as by their names Num. 1. is made manifest. The blessing which Israel gaue to his children, tooke place not onely in the diui∣sion of the Land of promise, and other things of more consequence, long after fol∣lowing; but euen in sorting them vnder their Standards in the wildernesse it was obserued. For Iudah had the precedencie and the greatest Armie, which also was wholly compounded of the sonnes of Lea, Iacobs wife. Ruben hauing lost his birth-right, followed in the second place, accompanied with his brother Simeon, who had vndergone his Fathers curse; and with Gad, the sonne of his Mothers Hand-maide. Ioseph, who in temporall blessings had the prerogatiue of the first borne a double portion, was accounted as two Tribes, and diuided vnto two Regi∣ments: the yonger (according to Iacobs prophecie) taking place before the Elder. He was assisted by Beniamin, his best beloued brother, the other sonne of . To Dan, the eldest sonne of Iacobs Concubines, was giuen the leading of the fourth Ar∣mie, according to Iacobs prophecie. Hee had with him vnder his Standard none of the children of Lea, or Rachel, but onely the sonnes of the Hand-maides. In the middle of these foure Armies, was the Tabernacle, or portable Temple of the Congregation carried, sur-rounded by the Leuites. Neere vnto which, as the Heathens and Pagans could not approch, by reason of these foure powerfull Ar∣mies which guarded the same: so was it death for any of the children of Israel to come neere it, who were not of the Leuites, to whom the charge was committed. So sacred was the mooueable Temple of God, and with such reuerence guarded and transported, as 22000. persons were dedicated to the seruice and attendance there∣of: of which 8580. had the peculiar charge, according to their seuerall offices and functions; the particulars whereof are written in the third and fourth of Numbers. And as the Armies of the people obserued the former order in their incampings: so did the Leuites quarter themselues, as in an inner square, on euery side of the Taber∣nacle; the Geshurites on the West, within the Armie, and Standard of Ephraim, o∣uer whom Eliasaph commanded, in number 7500. The familie of on the South side, guided by Elizaphan, within the Armie of , and betweene him and the Tabernacle, in number 8600. The third companie were of the familie of Merari, ouer whom Zuriel commaunded, in number 6200. and these were lodged on the North side within the Armie of Dan; On the East side, and next within those Tribes and Forces which led, did Moses and Aaron lodge, and their children, who were the first and immediate Commanders, both of the Ceremonies and of the People; vnder whom, as the chiefe of all the other Leuiticall families, was Eleazar the sonne of Aaron, his successour in the high Priest-hood. This was the order of the Armie of Israel, and of their incamping and marching; the Tabernacle of God being alway set in the middle and center thereof. The re∣uerend care, which Moses the Prophet, and chosen seruant of God, had in all that belonged euen to the outward and least parts of the Tabernacle, Arke and Sanctua∣rie, witnessed well the inward and most humble zeale borne towards God himselfe. The industrie vsed in the framing thereof, and euery, and the part thereof; the curious workmanship thereon bestowed; the exceeding charge and expence in the prouisions; the dutifull obseruance in the laying vp and preseruing the holie Vessels; the solemne remoouing thereof; the vigilant attendance thereon, and the prouident defence of the same, which all Ages haue in some degree imitated, is now so forgotten and cast away in this super-fine Age, by those of the Familie, by the Anabaptist, Brownist, and other Sectaries, as all cost and care bestowed and had of the Church, wherein God is to be serued and worshipped, is accounted a kinde of Poperie, and as proceeding from an idolatrous disposition: insomuch as Time would soone bring to passe (if it were not ) that God would be turned out of Chur∣ches into Barnes, and from thence againe into the Fields and Mountaines, and vn∣der the Hedges; and the Offices of the (robbed of all dignitie and respect) bee as contemptible as these places; all Order, Discipline, and Church-gouerne∣ment, left to newnesse of opinion, and mens fancies: yea, and soone after, as many kindes of Religions would spring vp, as there are Parish-Churches within England: euery contentious and ignorant person clothing his fancie with the Spirit of God, and his imagination with the gift of Reuelation; insomuch, as when the Truth, which is but one, shall appeare to the simple multitude, no lesse variable than contrarie to it selfe, the Faith of men will soone after dye away by degrees, and all Religion bee held in scorne and contempt. Which distraction gaue a great Prince of Germanie cause of this answere to those that perswaded him to become a Lutheran, Si me , tunc condemnor ab alijs: si me alijs , à vobis ; quid video, sed quid sequar, non habeo; If I adicyne my selfe to you, I am by others; if I ioyne with others, I am condemned by you; What I should auoide I see, but I know not what I should follow. §. II. The offerings of the twelue Princes: the Passeouer of the second yeere: The departing of IETHRO. NOW when Moses had taken order for all things necessarie, prouided for the seruice of God, written the Lawes, numbred his Armie, and diui∣ded them into the battailes and before remembred, and ap∣pointed them Leaders of all sorts, The twelue Princes or Comman∣ders of the Tribes brought their offerings before the Lord, to wit, Num. . sixe couered Chariots, and twelue Oxen to draw them, therein to transport, as they marched, the parts of the Tabernacle, with all that belonged thereunto: the San∣ctuarie The Hebrew Gerah waigh∣eth graines: so a of is about halfpencester∣ling: the Sicle of the Sanctua∣rie (as it is ex∣pounded Exod. 30. 13.) contei∣neth 20. Gerahs so a Sanctuarie of siluer is about 7. groats the cōmon Si∣cle is but so much, to wit ten Gerahs: as it is vsually ; Villalpandus la∣bours to that the com∣mon and the Sicle were all one. excepted, which for was carryed vpon the shoulders of the sonnes of Korah, to whom the charge was committed; and the Chariots in which was con∣ueied the other parts of the Tabernacles and Vessels thereto belonging, were deli∣uered to the Leuites for that seruice, namely to the sonnes of Gershan and Merari. Besides these Chariots, each of these Commanders, Princes, or Heads of Tribes, offered vnto God, and for his seruice in the Temple, a charger of fine siluer, waigh∣ing 130. sheckles; a siluer Boll of 70. sheckles; after the sheckle of the Sanctuarie; and an incense-Cup of gold, often sheckles, which they performed at the same time when the Altar was dedicated vnto God by Aaron: and before they marched from Sinai towards their conquest, besides the beasts which they offered for sacrifice, ac∣cording to the law Ceremoniall, the waight of all the twelue siluer chargers, and twelue siluer Bolles, amounted vnto 2400. sheckles of siluer; and the waight of gold in the incense-Cups, to 120. sheckles of gold; which makes of sheckles of siluer 1200. euery sheckle of gold valuing ten of siluer, so that the whole of gold & siluer which they offered at this time, was about foure hundreth and twentie pound sterling. This done, Moses, as in all the rest by the Spirit of God conducted, gaue order for the celebrating of the Passeouer, which they performed on the foureteenth day of the second moneth of the second yeere: and on the 20. day of the same, the cloude was lifted vp from aboue the Tabernacle, as a signe of going forward; Moses begin∣ning his march with this inuocation to God; Rise vp, Lord, and let thine enemies bee Num. 9. v. 5. Num. 10. 11. scattered, and let them that hate thee, before thee. Then all the people of Isral re∣moued Exod. vlt. 34. from their incamping at the foote of the Mountaine Sinai, towards Param Num. 9. 17. the Armie, or great squadron of Iuda, led by Naashon, taking the Vauntguard, fol∣lowed by Nethaneel and Eliab, Leaders of the Tribes of Issachar and Zabulon: after whom the rest marched, as in the figure exprest. And because the passage through so many Desarts and Mountaines, was exceeding difficult: Moses leauing nothing vnforethought which might serue for the aduancement of his enterprize, he instant∣ly intreated his Father-in-law, whom in the tenth of Numbers hee calleth Hobab, to accompanie them in their journey towards Canaan; promising him such part and profit of the enterprize, as God should bestow on them: for this man, as hee was of great vnder standing and iudgement (as appeared by the Counsaile he gaue to Moses for the appointing of Iudges ouer the people) so was hee a perfect guide in all those parts, himselfe inhabiting on the frontier thereof, at Midian, or Madian: and (as it seemeth) a man of great yeeres and experience; for he was then the Priest or Prince of Madian, when Moses fled first out of Aegypt, and married his Daughter, which was 42. yeeres before this request made. And though Moses had liued 40. yeeres in these parts of Arabia, through which hee was now to trauell: yet the bet∣ter to assure his passage, and so great a multitude of soules, which could not bee so few as a Million, it was necessarie to vse many guides, and many conducters. To this request of Moses, it may seeme by the places, Exod. 18. 27. and Num. 10. 30. that Ie∣thro, otherwise called Hobab, yeelded not: for it is euident, that he went backe from Moses into his owne Countrie. But because it appeareth by other places of Scrip∣ture, Iudic. 1. 16. & 4. 11. Also 1. Sam. 15. 6. And 2. . 10. 15. 1. Chron. 2. 55. . 35. that the posteritie of this Hobab was mingled with the Israelites, it is most like∣ly that this his returne to his owne Countrie was rather to fetch away his familie, and to take his leaue of his owne Countrie, by setting things in order, than to abide there. §. III. The voiage from Horeb to Kades: the mutinies by the way: and the cause of their turning backe to the red Sea. AFter this dismission of Hobab, Israel beganne to march towards the De∣sarts of Paran: and after three daies wandring, they sate downe at the Sepulchers of lust, afterward called Tabeera, or Incensio: by reason that God consumed with fire those Mutiners and Murmurers which rose vp in this remoue, which happened about the 23. day of the same Mo∣neth. And from this 23. day of the second moneth, of the second yeere, they and fed themselues with Quailes (which it pleased God by a Sea-winde to cast vpon them) to the 24. day of the third moneth, to wit, all the moneth of Sinan or Iune: whereof surfaiting there died great numbers: from whence in the following mo∣neth, Num. 11. & 33. called Thamus, answering to our Iuly, they went on to Hazeroth, where Miriam Num. 12. the sister of Moses was stricken with the leprosie, which continued vpon her seuen daies, after whose recouery Israel remooued toward the border of Idumaea; and in∣camped at Rithma, Kades Barnea, from whence Moses sent the twelue discoue∣rers into the Territorie of Canaan, both to informe themselues of the fertilitie and strength of the Countrie; as also to take knowledge of the Waies, Passages, Riuers, Fords, and Mountaines. For Arad King of the Canaanites surprised diuers compa∣nies of the Israelites, by lying in ambush those waies, through which the dis∣couerers and searchers of the Land had formerly past. Now, after the returne of the discouerers of Cades, the wrath of God was turned against Israel; whose ingra∣titude Num. 21. and rebellion after His so many benefits, so many remissions, so many mira∣cles wrought, was such, as they esteemed their deliuerance from the Aegyptian , his feeding them, and conducting them through that great and terrible Wil∣dernesse Deut. 1. v. 19. (for so Moses calleth it) with the victorie which hee gaue them against the powerfull Amalekites, to be no other then the effects of his hatred, thinking that hee Deut. 1. v. 27. led them on and preserued them, but to bring them, their wiues, and children to be slaughtered, and giuen for a prey and spoile to the Amorites or Canaanites. For it was reported vnto them, by the searchers of the Land, that the Cities of their enemies were walled and defended with many strong Towers and Castles; that many of the people were (for they confest that they saw the sonnes of Anac there) who were men of fearefulstature, and so farre ouer-topped the Israelites, as they ap∣peared to them, and to themselues, but as Grashoppers in their respect. Now, as this mutinie exceeded all the rest, wherein they both accused God, and consulted to choose them a Captaine (or as they call it now-a-daies, an Electo) to carry them backe againe into Aegypt; so did God punish the same in a greater measure, than any of the former. For he extinguished euery soule of the whole multitude ( and Caleb excepted) who being confident in Gods promises, perswaded the people to enter Canaan, being then neere it; and at the mountaine foote of Idumaea; which is but narrow, laying before them the fertilitie thereof; and them of victo∣rie. But as men; whom the passion of feare had bereaued both of reason and com∣mon sense, they threatned to stone these encouragers to death; accounting them as Num. 14. 10. men either desperate in themselues, or betrayers of the liues, goods, and children of all their brethren, to their enemies; but God these wicked purposes, and interposing the feare of his bright glory betweene the vnaduised furie of the mul∣titude, and the innocencie and constancie of his seruants, preserued them thereby from their violence; threatning an intire destruction of the whole Nation, by sen∣ding among them a consuming and mercilesse pestilence. For this was the tenth in∣surrection Num. 14. v. 22. and rebellion, which they had made, since God deliuered them from the slauerie of the Aegyptians. But Moses (the mildest or of all men) praied vnto Num. 12. v. 3. God to remember his infinite mercies; alledging, that this so seuere a judgement, how deseruedly soeuer afflicted, would increase the pride of the Heathen Nations, and giue them occasion to vaunt, that the God of Israel, failing in power to performe his promises, suffered them to perish in these barren and fruitlesse Desarts. Yet as God is no lesse iust than merciful, as God is slow to anger, so is his wrath a consu∣ming fire; the same being once kindled by the violent breath of mans ingratitude: & therfore, as with a hand lesse heauy than hoped for he scourged this iniquitie, so by the measure of his glory ( iealous of neglect and derision) he suffered not the wicked to passe vnpunished; reseruing his compassion for the innocent: whom, because they participated not with the offences of their Fathers, he was pleased to preserue, and in them to performe his promises, which haue neuer beene frustrate. §. IIII. Of their vnwillingnesse to returne: with the punishment thereof, and of diuers accidents in the returne. NOw when Moses had reuealed the purposes of God to the people, and made them know his heauie displeasure towards them, they to bewaile themselues, though ouer-late: the times of grace and mens repentance, hauing also their appointment. And then when God had left them to themselues, and was no more among them, after they had so often plaid and dallied with his mercifull sufferings, They would needes amend their former disobedience by a second contempt: and make offer to enter the Land contrarie againe to the aduice of Moses; who assured them, that God was not now among them; and that the Arke of his couenant should not moue, but by His direction, who could not erre; and that the enemies sword which God had hitherto bended and rebated, was now left no lesse sharpe than death; and in the hands of the Amalekites, and Canaanites no lesse cruel. But as men from whom God hath with-drawne his grace, doe alwaies follow those counsells which carrie them to their own destructions: so the Hebrewes, after they had for saken the oppor∣tunitie by God and their Conductors offered: and might then haue entered Indea before their enemies were prepared and joyned; did afterward, contrarie to Gods commaundement, vndertake the enterprise of themselues; and ranne headlong and without aduice into the mountaines of . There the Canaanites and the Amalekites being ioyned and attending their aduantage, set on them, brake them: and of their numbers slaughtered the greatest part: and following their victorie and pursuite, consumed them all the way of their flight euen vnto Hormah: the Amalekites in reuenge of their former losse, and ouerthrow at Raphidim: the Canaa∣nites to preuent their displantation and destruction threatned. Of which power∣full assemblie of those two Nations (assisted in all likelihood with the neighbour Kings joyned together for their common safetie) it pleased God to forwarne Mo∣ses, and to direct him another way, than that formerly intended. For hee com∣maunded him to returne by those painefull passages of the Desarts, through which they had formerly trauelled, till they found the bancks of the red Sea againe: in which retraite before they came backe to passe ouer Iordan, there were consumed 38. yeeres; and the whole number of the sixe hundreth and odde thousand, which came out of Aegypt ( Moses, Ioshua and Caleb excepted) were dead in the Wilder∣nesse, the stubborne and carelesse generations were wholy worne out, and the pro∣mised Land bestowed on their children; which were increased to 600000. and more. For besides the double fault both of refusing to enter the Land vpon the returne of the discouerers, and the presumption then to attempt it, when they were countermaunded: it seemeth that they had committed that horrible Idola∣trie of worshipping Moloch, and the Host of heauen. For although Moses doth not mention it, yet Amos doth, and so doth the Martyr Stephen; as also that the Isra∣elites . 5. v. 25. worshipped the Sunne and Moone in after-times it is prooued out of sun∣dry Act. c. 7. v. 42. 2. Kings c. 17. v. 16. & cap. 21. . 3. &c. 23. v. 4 5. 11. other places. Now after the broken companies were returned to the Campe at Cades, Moses, according to the commaundement receiued from God, departed towards the 2. Chro. c. 33. v. 3 . c. 19. v. 13. &c. South from whence he came, to recouer the shoares of the Red Sea. And so from Cades or Rithma he remooued to Remmonparez, so called of abundance of Pomegra∣nates there found and diuided among them. From thence he went on to Libnah, taking that name of the Frankincense there found. From Libnah hee crost the val∣ley, and sate downe at Ressa, neere the foote of the mountaine. And after he had re∣sted Num. 33. there, he bended towards the West, and incamped at Ceelata; where one of the Hebrewes, for gathering broken wood on the Sabbath, was stoned to death. After which, Moses alwaies keeping the valley, between two great ledges of mountaines (those which bound the Desart of Sin, and those of Pharan) crost the same from Ceelata, and marched Eastward to the mountaine of Sapher, or Sepher: this making the Twentieth mansion. From thence he passed on to Harada; then to Maccloth; and then to Thahah; & so to Thara or Thare: the foure & twentieth mansion. Where while Moses rested, the people began that insolent and dangerous mutinie of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram; who for their contempt of God and his Ministers, were some of them swallowed vp aliue, and by the earth opening her mouth deuoured; others, euen two hundred and fiftie which offered incense with Korah, were consumed with fire from heauen; & 14700. of their partie, which murmured against Moses, stricken dead with a sudden pestilence: one of the greatest maruailes and judgements of God, that hath beene shewed in all the time of Moses his gouernment, or before. For among so great a multitude, those lay-men who would haue vsurped Ecclesia∣sticall authoritie, were suddenly swallowed vp aliue into the earth with their fami∣lies and goods; euen while they sought to ouerthrow the Order, Discipline, and power of the Church, and to make all men alike therein, rebelliously conten∣ding against the High Priest and Magistrate, to whom God had committed the go∣uernment both of his Church and Common weale of his people. And the bet∣ter to assure the people, and out of his great mercie to confirme them, it pleased him in this place also to approoue by miracle the former election of his seruant Aaron, by the twelue rods giuen in by the Heads of the twelue Tribes; of which Moses receiued one of euery Head, and Prince of his Tribe: which being all wi∣thered and drie Wands, and on euery rod the name of the Prince of the Tribe writ∣ten, and Aarons on that of Leui; it pleased God, that the rod Aaron receiued by his power a vegetable Spirit, and hauing laine in the Tabernacle of the Congrega∣tion before the Arke one night, had on it both Buddes, Blossomes, and ripe Al∣monds. From Tharah the whole Armie remoued to Methra; and thence to Esmona; and thence to Moseroth, (or Masurit after S. Hierome) and from Moseroth to ; and so to Gadgad, which Hierome calleth Gadgada; thence to Ietabata, the thirtieth Mansi∣on; where from certaine fountaines of water gathered in one, maketh a Riuer, which falleth into the Red Sea, betweene Madian and Asiongaber. Now although it be very probable, that at Asiongaber, where Salomon furnished his Fleetes for the East India: there was store of fresh water; and though Herodotus . l. 3. maketh mention of a great Riuer in Arabia the stonie, which he calleth Corys, from whence (saith hee) the inhabitants conueigh water in pipes of leather to other pla∣ces, by which deuice the King of Arabia relieued the Armie of Cambyses: yet is A∣drichomius greatly deceiued, as many times he is, in finding these springs at Gadgad, or Ietabata, being the nine and twentieth or thirtieth Mansion. For it was at Punon, that those Springs are spoken of, which in . the 10. v. 7. is also called Ietabata, or Iotbath, a Land of running waters, and which by all probabilitie fall into the Ri∣uer Zared, the next adioyning. And that these Springs should fall into the Red Sea, at Asiongaber, or Eloth, I cannot beleeue, for the way is very long. And this I finde in Belonius, that there are diuers Torrents of fresh water in those sandie parts of Arabia: which though they continue their course for a few miles, yet they are drunke vp by the hot and thirsty sand, before they can recouer the bankes of the Red Sea. From Ietabata, Moses directed his iourney towards the Red Sea, and incamped at Hebrona, and from thence to Esiongaber: which Citie in Iosephus time had the name of Berenice; and in Hieroms Essia. From thence keeping the Sea, and Eloth on his right hand, he turned towards the North, as he was by God commanded: Esiongaber . 2. being the farthest place towards the South-East, that Moses trauailed in that passage. It seemeth that Esiongaber or Asiongaber, Eloth and were not at this time in the possession of the Kings of Edom. For it is said, That the Lord spake vnto MOSES Num. c. 20. v. 13 and AARON in the Mount Hor; neere the coast of the Land of Edom; so as the Mount Hor was at this time in the South border of . And if Esiongaber, and the o∣ther places neere the Red Sea, had at this present been subiect to the , Moses would also haue demanded a free passage through them. It is true, that in the future the Idumaeans obtained those places: for it is said; And they arose out of Midian, and came 1. King. 11. 18. to Paran, and tooke men with them; which were those companies that followed yong Adad of Idumaea, into Aegypt, when he fled from Ioab. Likewise it is said of Salomon, that he made a Nauie of ships in Esiongaber besides Eloth, in the Land of Edom. §. V. Of MOSES arriuall at Zin Kades: and the accidents while they abode there. FRom Esiongaber he turned againe towards the North, and pitched in the Wildernesse of Zin, which is Kadesh: or in Beroth, of the children of Iacan; where they sate downe in the first Moneth of the fortieth yeere after they left Aegypt. For at the next Mansion Aaron died in the first day of the fifth Moneth of the fortieth yeere: the nine and thir∣tieth yeere taking end at Esiongaber. And at this Citie of Cades (for so it was thought Num. 20. 1. to be) or neere it, died Miriam or Mary, Moses sister, whose Sepulchre was to bee seene in Saint Hieromes time, as himselfe auoweth. From hence ere they departed Num. 20. 3. to the Mountaine Hor, all the people murmured most violently against Moses, by reason of the scarcitie of water. For neither the punishments by fire from Heauen; by beeing deuoured and swallowed vp by the earth; by the sudden pestilence, which often seized them; nor any miracle formerly shewing, either the loue or wrath of God, could preuaile with this Nation any longer, than while they were full fed and satisfied in euery of their appetites: but in stead of seeking for helpe and reliefe at Gods hands, when they suffered hunger, thirst, or any other want, they mur∣mured, repined, and rebelled, repenting them of their changed estates, and casting vngratefully on Moses all their misaduentures; yea, though they well knew that their owne Fathers had left their bodies in the Desarts, and that they were now entred into the fortieth yeere, wherein all their miseries were to take end. And beeing, as it were, in the sight of the Land promised, they againe as obstinately tempted God as in former times, and neither trusted his promises, nor feared his indignation. But as the will and purposes of God are without beginning; so his mercies being with∣out Num. 20. 9. end; he commanded Moses to strike a Rocke adioyning with his rod; and the wa∣ters issued out in a great abundance, with which both themselues and their cattell were satisfied. Neuerthelesse, because God perceiued a kinde of diffidence both in Moses and Aaron, at this place; therefore he permitted neither of them to enter the Land promised, whereto perchance their worldly desires might inuite them. But it pleased Him to ende the trauailes of Aaron at the Mountaine Hor, beeing the next, and foure and thirtieth Station. At which Mountaine of Hor, Aaron was 2553. despoiled of the Garments of his Priest-hood, and the same put on Eleazar his Sonne, as God had commanded. Which done, Moses and Eleazar descended the Mountaine; but God receiued Aaron on the top thereof, and hee was no more seene. Of this Mountaine called Hor, otherwise Mosera, as in Deuter. 10. vers. 6. those Horites tooke name, which the Idumeans had formerly vanquished. Some there are which make Mosera, which was the seuen and twentieth Mansion; and Mosera which they write Moseroth for difference, which was the foure and thirtieth Man∣sion, and is also called Hor, to be two distinct places: because Moses in passing from Cadesbarne towards Esiongaber, incamped at Mosera, after he departed from Hesma∣na, and before hee came to Beniaacan. And this Mosera, which is also called Hor, he . 33. came vnto after hee left Cades, where Miriam, Moses sister died; the first beeing the seuen and twentieth, and the second being the foure and thirtieth Mansion. But for Hor, which is also called Mosera, it should haue beene written, Hor iuxta Mosera; Hor neere Mosera: for it is but one roote of a Mountaine, diuided into diuers tops, as Sinai and Horeb are: Whereof the West part Moses calleth Mosera, and the East part Horeb. By the West part Moses encamped, as he past towards the Red Sea, on his left hand; by the East part, as hee went backe againe North-wards towards Moab: as in the description of Moses his passage through Arabia, the Reader may perceiue. Now it was from Cades, before they came to Hor, because Hor belonged to Edom, that Moses sent Messengers to the Prince of Idumaea, praying him that hee might passe with the people of Israel through his Territorie into the Land of Canaan, which bordered it. For it was the neerest way of all other from the Citie of Kadesh, where Moses then encamped; whereas otherwise taking his iourney by the Riuers of Zared, Arnon, and Iordan, hee might haue runne into many hazzards in the passage of those Riuers, the farre way about, and the many powerfull Kings, which commaunded in those Regions. Now the better to perswade the Prince of hereunto, Moses remembred him, that hee was of the same race and familie with Israel: calling him by the name of Brother, because both the Edomites and Israelites were the Sonnes of one Father, to wit, Isaac; inferring thereby, that hee had more reason to fauour and respect them, than hee had to the Canaanites; against whome Esau his Ancester had made warre, and dri∣uen out the Horites (who were of their ancient races descended of Cham) out of the Region of Seir, calling it by his owne name Edom, or Edumaea. Hee also ma∣king a short repetition of Gods blessings bestowed on them, and of his purposes and promises; assured Edom, or the King thereof, that hee would no way of∣fend his people, or waste his Countrey, but that hee would restraine his Armie within the bounds of the Common, and Kings high wayes, paying money for whatsoeuer hee vsed, yea, euen for the water, which themselues or their Cattell should drinke. For Moses was commaunded by God, not to prouoke the children of Esau. But the King of Edumaea knowing the strength of his owne Countrey, the . 24. same beeing neere Canaan, rampard with high and sharpe mountaines: and with∣all suspecting; as a naturall wise man, that 600000. strangers being once entred his Countrey, it would rest in their wills to giue him law, resoluedly refused them pas∣sage, and deliuered this answere to the Messengers: That, if they attempted to en∣ter Num. 20. 20. & 21. that way, he would take them for enemies, and resist them by all possible meane. And not knowing whether such a deniall might satisfie or exasperate, hee gathered the strength of his Countrie together, and shewed himselfe prepared to defend their passage. For, as it is written; Then EDOM came out against him (to wit, MOSES) with Num. c. 20. much people, and with a mighty power. Whereupon Moses considering, that the ende of his enterprise was not the conquest of Seir or Edumaea, and that the Land promi∣sed was that of Canaan: like vnto himselfe who was of a naturall vnderstanding the greatest of any man, and the skilfullest man of warre that the world had, hee refused to aduenture the Armie of Israel against a Nation, which being ouer-come, gaue but a passage to inuade others; and which by reason of the seate of their mountainous Countrey, could not but haue endangered, or (at least) greatly enfeebled the strength of Israel, and rendred them lesse able, if not altogether powerlesse, to haue conque∣red the rest. §. VI. Of their compassing Idumaea, and trauailing to Arnon, the border of Moab. HE therefore leauing the way of Idumaea, turned himselfe towards the East, and marched towards the Desarts of Moab. Which when Arad King of the Canaanites vnderstood, and that Moses had blanched the way of Edumaea; and knowing that it was Canaan, and not Edom, which Israel aimed at, thought it safest, rather to finde his enemies in his neighbours Countrey, than to be found by them in his owne: which he might haue done with a farre greater hope of victorie, had Moses beene enforst first to haue made his way by the sword through Idumaea, and thereby though victorious, greatly haue lessened his numbers. But although it fell out otherwise than Arad hoped for, yet being resolued to make triall, what courage the Israelites brought with them out of Aegypt, before they came neerer his owne home, leading the strength of his Nation to the edge of the Desart, hee set vpon some part of the Armie; which, for the multitude occupied a great space, and for the many heards of Cattell that they draue with them, could not encampe so neere together, but that some quarter or o∣ther was -more subiect to surprise. By which aduantage, and in that his at∣tempts were then perchance vnexpected, he slew some few of the Israelites, and car∣ried with him many prisoners. Now it is very probable, that it was this Canaanite, or his Predecessour, which ioyned his forces with the Amalekites, and gaue an ouerthrow to those mutinous Israelites, which without direction from God by Moses would haue entred Canaan Num. 14. 45. from Cadesbarne. For it seemeth that the greatest number of that Armie were of the Canaanites, because in the first of Deuteron. 44. the Amorites are named alone without the Amalekites, and are said to haue beaten the Israelites at that time. And this Arad, if hee were the same that had a victory ouer Israel, neere Cadesbarne, or if it were his that then preuailed, this man finding that Moses was retur∣ned from the Red Sea, and in his way towards Canaan, and that the South part of Canaan was first to bee inuaded, and in danger of beeing conquered, not knowing of Moses purpose to compasse Moab, determined while he was yet in the Desart to trie the quarrell. And whereas it followeth in the third verse of the twelfth Chapter of Numbers, that the Israelites vtterly destroyed the Canaanites and their Cities, they are much mistaken that thinke, that this destruction was presently performed by the Israelites. But it is to be vnderstood, to haue beene done in the future, to wit, in the time of Iosua. For had Moses at this time entred Canaan in the pursuit of Arad, hee would not haue fallen backe againe into the Desarts of Zin and Moab, and haue fetcht a wearisome and needelesse compasse, by the Riuers of Zared and Arnon. Neither is their coniecture to bee valued at any thing, which affirme, that Arad did not inhabite any part of Canaan it selfe, but that his Territorie lay with∣out it, and neere the Mountaine Hor. For Hor and Zin Cades were the South Num. 33. 40. borders of Edom, and not of Canaan. And it was in the South of the Land of Canaan, that Arad dwelt: which South part of Canaan was the North part of Edom. Againe, Horma (for so farre the Israelites after their victory pursued the Canaa∣nites ) is seated in the South of Iudaea. There is also a Citie of that name in Simeon. But there is no such place to the South of Edom. And were there no other argu∣ment, but the mutinie which followed presently after the repetition of this victory, it were enough to prooue, that the same was obtained in the future, and in Iosua his time, and not at the instant of Arads assault. For had the Israelites at this time sackt the Cities of Arad, they would not the next day haue complained for want of water and bread. For where there are great Cities, there is also water, and bread. But it was in the time of Iosua, that the Israelites tooke their reuenge, and after they had past Iordan: Iosua then gouerning them; who in the twelfth Chapter and fourteenth Verse, nameth this Arad by the name of his Citie so called; and with him the King of Horma: to which place the Israelites pursued the Canaanites. And hee nameth them amongst those Kings, which vanquished, and put to death. Now after this assault and surprise by Arad, Moses finding that all entrance on that side was desended, hee led the people Eastward to compasse Idumaea and the Dead Sea, and to make his entrance by Arnon and the Plaines of Moab, at that time in the possession of the Amorites. But the Israelites, to whom the very name of a Desart was terrible, began againe to rebell against their Leader; till God by a mul∣titude of fiery Serpents, (that is, by the biting of Serpents, whose venome inflamed them, and burnt them as fire) made them know their error, and afterward, accor∣ding to his plentifull grace cured them againe by their beholding an artificiall Ser∣pent, by his Commandement set vp. From the Mount Hor, Moses leauing the ordinarie way which lyeth betweene the Red Sea, and Coelosyria, encamped at Zalmona: and thence hee remooued to Phunon, where hee erected the Brazen Serpent; making these iourneys by the edge of Edumaea, but without it. For Phunon was sometime a principall Citie of the Edomites. Now where it is written in Numbers 21. Verse 4. That from Mount Hor they departed by the way of the Red Sea, which grieued the people, it was not thereby meant that the Israelites turned backe towards the Red Sea; neither did they march (according to FONSECA) per viam, quae habet à latere mare rubrum; By the way that sided the Red Sea, but in deede they crost, and went athwart the common way from Galaad, Trachonitis, and the Countries of Moab, to the Red Sea, that is, to Esiongaber; Eloth, and Midian: which way, as it lay North and South, so Israel to shunne the border of Edom, and to take the vtmost East part of Moab, crost the common way towards the East, and then they turned againe towards the North, as before. From Phunon he went to Oboth; where they entred the Territory of Moab, ad∣ioyning to the Land of Suph, a Countrey bordering on the Dead Sea; and from thence to Abarim, the eight and thirtieth Mansion, that is, where the Mountaines so cal∣led take beginning, and are as yet but small Mountures of Hills, on the East border of Moab; From thence they recouered Dibon Gad, or the Riuer of Zared, which ri∣seth in the mountaines of Arabia, and runneth towards the Dead Sea, not farre from Petra the Metropolis thereof, being the nine and thirtieth Station. And hauing past thàt Riuer, they lodged at Dibon Gad, and from thence they kept the way to Dibla∣thaim, one of the Cities of Moab; which Hieremie the Prophet c. 48. v. 22. calleth the House of Diblathaim, the same which afterward was destroyed among the rest by Na∣buchadnessar. From thence they came to the Riuer of Arnon, and incamped in the mountaines of Abarim: though in the 22. of Numbers, Moses doth not remember Helmon diblathaim, but speaketh of his remooue from the Riuer of Zared, immediate∣ly to the other side of Arnon; calling Arnon the border of Moab, betweene them and the Amorites: speaking, as hee found the state of the Countrie at that time. For Arnon was not anciently the border of Moab, but was lately conquered from the Moabites, by Sehon, King of the Amorites: euen from the Predecessour of Balac Peor then raigning. From Diblathaim, Moses sent Messengers to Sehon, King of the Amo∣rites, to desire a passage through his Countrie: which though he knew would be de∣nied him, yet he desired to giue a reason to the neighbour Nations, of the warre he vndertooke. And though Edom had refused him as Sehon did, yet hee had no war∣rant from God to enforce him. Moses also in sending messengers to Sehon, obserued the same precept, which he left to his posteritie, and successors, for a law of the war, namely in Deut. 20. v. 10. in these words, When thou commest neere vnto a Citie to fight against it, thou shalt offer it peace, which if it doe accept of and open vnto thee, then let all the people found therein bee tributaries vnto thee, and serue thee; but if it refuse, &c. thou shalt smite all the males thereof with the edge of the sword. Which ordinance all Comman∣ders of Armies haue obserued to this day, or ought to haue done. §. VII. Of the Booke of the battailes of the Lord, mentioned in this Storie, and of other Bookes mentioned in Scripture which are lost. NOw concerning the Warre betweene Israel and Sehon, Moses seemeth Num. c. 21. v. 14 to referre a great part of this Storie to that Booke, entituled, Liber bello∣rum Domini; The booke of Gods battailes: and therefore passeth ouer ma∣ny encounters, and other things memorable, with greater breuity in this place. His wordes after the Geneua translation are these. Where∣fore it shall be spoken in the Booke of the battailes of the Lord, what things he did in the Red Sea, and in the Riuers of Arnon. The Vulgar copie differeth not in sense from this: But Num. 21. the Greeke Septuagint varie. For the Greeke writes it to this effect; For thus it is said in the booke: the Warre of the Lord hath burnt (or inflamed) Zoob, and the brooks of Arnon. for the Red Sea, which is in the Geneuan and Vulgar Edition, names the Region of Of the coun∣trie of Suph see more Chap. 10 §. 4. †. 2. & of the of the Word Suph, also chap, 18. §. 3. Suph, a Countrie bordering the Dead Sea towards the East, as he coniectureth. The Text hee readeth thus. Idcircò dici solet in recensione bellorum IEHOVae, contra VAHEBVM in Regione SVPH: & contraflumina, flumina Arnonis; Therefore is it spoken in repeating of the battailes of IEHOVAH, against VAHEB in the Countrie of SVPH: and against the Riuers, the Riuers of Arnon. In which words he vnderstands, that amongst the Warres which the Lord disposed for the good of the Israelites, there was in those times a famous memory in the mouth of most men, concerning Num. 21. 26. the Warre of Sehon against Vaheb, the King of the Moabites, and of his winning the Countrie neere Arnon, out of the possession of the Moabites. For this Vaheb was the immediate Predecessour of Balac, who liued with Moses: though it be written that this Balac was the sonne of Zippor, and not of Vaheb. For it seemes (as it is plaine . 1. c. 1. in the succession of the Edomites ) that these Kingdomes were electiue, and not suc∣cessiue. And as Iunius in this translation vnderstandeth no speciall Booke of the bat∣tailes of the Lord: so others, as Vatablus in his Annotations, doubt whether in this place any speciall Booke bee meant; and if any; whether it bee not a prediction of Warres in future ages, to be waged in these places, and to be written in the booke of Iudges. Siracides c. 46. tells vs plainely, that those battailes of the Lord were fought by IOSVA. Who was there (saith he) before him like to him? for he fought the battailes of the Lord. But seeing the Histories of the Scripture elsewhere often passe ouer mat∣ters of great weight in few words, referring the Reader to other Bookes, written of the same matter at large: therefore it seemeth probable, that such a booke as this there was; wherein the seuerall victories by Israel obtained, and also victories of o∣ther Kings, making way for the good of the Israelites, were particularly and largely written. And that the same should now be wanting, it is not strange, seeing so ma∣ny other Volumes, filled with diuine discourse, haue perished in the long race of time, or haue been destroyed by the ignorant and malicious Heathen Magistrate. For the bookes of Henoch, how soeuer they haue been in later ages corrupted, and there∣fore now suspected, are remembred in an Epistle of Thaddaeus, and cited by Origen , and by Tertullian. That worke also of the Patriarch Abraham, of Formation, which others bestow on Rabbi Achiba, is no where found. The bookes remembred by Iosua c. 10. v. 13. and in the second of Samuel c. 1. v. 18. called the Booke of Iasher, or Iustorum, is also lost; wherein the stay of the Sunne and Moone in the middest of the Heauens is recor∣ded, and how they stood still till Israel had auenged themselues of their enemies: out of which also Dauid tooke the precept, of teaching the children of Iuda, to exercise their bowes against their enemies. Some thinke this to be the booke of eternall Predestination, in which the iust are written, according to the 69. Psalme, v. 28. where it is said, Let them be put out of the Hieron. in quest. super lib. Regum. booke of life, neither let them bee written with the righteous. HIEROME thinkes, that Dauid by this booke vnderstood those of Samuel; Rabbi Salomon, that the bookes of the Law are thereby meant, in which the acts of the iust Abraham, of Isaac, Iacob, and Moses, are written; others, that it was the booke of Exodus; others, as Theodoretus, that it was a Commentary vpon Iosua, by an vnknowne Author. The booke of Chozai, concerning Manasse, remembred in the second of Chron. 33. v. 18. & 16. Of this booke, also lost, Hicrome conceiues that the Prophet Isay was Hieron. in annot. in Paralip. the Author. The same mischance came aswell to the Story of Salomon, written by Ahia Silo∣nites, who met with , and foretold him of his obtaining the Kingdome of Israel from the sonne of Salomon: as to the bookes of Nathan the Prophet, and to those of Ieedo the Seer, remembred in the second of Chron. c. 9. v. 29. with these haue the bookes of Shemaiah and of Iddo, remembred in the second of Chron. c. 12. v. 15. perished: and that of Iehu the sonne of Hanani, of the acts of Iehossaphat, cited in the second of Chron. c. 20. v. 34. Also that booke of Salomons which the Hebrewes write Hascirim, of 5000. verses, of which that part called Canticum Canticorum onely remai∣neth, 1. Kings 4. 32. and with this diuers other of Salomons workes haue perished, as his booke of the natures of Trees, Plants, Beasts, Fishes, &c. 1. King. 4. 33. with the rest remembred by Origen, Iosephus, Hierome, Cedrenus, Ciccus Asculanus, Picus Mirandula, and others. Of these and other bookes many were consumed with the same fire, wherewith Nebuchadnessar burnt the Temple of Hierusalem. But let vs returne thither where we left. §. VIII. Of MOSES his sparing the issue of LOT; and of the Giants in those parts; and of SEHON and OG. WHen Moses had past Arnon, hee incamped on the other side thereof at Abarim, opposite to the Citie of Nebo, leauing the Citie of Midian on his left hand, and attempting nothing vpon the Moabites on that side. For Moab did at this time inhabite on the South side of Arnon, hauing lost all his ancient and best Territorie, which was now in the possessi∣on Deut. 2. v. 9. & 10. 11. & 12. of Sehon the Amorite. For Moses was commanded by God not to molest Moab, neither to prouoke them to battaile, God hauing giuen that Land to the children of Lot; the same which was anciently possest by the Emims, who were men of great stature, and comparable to those Giants called Anakims, or the sonnes of . God also commanded Moses to spare the Ammonites, because they likewise were descended of Lot: who had expelled from thence those Giants, which the Ammo∣nites called Zamzummims. For it seemeth that all that part, especially to the East of Iordan, euen to the Desart of Arabia, aswell on the West, as on the East side of the Mountaines of Gilead, were inhabited by Giants. And in the plantation of the Land promised, the Israelites did not at any time passe those Mountaines to the East of Basan, but left their Countrie to them, as in the discription following is made ma∣nifest. We finde also, that as there were many Giants both before and after the floud: so these Nations, which anciently inhabited both the border of Canaan, and Ios. 15. v. 13. c. 14. v. 15. the Land it selfe, had among them many families of Giant-like men. For the Ana∣kims dwelt in Hebron, which sometimes was called the Citie of Arbah, which Arbah in Iosua is called the Father of the ; and the greatest man of the Anakims. There had also beene Giants in the Land of the Moabites, called Emims: and their chiefe Citie was Aroer or Ar, neere the Riuer of Arnon. To the Giants of the Re∣phaims, the Ammonites gaue the name of Zamzummims; which were of the same an∣cient Canaanites: and their chiefe Citie was Rabba, afterward Philadelphia. They were also called Zuzims, which is as much to say, as Viri robusti, horrendi{que} Gigantes; Strong men, and fearefull Giants, who inhabited other Cities of Ham, or Hom, in the same Prouince, and not farre to the North of Aroer. Now Moses hauing past Arnon, and being incamped at Abarim; and hauing (as before) sent to Sehon, as hee had done to Edom, to pray a passage through his Coun∣trie, was denied it. For Sehon being made proude by his former conquest vpon Va∣heb the Moabite, which Nation the Amorites esteemed but as strangers and vsurpers, (themselues being of the sonnes of Canaan, and the Moabites of Lot ) refused to grant Israel any entrance that way; and withall prepared to encounter Moses with as much speede as he could, because Moses incamped in the Countrie of his new con∣quests, to wit, the Plaines of Moab; the two and fortieth and last Mansion: which Moses wasted with the multitude of his people, and cattell. Towards him therefore hasting himselfe, they encountred each other at Iahaz: where Schon with his chil∣dren and people were broken and discomfited: and the victorie so pursued by Moses, as few or none of the Amorites escaped. Hee also slaughtered all the Women and Children of the Amorites, which hee found in Essebon, and all the other Cities, Vil∣lages, or Fields; they being of the race of , as those of Basan also were: and descended of Emoreus or Amoreus: for Moses calleth the Basanites also Amorites. . 1. v. 8. And although Israel might now haue taken a ready way and passage into Iudaea: be∣ing at this time, and after this victorie at the bankes of Iordan: yet hee knew it to bee perilous to leaue so great a part of that Nation of the Amorites on his backe, as in ha∣bited all the Region of Basan or Traconitis: and therefore he led on his Armie to in∣uade Og: a person of exceeding strength and stature: and the only man of marké re∣maining of the ancient Giants of those parts, and who at that time had 60. Cities walled and defenced: lying betweene the mountaine of Hermon (which mountaine saith Moses, the Sidonians call Shirion, and the Amorites Shenir ) and the Riuer of Iordan. And it befell vnto the King of Basan (who attended Moses comming at E∣dres ) as it did vnto Sihon: for he and his sonnes perished, and all his Cities were ta∣ken and possest. After this, Moses with-drawing himselfe backe againe to the moun∣taines of Abarim, left the presequution of that warre vnto Iair the sonne of Manasse: who conquering the East parts of Basan, to wit, the Kingdome of Argob, euen vnto the Nations of the Gessuri and Machati, 60. walled Cities: called the same after his owne name Hauoth Iair: of all which conquests afterward the halfe Tribe of Ma∣nasse possest the North part as farre as Edrei, but the East part that belonged to Si∣hon the Amorite, with the mountaines of Gilead adioyning, was giuen to Reuben and Gad. §. IX. Of the troubles about the Madianites, and of MOSES his death. AFter these victories, and while Israel so journed in the valley of Moab, the Madianites and Moabites (ouer both which Nations it seemeth that Balac King of the Moabites then commanded in chiefe) sought, ac∣cording to the aduice of Balaam, both by alluring the Hebrewes to the loue of their daughters, and by perswading them to honour and serue their Idols, to diuide them both in Loue and Religion among themselues: thereby the better both to defend their owne interest against them, as also to beate them out of Moab, and the Countries adioyning. The Israelites as they had euer beene incli∣ned, so were they now easily perswaded to these euill courses, and thereby drew on Num. 25. v. 9. themselues the plague of pestilence, whereof there perished 24000. persons: be∣sides which punishment of God, the most of the offenders among the Hebrewes, were by his commandement put to the sword, or other violent deaths: after this, when that the sonne of Eleazar had pierced the bodies of Zimri, a Prince of the Simconites, together with Cosbi a Daughter of one of the chiefe of the Midianites, the plague ceased, and Gods wrath was appeased. For such was the loue and kindnesse of his all-powerfulnesse, respecting the ardent zeale of Phineas in prosequuting of Zimri (who being a chiefe among the Hebrewes became an Idolater) as hee forgaue the rest of Israel, and staied his hand for his sake. In this valley it was that Moses caused the people to be numbred the third time: Num. 26. v. 51. and there remained of able men fit to beare armes, 60 1730. of which as his last en∣terprise, he appointd 12000. to bee chosen out, to inuade the Cities of Midian, who together with the Moabites practised with Balaam to curse Israel: and after that sought to allure them (as before remembred) from the worship of the true God, to the seruice of Beth-Peor: and to the rest of their barbarous Idolatrie. Ouer which companies of 12000. Moses gaue the charge to Phineas, the sonne of Eleazar the Num. 31. v. 8. high Priest: who slew the fiue Princes of the Midianites, which were, or had lately Ios. c. 13. v. 21. beene, the vassalls of Sehon, as appeareth by Iosuah. These fiue Princes of the Midia∣nites slaine by Eleazar, were at this time but the vassalls of Sehon the Amorite, to wit, Cap. 13. 21. Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba, the Dukes of Sehon, saith Iosua. Hee slew also all the men, male-children, and women: sauing such as had not yet vsed the companie of men, but those they saued and disperst them among the children of Israel to serue them. And Moses hauing now liued 120. yeeres, making both his owne weakenesse of Deut. 31. v. 2. body knowne to the people, and his vnabilitie to trauaile: and also that he was fore∣warned Deut. 31. v. 2. of his ende by the spirit of God: from whom hee receiued a new comande∣ment to ascend the Mountaines of Abarim, and thereon to render vp his life: Hee hastned to settle the Gouernement in Iosua: whom hee perswaded with most liuely arguments to prosequute the conquest begunne, assuring him of Gods fauour and assistance therein. And so hauing spent these his later dayes after the Conquest of Og and Sehon, King of the Amorites, in the repetition and exposition of the Law (or Aug. l. 4. de Mi∣rab. sacr. Script. an iteration of the Law, according to S. Augustine ) vsing both arguments, prayers, and threats vnto the people: which hee often repeated vnto them; thereby to con∣firme them in knowledge, loue, feare, and seruice, of the all-powerfull God: Hee Deut. 33. blessed the twelue Tribes, that of Simeon excepted, with seuerall and most comfor∣table blessings: praising the greatnesse and goodnesse of him, vnto whom in his prayers hee commended them: Hee also commanded the Priests to lay vp the booke of the Law, by the side of the Arke of God: The last that he indited was that Pro∣pheticall Deut. 32. 1. Song, beginning: Hearken yee Heauens and I will speake, and let the earth heare the word of my mouth: and being called by God from the labours and sorrowes of this Deut. 34. v. 6. life, vnto that rest which neuer afterward hath disquiet, hee was buried in the Land of Moab, ouer against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his Sepulchre to this day, which happened in the yeere of the World 25 54. §. X. Obseruations out of the Storie of MOSES, how God disposeth both the smallest occasions, and the greatest resistances, to the effecting of his purpose. NOw let vs a little, for instruction, looke backe to the occasions of sun∣drie of the great euents, which haue beene mentioned in this Storie of the life of Moses, for (excepting Gods miracles, his promise, and fore-choise of this people) hee wrought in all things else by the me∣dium of mens affections, and naturall appetites. And so we shall find that the feare which Pharao had of the increase of the , multiplied by God to exceeding great numbers, was the next naturall cause of the sorrowes and losse, which befell himselfe, and the Aegyptian Nation: which numbers when he sought by cruell and vngodly policies to cut off and lessen, as when hee commanded all the male-children of the Hebrewes to be slaine, God (whose prouidence cannot bee resi∣sted, nor his purposes preuented by all the foolish and saluage craft of mortall men) moued compassion in the heart of Pharao's owne Daughter, to preserue that child, which afterward became the most wise, and of all men the most gentle and milde, the most excellently learned in all Diuine and Humane knowledge, to be the Con∣ductor and deliuerer of his oppressed Brethren, and the ouerthrow of Pharao, and all the flower of his Nation; euen then, when he sought by the strength of his men of Warre, of his Horse, and Chariots, to tread them vnder and burie them in the dust. The griefe which Moses conceiued of the iniuries, and of the violence offered to one of the Hebrewes in his owne presence, moued him to take reuenge of the Aegyptian that offered it: the ingratitude of one of his owne Nation, by threatning him to dis∣couer the slaughter of the Aegyptian, mooued him to flie into Midian: the conten∣tion betweene the sheepe-heards of that place, and Iethro's Daughters, made him knowne to their Father: who not onely entertained him, but married him to one of those Sisters: and in that solitarie life of keeping of his Father in lawes sheepe, farre from the presse of the world, contenting himselfe (though bred as a Kings Sonne) with the lot of a poore Heards-man, God found him out in that Desart, wherein hee first suffered him to liue many yeeres, the better to know the wayes and passages through which hee purposed that hee should conduct his people, toward the Land promised: and therein appearing vnto him, he made him know his Will and diuine Pleasure for his returne into Aegypt. The like may be said of all things else, which Moses afterward by Gods direction performed in the Storie of Israel before remem∣bred. There is not therefore the smallest accident, which may seeme vnto men as falling out by chance, and of no consequence: but that the same is caused by God to effect somewhat else by: yea, and oftentimes to effect things of the greatest worldly importance, either presently, or in many yeeres after, when the occasions are either not considered, or forgotten. CHAP. VI. Of the Nations with whom the Israelites had dealing after their comming out of Aegypt; and of the men of re∣nowne in other Nations, about the times of MOSES and IOSVA, with the summe of the Historie of IOSVA. §. I. How the Nations with whom the Israelites were to haue Warre, were diuers wayes, as it were, prepared to be their enemies. IN like manner if we looke to the qualitie of the Na∣tions, with whom the Israelites, after their comming out of Aegypt, had to doe, either in the Wildernesse, or afterward: we shall finde them long before-hand, by the disposing prouidence of God, as it were prepared for enmitie: partly in respect that they were most of them of the issue of Canaan, or at lest of Ham: and the rest (as the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, and Ismac∣lites ) were mingled with them by mutuall marriages: whereas the Israelites still continued strangers, and se∣parate from them: and so partly in this respect, and partly by ancient injuries or enmities, and partly by reason of diuersitie in Religion, were these Nations, as it were prepared to be enemies to the Israelites: and so to serue for such purposes as God had reserued them for. To make these things more ma∣nifest, we must vnderstand that this part of Syria bounded by the mountaines of Li∣banus, and on the North, by the same mountaines continued as farre as the Springs of Arnon on the East: by the way of Aegypt, and the Red Sea on the South: and by the Mediterran Sea on the West: was inhabited and peopled by two Nati∣ons, the one springing from the sonnes of Cham, the other from : but those of , were but as strangers therein for a long time, and came thither in effect but with It seemeth also that Hus, the Sonne of Nachor, & his Brother, planted them∣selues in the Eastside of Tor∣dan, about Ba∣san: where they finde the Land of Hus: in which both Iob dwelt, as one of the issue of Hus the Sonne of Nachor, and E∣libu, his friend, which is called a Buzit. See hereafter Cha. 10. §. 7. one familie, to wit, that of Abraham, and a few of his kindred. The other for the greatest part were the Canaanites, the ancient Lords and Possessors of those Territories: by processe of time diuided into seuerall families and names: whereof some of them were of eminent stature and strength, as the Anakims, Zamzummims, or Zuzei, Emims, Horites, and others. These (as men most valiant and able com∣monly doe) did inhabite the vtter borders and mountaines of their Countries: the rest were the Zidonians, Iebusites, Amerites, Heuites, Hetites, and others, who tooke name after the sonnes of Canaan, and after whom the Countrie in generall was still called. As for the Hebrewes which descended of Shem by Abraham, they were of ano∣ther familie, and strangers in that Countrie: the Israelites, and this was some cause that the Canaanites did not affect them, or indure them: no more then the Philistims , who descended also of Cham by Mizram. For though Abraham himselfe being a stranger was highly esteemed and honoured among them: especi∣ally by the Amorites inhabiting the West part of Iordan: yet now euen they which descending from Abraham, or from his kindred, abode and multiplied in those Exod. c. 17. v. 16 parts, were alienated in affections from the Israelites: as holding them strangers and intruders: making more account of their alliance with the Canaanites, and the rest of the issue of Cham, with whom they dayly contracted affinitie: than of their olde petigree from Abraham. True it is that these Nations descended of Abraham, or of his kindred, who had Deut. c. 11. v. 5. lincked themselues and matched with the Canaanites and others, had so farre possest themselues of the borders of those Regions, as they began to bee equall in strength to the bordering Canaanites, if not superiour. For of Lot came those two great fami∣lies of the Moabites, and Ammonites: of the Idumaeans: of Madian the Madia∣nites: of Ismael, the eldest son of Abraham, came the Ismaelites, with whom are ioyned as of the same nation, the Amalekites, whom though the more common opinion thinketh to haue been a tribe of Edom, because Esau had a grand-child of that name, yet manifest reason conuinceth it to haue been otherwise. For the Israelites were for∣bidden Deut. c. 11. v. 5. to prouoke the Eaomites, or doe them any wrong, whereas contrariwise was cursed, and endlesse warre decreed against him: but hereof more else∣where. Exod. c. 17. v. 16 Chap. 8. §. 3. Of Ismaels eldest Sonne Nabeth sprung the Arabians of Petraea, called Nabathaei. Now euen as Abraham besought God to blesse Ismael, so it Gen. 17. pleased him both to promise and performe it. For of him those twelue Princes came, which inhabited, in effect, all that Tract of Land betweene Hauilath vpon Tigris, and Sur which is the West part of the Desart of Arabia Petraea. Yet howsoe∣uer the strength of these later named nations, which descended from Abraham, were great: yet it is not vnlikely, but that some reason which moued them not to fauour the entrance of the Israelites into Canaan, was in respect of feare: because all Princes and States doe not willingly permit any stranger or powerfull Nation to enter their Territories. Wherefore, though all these families beforenamed, were not so vni∣ted, in and among themselues, but that they had their jealousies of each other, and contended for Dominion: yet fearing a third more strong than themselues, whe∣ther they stood a-part or vnited, they were taught by the care of ther owne preser∣uation, to joyne themselues together against Israel: though they did it nothing so maliciously and resoluedly as the Canaanites did. For the Edumaeans only denied the Hebrewes a passage: which the Moabites durst not denie: because their Countrie lay more open; and because themselues had lately beene beaten out of the richest part of their Dominions, by the Amorites: and as for the Ammonites, their Countrie lay altogether out of the way, and the strength of Sehon and Og Kings of the Amorites, was interjacent: and besides that, the border of the Ammonites was strong, by rea∣son of the mountaines which diuided it from Basan. Againe, that which moued the Num. c. 21. v. 24 Moabites in their owne reason not much to interrupt Israel, in the conquest of Sehon the Amorite, and of Og his Confederate, was that the Moabites might hope after such time as the Amorites were beaten by Moses, that themselues might recouer againe their owne inheritance: to wit, the Vallies and Plaines lying betweene the moun∣taines of Arabia and Iordan: But as soone as Sehon was slaine, and that the King of , , perceiued that Moses allotted that valley to the Tribes of and Ru∣ben, began to practise with Balaam against Israel, and by the Daughters of Mi∣dian, as aforesaide, to allure them to Idolatric: and thus at length the Moabites by were more and more stirred vp to enmitie against Israel. And as for diuers of the rest that were descended from Abrahams kindred, wee may note, how in the beginning, betweene the Authors of their Petigrees, God permitted some en∣mities to be as it were presages of future quarrells, which in the posteritie might bee the easier incensed, by the memorie of olde grudges: and withall by some disdaine from the elder in nature to the yonger. For the Ismaelites being descended from the eldest sonne of Abraham, and the Edomites from the eldest sonne of , Iacob, be∣ing but a second sonne, of a second brother, those Princes which were descended of the elder Houses being naturall men, might scorne to giue place, much lesse to sub∣iect themselues, to their inferiours, as they tooke it, and for a more aggrauation the Gen. 25. issues of Esau Princes of Edumaea, might keepe in record that their Parent was bought Gen. 27. out of his birth-right by Iacobs taking his aduantage, and that he was deceiued of his Fathers blessings also by him: and that Iacob after reconciliation came not vnto him Gen. 33. 14. as he promised into Seir or Idumaea. So also in the posteritie of Ismael, it might remaine as a seede or pretence of enmi∣tie, that their fore-father was by the instigation of Sara, cast out into the Desart, with his Mother Hagar: and had therein perished, but that it pleased God by his Angel to relieue them. Ismael also had an Aegyptian both to his Mother and to his Wife: and Amalec was also an Horite by his Mother: which Horites were of the ancient Ca∣naanites. The Edumaeans also, or Edomites, were by their Maternall line descended of the Canaanites. For Esau tooke two Wiues of that Nation: one of them was A∣dath, the Daughter of Elou, the Hittite, and the other Aholibamah, the grand child of Gen. 36. Zibeon the Heuite, Lord of Seir, before the same was conquered by Esau, and called after his name, Edom, or Edumaea. Lastly, it appeareth that all those families of the Ismaelites, Amalekites, Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, &c. were in processe of time corrupted, and drawne from the knowledge and worship of God, and became Idolaters, infected and seduced by the conuersation of those people among whom they dwelt, and by those Wiues of the Canaanites which they had married: onely a few of the Kenites and those Madianites, which inhabited on the edge of the Red Sea, whereof Iethro was Priest, or Prince, or both, worshipped the true and euer-liuing God. §. II. Of the Kings of the Canaanites and Madianites, mentioned in the ancient Warres of the Israelites. OF the Kings of the Canaanites, descended of Cham, (for Melchizedek may be thought to be of a better Petigree ) wee finde foure named by Moses: and one and thirtie remembred by Iosua, though few of these named, otherwise than by the Cities ouer which they commanded: to which each of them had a small Territorie adioyning, and no other Dominion. These Canaanites in a generall consideration are to be vnderstood for all those Nations, descended of Cham by Canaan, as the Hittites, Iebusites, Amorites, Ger∣gesites, Heuites, &c. and so heere wee vnderstand this name in speaking of the Kings of the Canaanites: and so also we call the Countrie of their habitation, the holy Land, or the Land of promise: for God had appointed that the seuen principall Families should bee rooted out: and that his owne people should inherite their Lands and Cities. But if wee consider of the Name and Nation in particular, then is their pro∣per habitation bounded by Iordan, on the East, and by the Mediterran Sea on the West: in which narrow Countrie, and in the choisest places thereof, those Canaanites which held their Paternall name chiefly inhabited. The first King of these Nations, named in the Scriptures, was Hamor or Hemor, of Gen. 34. the Heuites, whom Simeon and Leui slew, together with his Sonne Sichem, in reuenge of their Sisters rauishment. Arad was the second King which the Scriptures haue remembred, who had that part of Canaan towards the South, neighbouring Edom and the Dead Sea; the same which surprised Israel, as they incamped in the Wildernesse in the edge of Edu∣maea. Num. 21. 1. The third named was Sehon King of Essebon, who before Moses arriuall had bea∣ten the Moabites out of the West part of Arabia or Nabathea, and thrust them Num. 21. 24. ouer Arnon Desarts, the same whom Moses ouer-threw in the plaines of Mo∣ab: at which time he tooke Essebon, and all the Cities of the Amorites. Ios. 9. Iosepb. ant. lib. 4. c. 5. Presently after which victorie, Og was also slaine by Israel, who commaunded the North part of that Valley betweene the Mountaines Traconi or Galaad and Iordan, Num. . 35. who was also a King of the Amorites. The fift was Adonizedek King of the Iebusites, and of Hierusalem, with whom Io∣sus nameth foure other Kings. Hoham, King of Hebron. Piram, King of Iarmuth. Iapia, King of Lachis: and Deber, King of Eglon, who were all Amorites ouerthrowne in battell: and hanged Iosua. 10. by Iosua. After this ouerthrow Iosua nameth Iabin, King of Hazor, and Ioseph. ant. lib. 5. cap. 1. Iobab, King of Madon: whom he also slaughtered, and tooke his Cities: and this Iabin seemed to haue some Dominion ouer the rest, for it is said in the Text, For Iosua. 11. v. 10. HAZOR before-times was the head of all those Kingdomes. After these Adonibezek that notorious Tyrant is named: who confest that he had cut off the thumbs of the hands, and feete, of 70. Kings, inforcing them to gather Iud. 1. Ioseph. lib. 5. cap. 2. crummes vnder his Table: who, after Iuda and Simeon had vsed the same exequution vpon himselfe, acknowledged it to be a iust reuenge of God: this King was carried to Hierusalem where he died. The last King named is Iabin the second, who as it seemeth had rebuilt Hazor, burnt by Iosua. For at such time as he imploied Sisara against Israel, whom hee op∣prest Iud. 4. twentie yeeres, after the death of Ehud, He inhabited Hazor. This Iabin, Barac (incouraged by Debora ) ouerthrew; and his Captaine Sisara had by Iael, the Wife Iud. 4. of Heber the Kenite, a naile driuen into his head while hee slept in her Tent: Iabin Psal. . himselfe perishing afterward in that warre. The Madianites had also their Kings at times, but commonly mixt with the Moa∣bites: Ioseph. l. 5. c. 6. and they held a corner of Land in Nabathea: to the South-east of the Dead Sea. They descended from Madian, Abrahams sonne, by Cethura. Raguel surnamed Gethegleus or Iethres, saith Iosephus, called Iethro in Exodus, Kenis in the first of Iudges, Exod. 3. the sonne of Dathan, the grand-child of Iexanis, or Ioksham, the great grand-child of Abraham by Cethura, was Priest or Prince of the Madianites by the Red Sea: whose Cedron. pag. 34. Daughter, or Neece, Moses married: and of whom I haue spoken elsewhere more at large. This Iethro if hee were not the same with Hobab, must be his Father: and this Hobab had seuen Daughters. Hee guided Moses in the Wildernesse: and became one Iud. 1. of the Israelites: of him descended the Kenites so called of his Father Raguels surname, of which Kenites was Heber, which had peace with Iabin the second, euen now re∣membred. At such time as Saul inuaded the Amalekites, he knowing the good affection of the 1. Sam. 15. 6. Kenites to Israel, gaue them warning to separate themselues: and yet the Kenites had strong seates, and liued in the mountaines of the Desarts. The Kings of the Canaanites, and Madianites, and the Amalekites, as many as I finde named were these. 1. Homer the Heuite of Sichem 2. Arad of the South parts 3. Sehon of Essebon 4. Og of Basan. 5. Adonizedek the Iebusite, King of Hierusalem 6. Hoham of Hebron . 10. 7. Piram of Iarmuth 8. Iapia of Lachis 9. Debir of Eglon 10. Iabin of Hazor 11. Iobab of Modon Ios. 11. 12. Adonibezek of Bezek and 13. Iabin the second King of Hazor. Of the MADIANITES these. These fiue were all at one time of seuerall por∣tions of the Madiaxites: slaine by Phi∣nehas and the 12000. Which hee led against them. Num. 31. vers. 8. Eui or Euis. Rekam or Recem who built Petra the Metropolis of so called by the Greekes: and by Esai. cap. 16. vers. 1. and Selah, which is as much as Petra: and so also it is called 2. Reg. 14. 7. where it is also called Ioktheel. Zur Hur and Reba These foure last were like∣wise at one time, slaine in the pursuite of victo∣rie. Iud. . 7. . 25. . cap. 8. v. 12. Oreb Zeb Zebah Salmunna. After the death of Barac, Iudge of Israel, the foure last named of these Madianite Kings, vexed Israel seuen yeeres: till they being put to flight by Gideon, two of them to wit, Oreb and Zeb, were taken and slaine by the Ephraimits, at the passage of , as in the 6. 7. and 8. of Iudges it is written at large. Afterward in the pursute of the rest Gedeon himselfe laid hands vpon Zebah and Salmana, or Salmunna, and exequu∣ted them, being prisoners, in which expedition of Gedeon there perished 120000. of the and their Confederates. Of the Idumaeans, Moabites, and Ammonites, I will speake heereafter in the description of their Territories. §. III. Of the Amalekites and Ismaelites. OF the Kings of the Amalekites and Ismaelites, I finde few that are na∣med, and though of the Ismaelites there were more in number than of the rest (for they were multiplied into a greater Nation, according to . 17. 20. the promise of God made vnto Abraham ) yet the Amalekites, who to∣gether with the Midianites were numbred among them, were more re∣nowned . 6. 7. in Moses time than the rest of the Ismaelites. So also were they when Saul gouerned Israel. For Saul pursued them from Sur vnto Hauilah, to wit, ouer a great part of Arabia Petraea, and the Desart. The reason to me seemeth to bee this: That the twelue Princes which came of Ismael, were content to leaue those barren Desarts of Arabia Petraea, called Sur, Paran, and Sin, to the issue of Abraham by Cetura, that ioyned with them (for so seeme the Amalekites to haue beene, and so were the Ma∣dianites: ) themselues taking possession of a better soile in Arabia the Happie, and about the Mountaines of Galaad in Arabia Petraea. For Nabaioth the eldest of those twelue Princes planted that part of Arabia Petraea, which was very fruitfull though adioyning to the Desart, in which Moses wandred, afterward called Nabathea: the same which neighboureth Iudaea on the East side. They also peopled a Prouince in Arabia the Happie, whereof the people were in after-times called Napathei (B) chan∣ged into (P). Kedar, the second of Ismaels Sonnes, gaue his owne name to the part of Basan, or Batanea, which was afterward by Manasse, so much thereof as lay within the Mountaines Traconi, or Gilead. Which Nation Lampridius calleth Kedarens, and Plinie . Adbeel sate downe in the Desart Arabia, neere the Mountaines which diuide it from the Happie: and gaue name to the Adubens, which Ptolomie calleth Agu∣bens. Mibsam was the Parent of the Masamancuses, neere the Mountaine Zamath, in the same Arabia the Happie. The Raabens were of Mishma: who ioyned to the Orchens, neere the Arabian gulfe, where Ptolomie setteth Zagmais. Of Duma were the Dumaeans, betweene the Adubens and Raabens: where the Citie Dumeth sometimes stood. Of Massa the Massani, and of Hadar, or Chadar the , who bordered the Na∣patheans in the same Happie Arabia. Thema begat the Themaneans, among the Arabian Mountaines, where also the Ci∣tie of Thema is seated. Of Ietur the Ituraeans, or Chamathens: of whom Tohu was King in Dauids time. Of Naphri the Nubeian Arabians: inhabiting Syria Zoba: ouer whom . l. 6. c. 28. commanded, while Dauid ruled Israel. Cadma, the last and twelfth of Ismaels sonnes, was the Ancestor of the Cadmonaeans: who were afterward called Asitae: because they worshipped the fire with the Baby∣lonians. . The Amalekites gaue their Kings the name of , as the the name of Pharaoh to theirs, and the ancient Syrians Adad to theirs, and the Arabian Naba∣theans, Aretas, as Names of Honour. The Amalekites were the first that fought with Moses, after he past the Red Sea: Exod. 17. when of all times they flourished most, and yet were vanquished. Afterward they ioyned with the Canaanites, and beate the Israelites neere Cades∣barne. Num. 14. After the Gouernement of Othoniel, they ioyned them with the Moabites: after Barac with the Madianites: and inuaded Israel. God commanded that as soone as Israel had rest; they should roote out the name of the : which Saul exe∣quuted in part, when hee wasted them from the border of Aegypt, to the border of : from to Shur. In Dauids time they tooke Siklag in Simeon: but Dauid followed them, and surprised 1. Sam. 30. them, recouering his prisoners and spoiles. And yet, after Dauid became King, they 2. Sam. 8. 12. againe vexed him, but to their owne losse. In Ezekias time as many of them as ioyned to Edumaea were wasted and displanted 1. Chron. 4. by the children of Simeon. §. IIII. Of the instauration of ciuilitie in Europe about these times, and of PROMETHEVS and ATLAS. THere liued at this time, and in the same age together with Moses, ma∣ny men exceeding famous, aswell in bodily strength, as in all sorts of learning. And as the World was but euen now enriched with the written Law of the liuing God, so did Art and Ciuilitie (bred and fo∣stered farre off in the East, and in Aegypt ) beginne at this time to dis∣couer a passage into Europe, and into those parts of Greece, neighbouring Asia and Iu∣daea. For if Pelasgus besides his bodily strength, was chosen King of Arcadia, because he taught those people to erect them simple Cottages, to defend them from raine and storme: and learned them withall to make a kinde of Meale, and bread of Acornes, who before liued for the most part, by Hearbs and Rootes: we may there∣by iudge how poore, and wretched those times were, and how falsly those Nations haue vaunted of that their antiquities accompanied not onely with ciuill learning, but with all other kinds of knowledge, And it was in this age of the World, as both Eusebius and S. Augustine haue obserued, that flourished: Quem propterea Aug. l. 18. c. 8. de Ciuit. Dei. ferunt de luto formasse homines, quia optimus sapientiae Doctor fuisse perhibetur; Of whom it is reported that he formed men out of clay, because he was an excellent teacher of Wisedome: and so Theophrastus expoundeth the inuention of fire ascribed to PROMETHEVS, Adinuenta sapientiae pertinere; To haue reference to wise inuentions: and Aeschylus affir∣meth, . in Prom. vinct. In c. 8. lib. 18. de Ciuit. Dei. That by the stealing of Iupiters fire was meant, that the knowledge of Prome∣theus reached to the Starres, and other celestiall bodies. Againe, it is written of him, that hee had the art so to vse this fire, as thereby hee gaue life to Images of Wood, Stone, and Clay: meaning that before his birth and being, those people among whom hee liued had nothing else worthy of men, but externall forme and figure. By that fiction of Prometheus, being bound on the top of the Hill Caucasus, his entrailes the while deuoured by an Eagle, was meant the inward care and rest∣lesse desire hee had to inuestigate the Natures, Motions, and Influences of Heauenly bodies, for so it is sayde: Ideò altissimum ascendisse Caucasum, vt L. Viue sex Hes. coelo quàm longissimè astra, signorum obitus & ortus spectaret; That hee ascended Cau∣casus, to the end that hee might in a cleere skie discerne a farre off the settings and ri∣sings of the Starres: though Diodorus Siculus expound it otherwise, and others diuersly. Of this mans knowledge AESCHYLVS giues this testimonie. Ast agebant omnia . in. . vinct. Vt fors ferebat: donec ipse repperi Signorum obitus, ortus{que} qui mortalibus Sunt vtiles: & multitudinem artium His repperi: componere inde liter as; Matrem{que} Musarum auxi ego Memoriam Perutilem cunctis, &c. But Fortune gouern'd all their works, till when I first found out how Starres did set and rise: A profitable art to mortall men: And others of like vse I did deuise: As letters to compose in learned wise I first did teach: and first did amplifie The Mother of the Muses Memorie. Africanus makes Prometheus farre more ancient, and but 94. yeeres after Ogyges. Porphyrius sayes that hee liued at once with , who liued with Aug. lib. . c. 3. . Dei. Isaac. There liued also at once with Moses, that famous Atlas, brother to Prometheus, both being the Sonnes of Iapetus, of whom though it bee saide, that they were borne before Moses dayes, and therefore are by others esteemed of a more an∣cient date: yet the aduantage of their long liues gaue them a part of other ages among Men, which came into the World long after them. Besides these Sonnes of Iapetus, Aeschylus findes two other, to wit, Oceanus, and Hespe∣rus, who being famous in the West, gaue name to the Euening, and so to the euening Starre. Also besides this Atlas of or , there were others, which bare the same name: but of the Libyan, and the brother of Prometheus, it was that those Mountaines which crosse Africa, to the South of Marocco, Sus, and , with the Sea adioyning tooke name, which memorie Plato in on Atlas, the Sonne of Neptune. in the fifth of his Tusculan questions, affirmeth that all things written of Prometheus and Atlas, were but by those names to expresse diume knowledge. Nec verò ATLAS sustinere coelum, nec PROMETHEVS as fixus Caucaso, nec stellatus CE∣PHEVS cum Vxore traderetur, nisi diuina cognitio nomen ad er rorem fabulae tra∣duxisset; Neither should ATLAS bee said to beare vp heauen, nor PROMETHEVS to be to Caucasus, nor CEPHEVS with his Wife to bee ; vnlesse their diuine knowledge had raised vpon then names these erroneous fables. Orpheus sometime exprest Time by Prometheus, sometime hee tooke him for Sa∣turne; as Rheae coniux alme Prometheu. But that the storie of Prometheus was not altogether a fiction: and that he liued about this time, the most approued Historians and Antiquaries, and among them Eusebius and S. Augustine haue not doubted, For the great iudgement which Atlas had in Astronomie, saith S. Augustine, were his Lib. 18. cap. 8. de Ciuit. Dei. Daughters called by the names of constellations, Pleiades and : Others attri∣bute vnto him the finding out of the Moones course, of which Archas the of Orchomenus challengeth the inuention. Of this in Peloponnesus tooke name, and therefore did the Arcadians vaunt that they were more ancient than the Moone. Et Luna gens prior illa fuit: which is to bee vnderstood, saith Comes, . de fast. l. 1. before there had beene any obseruation of the Moones course: or of her working in inferiour bodies. And though there bee that bestow the finding out there of vpon Endymion: others (as Xenagor as ) on Typhon: yet Isacius Tzetzes, a curious searcher of antiquities, gaue it Atlas of : who besides his gifts of minde, was a man of vn∣equalled and incomparable strength: from whom Thales the Milesian, as it is saide, had the ground of his Philosophie. §. V. Of DEVCALION and PHAETON. ANd in this age of the World, and while Moses yet liued, Deucalion raigned in Thessalie, Crotopus then ruling the Argiues. This Deucalion Clem. Alex. strom lib. 1. was the Sonne of Prometheus, saith Herodotus, Apollonius, Hesiodus, and Strabo. Hesiodus gaue him Pandora for Mother; the rest : Homer Strabo. lib. 9. in the fifteenth of his Odysees makes Deucalion the Sonne of Minos: but he must needes haue meant some other Deucalion; for else either Vlysses was mistaken, or Homer, who put the tale into his mouth. For Vlysses after his returne from Troy fained himselfe to bee the brother of Idomeneus, who was sonne to this later Deuca∣lion, the sonne of Minos: but this Minos liued but one age before Troy was taken: (for Idomeneus serued in that Warre) and this Deucalion the Sonne of Prometheus, who liued at once with Moses, was long before. In the first Deucalions time happe∣ned that great inundation in Thessalie by which in effect euery soule, in those parts, perished, but Deucalion, Pyrrha his Wife, and some few others. It is affirmed that at the time of this floud in Thessalie, those people exceeded in all kinde of wickednesse and villanie: and as the impietie of men is the forcible attractiue of Gods vengeance, so did all that Nation for their foule sinnes perish by waters: as in the time of Noah, the corruption and crueltie of all mankinde drew on them that generall destruction by the floud Vniuersall. Only Deucalion, and Pyrrha his wife, whom God spared, were both of them esteemed to bee louers of Vertue, of Iustice and of Religion. Of whom Ouid: Non illa melior quisquam, nec amantior aequi Vir fuit: aut illa reuer entior vlla dearum. No man was better, nor more iust than hee: Nor any Woman godlier than shee. It is also affirmed that Prometheus fore-told his sonne Deucalion of this ouer-flow∣ing; and aduised him to prouide for his safetie: who heereupon prepared himselfe a kinde of Vessell, which Lucian in his Dialogue of Timon calls Cibotium; and others Larnax. And because to these circumstances, they afterward adde the sending out of the Doue, to discouer the Waters fall and decrease, I should verily thinke that this Storie had beene but an imitation of Noahs floud deuised by the Greekes, did not the times so much differ, and S. Augustine with others of the Fathers and reuerent August. de . Dei. l. 18. c. 10. ex & . Writers approue this storie of Deucalion. Among other his children Deucalion had these two of note, Hellen of whom Greece had first the name of Hellas, and Melantho, on whom Neptune is said to haue begot Delphus, which gaue name to Delphos, so re∣nowned among the Heathen for the Oracle of Apollo therein founded. And that which was no lesse strange and maruailous than this floud, was that great burning and conflagaration which about this time also happened vnder Phae∣ton; not onely in Aethiopia, but in Istria, a Region in Italie, and about Cumae, and the Mountaines of : of both which the Greekes, after their manner, haue inuen∣ted many strange fables. §. VI. Of HERMES TRISMEGISTVS. BVt of all other which this age brought foorth among the Heathen, Mercurius was the most famous, and renowned; the same which was also called Trismegistus, or Ter maximus; and of the Greekes Hermes. Many there were of this name; and how to distinguish, and set them in their owne times, both S. Augustine and Lactantius finde it difficult. For that Mercurie which was esteemed the God of Theeues, the God of Wrestlers, of Merchants, and Sea-men, and the God of Eloquence (though all by one name confounded) was not the same with that Mercurie, of whose many workes some fragments are now extant. Cicero, Clemens Alexandrinus, Arnobius, and certaine of the Greekes reckon siue Mercuries. Of which, two were famous in Aegypt, and there worshipped; one, the Sonne of Nilus, whose name the Aegyptians feared to vtter, as the Iewes did their Tetragrammaton; the other, that Mercurie, which slew Argus in Greece, and flying into Aegypt, is said to haue deliuered literature to the Aegyptians, and to haue giuen them Lawes. But Diodorus affirmeth, that Orpheus, and others after him, brought Lod. out of Cicero. in Aug de Ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 26. learning and letters out of Aegypt into Greece: which also confirmeth, saying; That letters were not found out by that Mercurie which slew Argus, but by that ancient Mercurie, otherwise Theuet; whom Philo Biblius writeth Taautus; the Aegyp∣tians Thoyth; the Alexandrians Thot; and the Greekes (as before) Hermes. And to this Taautus, Sanconiatho, who liued about the Warre of Troy, giues the inuention of Euseb. l. 1. c. 6. de Prap. Euang. letters. But S. Augustine making two Mercuries, which were both Aegyptians, calls neither of them the sonne of Nilus, nor acknowledgeth either of them to haue slaine Argus. For he finds this Mercurie, the slayer of Argus, to be the grand-child of that Atlas, which liued while Moses was yet yong. And yet L. Viues vpon S. Augustine seemes to vnderstand them to bee the same with those, whom Cicero, , and the rest haue remembred. But that coniecture of theirs, that any Graecian Mer∣curie brought letters into Aegypt, hath no ground. For it is manifest, (if there bee any truth in prophane antiquitie) that all the knowledge which the Greekes had, was transported out of Aegypt or Phoenicia; and not out of , nor by any Grae∣cian into Aegypt. For they all confesse, that Cadmus brought letters first into Boeotia, either out of Aegypt, or out of Phoenicia: it being true, that betweene Mercurius, that liued at once with Moses, and Cadmus, there were these descents cast; Crotopus King of the Argiues, with whom Moses liued, and in whose time about his tenth yeere Moses died; after Crotopus, Sthenelus who raigned eleuen yeeres; after him Danaus fiftie yeeres; after him Lynceus: in whose time, and after him in the time of Minos King of Crete, this Cadmus arriued in Boeotia. And therefore it cannot be true, that any Mercurius about Moses his time, flying out of Greece for the slaughter of Argus, brought literature out of Greece into Aegypt. Neither did either of those two Mercuries of Aegypt, whom S. Augustine remembreth, the one the grand-father, the other the Nephew or grand child, come out of Greece. Eupolemus and Artapanus note, that Moses found out Letters and taught the vse of them to the Iewes; of whom the Phoenicians their Neighbours receiued them; and the Greekes of the Phoe∣nicians by Cadmus. But this inuention was also ascribed to Moses, for the reason be∣fore remembred; that is, because the Iewes and the Phoenicians had them first from him. For Nation gaue vnto those men the honour of first Inuentors, from whom they receiued the profit. Ficinus makes that Mercurie, vpon part of whose workes he Commenteth, to haue beene foure descents after Moses; which he hath out of Virgil, who calls Atlas, that liued with Moses, the maternall grand-father of Virgil. . 4. . the first famous Mercurie, whom others, as Diodorus, call the Counsailer and Instru∣cter of that renowned Isis, wife of . But Ficinus giueth no reason for his opini∣on Ficin. in Praefat. Poemand. Mer∣curij Trismegisti. herein. But that the elder Mercurie instructed Isis, Diodorus Siculus affirmeth, and that such an inscription was found on a piller erected on the Tombe of Isis. Lod. Vi∣ues vpon the sixe and twentieth Chapter of the eighth Booke of S. Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, conceiueth, that this Mercurie, whose workes are extant, was not the first which was entituled, Ter maximus, but his Nephew or grand-child. Or Sancho. niatho. See . de . E∣uang. lib. 1. c. 6. & 7. Sancho∣niaton, an ancient Phoenician, who liued shortly after Moses, hath other fancies of this Mercurie; affirming that hee was the Scribe of Saturne, and called by the Phoenicians, ; and by the Aegyptians Thoot, or Thoyt. It may bee, that the many yeeres Viues in lib. 8. c. 26 Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. which he is said to haue liued, to wit, three hundred yeeres, gaue occasion to some Writers to finde him in one time, and to others in other times. But by those which haue collected the grounds of the Aegyptian Philosophie and Diuinitie, he is found more ancient than Moses: because the Inuentor of the Aegyptian , wherein it is said, that Moses was excellently learned. It is true, that although this Mercurie or Hermes doth in his Diuinitie differ in ma∣ny particulars from the Scriptures, especially in the approuing of Images, which Moses of all things most detested; yet whosoeuer shall read him with an euen iudge∣ment, will rather resolue, that these workes which are now extant, were by the Greekes and Aegyptian Priests corrupted, and those fooleries inserted, than that euer they were by the hand of Hermes written, or by his heart and Spirit deuised. For there is no man of vnderstanding, and master of his owne wits, that hath affirmed in one and the same Tract, those things which are directly contrarie in doctrine, and in nature: For out of doubt ( Moses excepted) there was neuer any man of those elder times that hath attributed more, and in a stile more reuerend and diuine, vnto almightie God, than he hath done. And therefore if those his two Treatises, now among vs; the one conuerted by Apuleius, the other by that learned Ficinus, had beene found in all things like themselues: I thinke it had not beene perilous to haue thought with Eupolemus, that this Hermes was Moses himselfe; and that the Aegyp∣tian Theologie heereafter written, was deuised by the first, and more ancient Mercu∣rie, . which others haue thought to haue beene Ioseph, the sonne of Iacob: whom, af∣ter the exposition of dreames, they called Saphanet phane, which is as much to say, as absconditorum repertor; A finder out of hidden things. But these are ouer-ven∣turous opinions. For what this man was, it is knowne to God. Enuie and aged time hath partly defaced, and partly worne out the certaine knowledge of him: of whom, whosoeuer he were, Lactantius writeth in this sort: Hic scripsit libros, & qui∣dem L. 1. C. 6. fol. 4. multos, ad cognitionem diuinarum rerum pertinentes, in quibus Maiestatem summi ac singular is Dei asserit, nominibus appellat, quibus nos, Deum & Patrem; Hee hath written many Bookes belonging to, or expressing the knowledge of diuine things, in which he affirmeth the Maiestie of the most High and one God, calling him by the same names of God and Father, which we doe. The same Father also feareth not to number him among the Sybils and Prophets. And so contrary are these his acknowledgements to those I∣dolatrous fictions of the Aegyptians and Graecians, as for my selfe I am perswaded, that whatsoeuer is found in him contrary thereunto, was by corruption inserted. For thus much him selfe confesseth: Deus omnium Dominus, & Pater, fons & vita, po∣tentia & lux, & mens, & Spiritus; & omnia in ipso, & sub ipso sunt. Verbum ex e∣ius esse , perfectissimum existens, & generator & opifex, &c. God (saith hee) the Lord and things of all things, the fountaine, and life, and power, and light, and minde, and Spirit: and all things are in him and vnder him. For his Word out of himselfe proceeding being most perfect, and generatiue, and operatiue, falling vpon fruitfull nature, made it also fruitfull and producing. And he was therefore (saith Suidas ) called Ter maximus, de Trinitate loquutus est: in Trinitate vnum esse Deum asserens; Because he spake of the Tri∣nitie, affirming that there is one Godin Trinitie. Hicruinam (saith FICINVS) praeuidit Religionis, hic ortum nouae fidei, hic aduentum Christi, hic futurum iudicium, resurre∣ctionem saeculi, beatorum gloriam, Supplicta peccatorum; This MERCVRY foresaw the ru∣ine In . Mercu. Trismeg. of the old or Superstitious Religion, and the birth of the new faith, and of the comming of Christ, the future iudgement, the resurrection, the glory of the Blessed, and the torment or affliction of the wicked or damned. To this I will only adde his two last speeches reported by Calcidius the Platonist, and by out of . Hactenus fili pulsus patria, vixi peregrinus & exul, nunc incolumis repeto: post paulum à vobis corporeis vinculis absolutus discesse∣ro, ne me quasi mortuum lugeatis: Nam illam optimam re∣gredior: ad quam mortis conditone venturi sunt. Ibi solus Deus est summus Princeps: qui ciues suos replet mirifica: ad quam haec, quam multi vitam existimant, mors est dicenda quam vita; Hitherto, O Sonne, being driuen from my Countrey, I haue liued a stranger and banished man: but now I am repairing home-ward a∣gaine in safety. And when I shall after a few dayes (or in a short time) by being loosed from these bonds of flesh and bloud depart from you, see that you doe not bewaile me as a man dead, for I doe but returne to that best and blessed Citie, to which all her Citizens (by the condition of death) shall repaire. Therein is the onely God, the most high and chiefe Prince, who filleth or feedeth his Citizens with a sweetnesse more then : in regard whereof this be∣ing which others call a life, is rather to bee accounted a death then a life. The other and that which seemeth to be his last, is thus conuerted by others, agreeing in sense but not in words with SVYDAS. O magni Dei sapiens opus, O vox patris quam ille primam emisit, quando vniuersum constituit mundum, adiuro per vnigenitum cius ver∣bum, & Spiritum cuncta comprehendentem, miseremini mei; I adiure thee O heauen, thou wise worke of the great God, and thee O voyce of the Father, which he first vttered, when hee framed the whole world, by his onely begotten Word, and Spirit, comprehending all things, vpon mee. But hath his inuocation in these words: Obtestor te coelum magni Dei sa∣piens opus, obtestor te vocem Patris quam loquutus est primum, cum omnem mundum fir∣mauit, obtestor te per vnigenitum omnia continentem, propitius, esto; I beseech thee O heauen, wise worke of the great God, I beseech thee O voyce of the Father, which he spake first when he established all the World, I beseech thee by the only begotten Word containing all things, be fauourable, be fauourable. §. VII. Of IANNES and IAMBRES, and some other that liued about those times. THere were also in this age both , which after his death be∣came the God of Physicians, being the brother of Mercurius, as L. Viues in lib. 8 August. de . Dei c. 26. thinkes in his Commentary vpon Augustine, de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 8. and also those two notorious Sorcerers, Iannes and Iambres, who in that im∣pious art excelled all that euer had been heard of to this day: and yet Moses himselfe doth not charge them with any familiaritie with Deuils, or ill Spi∣rits: words indeed that seldome came out of his mouth; how-euer by the Septuagint they are called Sophistae or Venifici and , Sophists, poisoners, and Inchan∣ters: by Hierome, sapientes & malefici, Wisemen, and euill doers: and so by Vatablus, who alsovseth the word Magi. The Greeke it selfe seemes to attribute somewhat of what they did to natural Magick: calling them , workers by drugges. The . 9. 11. Geneuan, Sorcerers and : IVNIVS Sapientes, Praestigiatores & Magi. Magici∣ans and Wisemen here by him are taken in one sense: and Prestigiators are such as dazell mens eyes, and make them seeme to see what they see not: as false colours, and false shapes. But as some vertues and some vices are so nicely distinguished, and so resembling each other, as they are often confounded, and the one taken for the o∣ther: (religion and superstition hauing one face and countenance) so did the workes and workings of Moses, and of Pharaos Sorcerers appeare in outward shew, and to the beholders of common capacities, to bee one and the same art and gift of knowledge. For the Deuill changeth himselfe into an Angel of light: and imitateth in all he can the wayes and workings of the most High. And yet on the contrary euery worke which surmounteth the wisedome of most men, is not to bee condemned as perfor∣med by the helpe or ministerie of ill Spirits. For the properties and powers which God hath giuen to naturall things, are such as where hee also bestoweth the know∣ledge to vnderstand their hidden and best vertues, many things by them are brought to passe, which seeme altogether impossible, and aboue nature or arte: which two speculations of workes of nature, and of miracle, the Cabalists distinguished by these names; Opus de Beresith, & opus de mercana: the one they call Sapientiam naturae; The wisedome of nature: the other Sapientiam ; The Wisedome of diuinity: the one Iacob practised in breeding the Lambs in Mesopotamia, the other Moses exerci∣sed in his miracles wrought in Aegypt, hauing receiued from God the knowledge of the one in the highest perfection, to wit, the knowledge of nature: of the other so farre as it pleased God to proportion him, both which he vsed to his glory, that gaue them: assuming to himselfe nothing at all, either in the least or most. Also S. Au∣gustine noteth, that from the time that Moses left Aegypt, to the death of Iosua, diuers other famous men liued in the world, who after their deaths for their eminent ver∣tues and inuentions, were numbred among the Gods: as Dionysius otherwise Liber Pater, who taught the Graecians the vse of the Vine in Attica: at which time also there were instituted Musicall playes to Apollo Delphicus: thereby to regaine his fauour, who brought barrennesse and scarcitie vpon that part of Greece, because they resisted not the attempts of Danaus, who spoiled his Temple and set it on fire: so did Erictho∣nius institute the like games to Minerua: wherein the Victor was rewarded with a present of Oyle, in memory of her that first prest it out of the Oliue. In this age also rauished Europa: and begat on her Radamanthus, Sarpedon, and Minos, which three are also giuen to Iupiter by other Historians. To these Saint Augustine addeth Hercules; the same to whom the twelue labours are ascribed, na∣tiue Lib. de Ciuit. cap. 12. of Tyrinthia a Citie of Peloponnesus: (or as others say, onely nursed and brought vp there) who came into Italy, and destroyed many Monsters there; being neither that Hercules, which Eusebius surnameth Delphin, famous in ; nor that Her∣cules, according to Philostratus, which came to Gades, whom he calleth an Aegyptian: Manifestum fit, non Tbebanum HERCVLEM, sed Aegyptium ad Gades peruenisse, & ibi finem statuisse terrae (saith PHILOSTRATVS;) It is manifest that it was the Ae∣gyptian Philost. l. 2. HERCVLES, and not the Theban, which trauailed as farre as the streights of Ga∣des, and there determined the bounds of the earth. In this time also while Moses wande∣red in the Desarts, Dardanus built Dardania. But whosoeuer they were, or how worthy soeuer they were that liued in the dayes and age of Moses, there was neuer any man, that was no more than man, by whom it pleased God to worke greater things; whom he fauoured more; to whom (according to the appearing of an infinite God) hee so often appeared; neuer any man more familiar and conuersant with Angels; neuer any more learned both in Diuine and Humane knowledge; neuer a greater Prophet in Israel. He was the first that receiued and deliuered the Law of God entire; the first that left to posteritié by letters, the trueth and power of one infinite God; his creating out of nothing the World vniuersall, and all the creatures therein; that taught the detestation of ido∣latry, and the punishment, vengeance, and eradication, which followed it. Syracides calleth Moses the beloued of God and Men, whose remembrance is bles∣sed. He made him (saith the same Author) like to the glorious Saints, and magnified him Syrac. 45. 12. 3. by the feare of his enemies, made him glorious in the sight of Kings, shewed him his glorie, caused him to heare his voyce, sanctified him with faithfulnesse and meekenesse, and chose him out of all men. He is remembred among prophane Authors; as by Clearchus the Peripatetick: by Megastenes, and Numenius the Pythagorian. The long liues which the Patriarchs en∣ioyed before the floud, remembred by Moses, Estieus, Hieronymus Aegyptius, , Elanicus, Acusilaus, Ephorus, and Alexander the Historian, confirme. The vni∣uersall floud which God reucaled vnto Moses, Berosus, Nicolaus Damascenus, and o∣thers haue testified. The building of the Tower of Babel, and confusion of tongues, Abydenus, Estieus, and Sybilla haue approued. also honoureth Abraham. He∣cataeus wrote a Booke of him. Damascenus before cited, speaketh of Abrahams passage from Damascus into Canaan, agreeing with the bookes of Moses. Eupolemon writeth the very same of Abraham, which Moses did. For beginning with the building of Babel, and the ouerthrow thereof by diuine power, hee saith that Abraham, borne in the tenth generation, in the Citie called Camerina, or , excelled all men in wise∣dome: and by whom the of the Chaldeans was inuented. Is iustitia sua (saith Eusebius out of the same Author) sic Deo gratus fuit, vt diuino praecepto in Phoenicem venerit, ibi{que} habitauerit; For his iustice and piety hee was so pleasing vnto God, as by his commandement he came into Phoenicia, and dwelt there. Likewise Diodorus Si∣culus in his second Booke and fifth Chapter speaketh reucrently of Moses: There are many other among prophane Authors, which confirme the Bookes of Moses, as Eusebius hath gathered in the ninth of his Preparation to the Gospel, Chapter the third and fourth, to whom I referre the Reader. Lastly, I cannot but for some things in it commend this notable testimony of Strabo, who writeth of Moses in these wordes. MOSE senim affirmabat, docebat{que} Aegyptios non rectè sentire, qui bestiarum & pecorum Strabo l. 16. imagines Deo tribuerunt: item{que} Afros & Graecos, qui Dijs hominum figuram unt: id verò solumesse Deum, quod nos & terram & mare continet, quod coelum & mundum, & rerum omnium naturam appellamus: cuius profectò imaginem, nemo sanaementis, alicuius earum rerum, quae penes nos sunt, similem audeat effingere. Proinde (omni simulachorum effictione repudiata) dignum ei Templum ac Delubrum constituendum, acsine aliqua figura colendum: MOSES affirmed and taught, that the Aegyptians thought amisse, which attri∣buted vnto God the Images of beasts and : Also that the Africans and Greekes greatly erred in giuing vnto their Gods the shape of men: whereas that onely is God indeede, which containeth both vs, the Earth and Sea, which we call Heauen, the world, and the nature of all things, whose image, doubtlesse, no wise man will dare to fashion out vnto the likenesse of those things, which are amongst vs: That therefore (all deuising of Idols cast aside) a worthy Temple and place of prayer was to bee erected vnto him, and to be worshipped without any figure at all therein. Now concerning the Aegyptian wisedome, for which the Martyr Stephen com∣mended Moses, saying, That MOSES was learned in all the wisedome of the Aegyptians, Act. c. 7. v. 22. and was mighty in his workes and words; the same is collected (how truly know not) by Diodorus, Diogenes Laertius, , Philo Iudaeus, and Eusebius Caesariensis, and diuided into foure parts, viz. Mathematicall, Naturall, Diuine, and Morall. In the Mathematicall part, which is distinguished into Geometrie, Astronomie, Arithmetike, and Musicke; the ancient Aegyptians excelled all others. For Geometry which is by interpretation, measuring of grounds, was vsefull vnto them: because it consisting of infallible principles, directed them certainely in bounding out their pro∣per Lands, and Territories, when their fields and limits, by the inundations of Ni∣lus, were yeerely ouerflowne and confounded, so as no man could know what in right belonged vnto him. For the second part, to wit, Astronomie, the site of the Countrey being a leuell and spacious Plaine, free and cleere from cloudes, yeelded them delight with ease, in ob∣seruing and contemplating the risings, fallings, and motions of the Starres. Arithmeticke also, which is the knowledge of numbers, they studied; because with∣out it, in Geometrie and Astronomie, nothing can be demonstrated or concluded. But of Musicke they made no other account, not desired farther knowledge, than seemed to them sufficient to serue and magnifie their Gods, their Kings, and good Men. The Naturall part of this Wisedome, which handleth the principles, causes, ele∣ments, and operations of naturall things, differs little from Peripateticall Philosophie; teaching, that Materia prima is the beginning of all things; that of it all mixt bodies and liuing creatures haue their beeing; that Heauen is round like a Globe; that all Starres haue a certaine fouent heate, and temperate influences, whereby all things grow and are produced; that raines proceede and bee from mutations in the ayre; that the Planets haue their proper soules, &c. The Diuine part of this wisedome, which is called Theologie, teacheth and belee∣ueth that the world had a beginning, and shall perish; that men had their first origi∣nall in Aegypt; partly by meanes of the temperatenesse of that Countrey, where neither Winter with cold, not Summer with heate are offensiue; and partly through the fertilitie, that Nilus giueth in those places; That the soule is immortall, and hath transmigration from body to body; That God is one, the Father and Prince of all Gods; and that from this God, other Gods are, as the Sunne and Moone, whom they worshipped by the names of Osiris and Isis, and erected to them Tem∣ples, Statues, and diuers Images, because the true similitudes of the Gods is not knowne; that many of the Gods haue been in the estate of mortall men, and after death, for their vertues, and benefits bestowed on mankinde, haue beene Deified; that those beastes, whose Images and formes the Kings did carrie in their Armes, when they obtained victory, were adored for Gods: because vnder those Ensignes they preuailed ouer their enemies. Moreouer, the Aegyptian Diuines had a peculiar kinde of writing, mysticall and secret, wherein the highest points of their Religion and worship of God, which was to bee concealed from the vulgar sort, were ob∣scured. Clemens distributeth the whole summe of this later Aegyptian learning into three Clem. Strom. l. . seuerall sorts, viz. Epistolar, which is vsed in writing common Epistles; , which is peculiar to their Priests; and Sacred; which Sacred containeth Scripture of two kindes: the one proper, which it expressed by letters Alphabeticall in ob∣scure and figuratiue wordes; as for example, where it is written: The Ibis by the Hornet participateth the beauty of the Hawke; which is read thus: The Moone doth by the Sunne borrow part of the light of God: because Light is an Image of Diuine beauty; the other symbolicall, or by signatures, which is three-fold, viz. Imitatiue, Tropicall, and Aenygmaticall: Imitatiue, which designeth things by cha∣racters, like to the things signified, as by a Circle the Sunne; and by the Hornes of the Moone, the Moone it selfe: Tropicall or transferent, which applies the diuers formes and figures of naturall bodies or creatures, to signifie the dignities, fortunes, conditions, vertues, vices, affections, and actions of their Gods and of men. So with the Aegyptian Diuines, the Image of an Hawke signifieth God, the figure of the Hornet signifieth the Sunne, the picture of the Bird Ibis signifieth the Moone: by the forme of a Man, Prudence and Skilfulnesse: by a Lion, Fortitude: by a Horse, Libertie: by a Crocodile, Impudencie: by a Fish, Hatred is to be vnderstood: Ae∣nygmaticall is a composition or mixture of Images or Similitudes: in which sense, the monstrous Image of a Lions body hauing a Mans head, was grauen on their Temples and Altars, to signifie, that to men all diuine things are Aenygmaticall and obscure. So the Image of the Sunne set on the head of a Crocodile, (which liueth aswell in the Waters, as on Land) expresseth that the Sunne nourisheth Meteors in the Ayre, aswell from the Waters as from the Earth. So a Scepter, at the top whereof is made an Eye, and an Eare, signifieth God, Hearing, Seeing, and Gouerning all things. The Scythians are thought to haue been delighted with this kinde of writing. For Syrius reporteth, That when Darius sending let∣ters, threatned Idanthura, King of the Scythians, with ruine and destruction of his Kingdome, vnlesse he would acknowledge subiection: Idanthura returned to him a Mouse, a Frog, a Bird, a Dart, and a Plough-share: which Orontopagas, Tribune of the Souldiers, interpreted to signifie, that by the Mouse, their dwellings: by the Frog, their waters: by the Bird, their aire: by the Dart, their weapons: by the Plough, their lands: were signified to be ready to bee deliuered to Darius, as their Soueraigne Lord. But Xyphodres made another construction, viz. that the King meant, That except Darius with his Men did hasten away, as a Bird through the ayre, or creepe into holes as a Mouse, or runne into the waters which they had pas∣sed as a Frog, they should not escape his armes, but either be slaine, or being made Captiues, Till his grounds. The same Historie is with little difference reported by . l. 4. Herodotus. The fourth and last part, which is Morall and Politique, doth containe especially the Lawes, which (according to Laertius ) Mercurius Trismegistus, or Ter Maximus deuised: who in his Bookes or Dialogues of Pimander and Asclepius, hath written so many things of God, worthy of admiration; aswell (saith Sixtus Senensis ) of the Trinitie, and of the comming of Christ, as of the last and fearefull day of iudgement: that (as saith the same Author, the opinion being also ancient) hee is not onely to be accounted a Philosopher, but a Prophet of things to come. Iamblicus in his Bookes of Mysteries of the Aegyptians, taking two very ancient Historians for his Authors, to wit, Seleucus and Menaetus, affirmeth that this Mercu∣rie was not only the Inuentor of the Aegyptian Philosophie, but of all other learning, called the Wisedome of the Aegyptians before remembred: and that he wrote of that subiect 36525. Bookes, Pages. Of which there were numbred, of Fiery Spirits, one hundred Bookes; of Spirits as many, and of Spirits Celestiall a thousand; which because they were out of the Aegyptian language conuerted by certaine lear∣ned Philosophers into the naturall Greeke, they seemed to haue been first written in . Strom. l. 6. that Tongue. Clemens Alexandrinus writeth, that among the Bookes of Hermes, to wit, of the Wisedome of the Aegyptians, there were extant in his time 36. of Physicke sixe bookes; of the orders of Priests ten; and of Astrologie foure. §. VIII. A Briese of the Historie of IOSVA; and of the space betweene him and OTHONIEL: and of the remainders of the Canaanites; with a note of some Contemporaries to IOSVA: and of the breach of Faith. AFter the death of Moses, and in the one and fortieth yeere of the Egres∣sion, in the first moneth called Nisan, or March, Iosua the sonne of Nun, of the Tribe of , being filled with the Spirit of wisedome, tooke on him the Gouernment of Israel: God giuing him comfort, and encouraging him to passe the Riuer of Iordan, and to possesse, and diuide among the Israelites the Land promised. The beginning of Iosuas rule S. Augustine dates with the raigne of Amintas, the Lib. 18. de . Dei. c. 11. eighteenth King in Assyria; with Corax the sixteenth King in Sicyonia, when Danaus gouerned the Argiues; and Ericthonius, Athens. Iosua imitating in all things his Predecessor, sent Iordan certaine discouerers Ios. 2. 1. to view the seat and strength of Ierico, the next Citie vnto him on the other side of the Riuer, which hee was to passe ouer. Which discouerers being saued, and sent backe by Rahab, a Woman of ill fame, because she kept a Tauerne or Vitling-house, made Iosua know, that the Inhabitants of Ierico, and those of the Countrie about it, hearing of the approch of Israel, had lost courage. Whereupon the day after the re∣turne Ios. 2. 11. of the Spies, which was the sixth day of the one and fortieth yeere after the E∣gression, Iosua remooued from Sittim in the Plaines of , and drew downe his Ios. 3. 1. Armieto the banks of the Riuer Iordan; and them commaundment to put themselues in order to follow the Arke of God, when the Leuites tooke it vp, and Ios. 3. 3. mooued towards the Riuer; giuing them withall this forcible encouragement, That they should thereby assure themselues of his fauour and presence who is Lord of all the world, when the Riuer of Iordan should bee cut off and diuided, and the waters Ios. 3. 13. comming from aboue should stand still in a heape; whereby those below towards the Deadsea wanting supply, they might passe ouer into the land of Canaan with dry feet. He also commanded Reuben, Gad, and the halfe Tribe of Manasse, to prepare Ios. 1. 12. themselues (according to their Couenant made with Moses ) to march in the head of the rest, and as we call it in this age, to leade in the Vanguard, which through all the Desarts of Arabia, from the Mount Sinai to this place, those of the Tribe of Iuda had performed. For these Tribes being alreadie prouided of their habitations, and the Countrie and Cities of the Amorites, by the helpe of the rest, conquered for them: It agreed with iustice & equalitie, that Reuben, Gad, and the halfe of Manasse should also assist their brethren in the obtaining of their parts, as yet in their enemies possession. On the banks of Iordan they rested themselues from the sixth day to the ninth; and on the tenth day of the first Moneth Nisan, or March, they past ouer to the o∣ther side, taking with them twelue stones from the drie ground in the middest of the Riuer: which, for a memorie of that miracle by God wrought, they set vp at Gilgal, on the East side of the Citie of , where they incamped the first night. At which place Iosua gaue commandement, that all borne in the last fortieth yeere in the De∣sarts Ios. 4. 19. should bee circumcised, which ceremonie to that day had beene omitted. Of Ios. 5. . the neglect whereof S. Augustine giueth for cause, The peoples contempt of their Aug. q. 3. in Ios. superiours. Thomas excuseth it in this sort; That the Israelites knew not the certaine Thom. part. 3. quaest. 70. art. 4. ad. 3. time of their remouing from one place to another: Damascen, That it was not need∣full by circumcision to distinguish them from other Nations, at such time as they liued by them selues, and a-part from all Nations. On the foureteenth day of the same Moneth, the children of Israel celebrated the Passeouer now the third time; first, at their leauing Aegypt; secondly, at Mount Ios. 5. 10. Sinai; and now at Gilgal. After which being desirous to taste of the fruits of the Coun∣trie, and hauing, as it were, surfeited on Man, they parched of the Corne of the land, being not yet fully ripe, and ate thereof. And as Moses beganne to distribute those Regions beyond Iordan, to wit, the Lands of the Amorites, which Og of Basan, and Sihon held, so did Iosua performe the rest; and after a view and partition made of the Territories, gaue to each Tribe his portion by lot. But this partition and distribution was not done at once, but at three times; first, by Moses to Gad, Ruben, and the halfe Tribe of Manasse, Ios. 14. 3. of the Lands ouer ; Secondly, by Iosua, to the Tribe of Iuda, Ephraim, and the other halfe Tribe of Manasse, about the fifth yeere of his gouernment; proued in the 14. of Iosua. v. 10. and a third diuision was made to the other seuen Tribes at Shilo, where Iosua the Tabernacle of the Congregation. . 18. The victories of Iosua against the Kings of the Canaanites, are so particularly set downe in his owne bookes, as I shall not neede to lengthen this part by their repe∣tition. In whose Storie I chiefly note these particulars. First, how in the beginning of the warre, those little Kings or Reguii of the Canaanites, had not so much vnder∣standing, as to vnite themselues together against the Israelites; but according to the custome of those estates, from whose Gouernours God hath taken away all wisdome and fore-sight, they left those of their owne Nation, which were next the inuaders, to themselues, and to their owne defences; hoping that the fire kindled somewhat farre off, might againe haue beene quenched, ere it could spread it selfe so far as their owne Territories and Cities. But after such time as Ierico and Ai were entred, and the Kings, People, and Cities consumed; fiue of those 31. Kings (all which at length perished in that warre) ioyned themselues together, first attempting the Gibeonites, who had rendred themselues to Iosua. Onely fiue (the rest looking on to see the suc∣cesse) namely, the King of the Iebusites, in Iebus, or Hierusalem, the Kings of Hebron, Iarmoth, Lachis, and Eglon, addrest themselues for resistance: whose Armie being by Iosua surprised and broken, themselues despairing to scape by flight, and hopelesse of mercy by submission, creeping into a Caue vnder ground, were thence by Iosua drawne forth and hanged. In the prosequution of which victorie hee also tooke Ios. 10. Makkedath, and Libnah, and Lacbis. To the reliefe whereof Horam King of Gezar Ios. 10. hastened, and perished. After which Iosua possest himselfe of Eglon, Hebron, and Debir, destroying the Cities with their Princes. In the end, and when the South Countries were possest, the Cities thereof con∣quered, and their Kings and People made dust: the rest of the Canaanites, guided by the ouer-late counsailes of necessitie, vnited themselues, to make one grosse strength and body of an Armie: which Iabin, King of Hazor, practised and gathered together, by Iosua discouered, as the same rested neere the Lake of Merom, hee vsed such dili∣gence, as hee came on them vnawares; and obtaining an absolute victorie ouer them, he prosequuted the same to the vttermost effect. And, besides the slaughter of the defendants, he entred their Cities, of which hee burnt Hazor only, reseruing the rest for Israel to inhabite and enioy. Secondly, I note, that Iosua shewed himselfe a skilfull man of Warre, for that in those ancient times he vsed the stratageme of an ambush in taking of Ai; and in that he broke the Armies of the first fiue Kings of the Amorites, which attempted Gibeon, by surprise. For he marched all night from his camp at Gilgal, and set on them early . 10. v. 9. the next day; when they suspected no enemie at hand: as hee did also at Merom, when he ouerthrew Iabin, and his confederates. After which, making the best pro∣fit of his victorie, he assaulted the great Citie of Hazor. Thirdly, the miracles which God wrought during this warre, were exceeding ad∣mirable; as the stay of the Riuer Iordan at the Springs, so as the Armie of Israel past it with a drie foote; the fall of Ierico by the sound of the Hornes; the showres of Ios. 3. v. 13. Haile-stones, which fell vpon the Amorites in their flight from Gibeon, whereby Cap. 10. v. 11. more of them perished, than by the sword of Israel: againe, the arrest of the Sunne in the firmament, whereby the day was so much the more lengthened, as the Israe∣lites had time to execute all those, which fled after the ouerthrow: a wonder of wonders, and a worke onely proper to the all-powerfull God. Fourthly, out of the passage betweene Iosua and the Gibeonites, the Doctrine of keeping Faith is so plainly and excellently taught, as it taketh away all euasion, it admitteth no distinction, nor leaueth open any hole or out-let at all to that cunning , and horrible deceit of this latter age, called Aequiuocation. For, not∣withstanding that these Gibeonites were a people of the Heuites, expresly and by Ios. 9. 7. name, by the commandement of God to be rooted out, and notwithstanding that they were liers, and deceiuers, and counterfeits, and that they did ouer-reach, and as it were, deride Iosua, and the Princes of Israel, by faining to bee sent as Embassa∣dours from a farre Countrie, in which trauaile their clothes were worne; their bread mouldie, which they auowed to haue warme for newnesse when they first set out; their barrells and bottles of wine broken; their shoes patcht; and their Ios. 9. from the 5. to the 13. Vers. sacks rent and ragged: Yet Iosua hauing sworne vnto them by the Lord God of Israel, hee durst not, though vrged by the murmure of the people, to lay violent handes on them; but hee spared both their Liues, and the Cities of their inhe∣ritance. Now if euer man had warrant to breake Faith, and to retract his promise made, Iosua had it. For first, the commandement which hee receiued from God to roote out this Nation among the rest, preceded by farre the peace which hee had granted them. Secondly, he might iustly haue put these men to the sword, and haue sackt their Cities; if there bee any cuasion from a promise made, whereof the liuing God is called to witnesse. For it was not to the Gibeonites that hee gaue peace, be∣cause hee knew them to bee a people hated of God. Hee told them, that if they Ios. 9. 7. were of the Heuites, it was not in his power to make a league with them. But it was to a strange people that hee gaue faith, and to a Nation which came from , who hearing of the wonders which the God of Israel had done in Aegypt and o∣uer Iordan, sought for peace and protection from his people. Thirdly, the accord, Ios. c. 9. vers. 14. which Israel made with these craftie Canaanites, was without warrant. For it is written in the same place, That the Israelites accepted their tale, that is, beleeued what they had said, and counsailed not with the mouth of the Lord. Fourthly, these men who were knowne Idolaters, and serued those Puppers of the Heathen, men of an Apish Religion, as all Worshippers of Images are, could not challenge the witnesse of the true God, in whome they not. I say therefore; that if e∣uer man might haue serued himselfe by any or distinction, Iosua might iust∣ly haue done it. For hee needed not in this case the helpe of Aequiuocation, or Mentall Reseruation. For what hee sware, hee sware in good Faith; but hee sware nothing, nor made any promise at all to the Gibeonites. And yet, to the end that the faithlesse subtilitie of man should borrow nothing in the future from his example, who knowing well, that the promises hee made in the name of God, were made to the liuing God, and not to the dying Man, hee held them firme, and inuiolable, notwithstanding that they, to whom hee had sworne it, were worship∣pers of the Deuill. For it is not, as faithlesse men take it, that he which sweareth to a Man, to a So∣cietie, to a State, or to a King, and sweareth by the name of the liuing Lord, and in his presence, That this promise (if it be broken) is broken to a Man, to a Societie, to a State, or to a Prince; but the promise in the name of God made, is broken to God. It is God, that wee therein neglect: wee therein professe that wee feare him not, and that we set him at nought and defie him. If hee that without Reseruation of honour giueth a lie in the presence of the King, or of his Superiour, doth in point of Honour giue the lie to the King himselfe, or to his Superiour; how much more doth he breake Faith with God, that giueth Faith in the presence of God, promi∣seth in his name, and makes him a witnesse of the Couenant made? Out of doubt, it is a fearefull thing for a Sonne to breake the Promise, Will, or Deed of the Father; for a State, or Kingdome, to breake those Contracts which haue beene made in former times, and confirmed by publique faith. For though it were 400. yeeres after Iosua, that Saul, euen out of deuotion, slaughtered some of those people descended of the : yet God who forgat not what the Predecessours and Fore-fathers of Saul & the Israclites had sworne in his name, afflicted the whole Nation with a consuming famine; and could not be appeased, till seuen of Sauls sonnes were deliuered to the grieued, and by them hanged vp. And certainly, if it be permitted by the helpe of a ridiculous distinction, or by a God-mocking equiuocation, to sweare one thing by the name of the liuing God, and to reserue in silence a contrarie intent: the life of man, the estates of men, the saith of Subiects to Kings, of Seruants to their Masters, of Vassalls to their Lords, of Wiues to their Husbands, and of Children to their Parents, and of all trialls of right, will not onely be made vncertaine, but all the chaines, whereby freemen are tied in the world, be torne asunder. It is by oath (when Kings and Armies can∣not passe) that we enter into the Cities of our enemies, and into their Armies: it is by oath that warres take ende, which weapons cannot ende. And what is it or ought it to be that makes an oath thus powerfull, but this; That he that sweareth by the name of God, doth assure others that his words are true, as the Lord of all the World is true whom he calleth for a witnesse, and in whose presence he that ta∣keth the oath hath promised? I am not ignorant of their poore euasions, which play with the seueritie of Gods Commaundements in this kinde: But this indeed is the best answere, That he breakes no faith, that hath none to breake. For whosoeuer hath faith and the feare of God, dares not doe it. The Christians in the Holie Land when they were at the greatest, and had brought the Caliph of Egypt to pay them tribute, did not only lose it againe, but were soone after beaten out of the Holie Land it selfe: by reason (saith William of Tyre, a reue∣rend Bishop which wrote that ) that Almerick the fiftieth King after Godfrey brake faith with the Caliph Elhadech, and his Vicegerent, The Soldan Sanar; who bee∣ing sodainely inuaded by Almerick, drew in the Turke Syracon to their aide: whose Nephew Seladine, after he had made Egypt his owne, beat the Christians out of the Holie Land; neither would the woodden Crosse (the very Crosse, say they that Christ died on) giue them victorie ouer Seladine, when they brought it into the field as their last refuge: seeing they had for sworne themselues in his name, that was crucified thereon. And if it be a direction from the holy Ghost, That hee that Psal. 5. 6. speaketh lies, shall be destroied, and that the mouth which vttereth them, slaieth the soule: Wisd. 1. 11. how much more perilous is it (if any perill be greater than to destroy the soule) to a lie? It was Eugenius the Pope, that perswaded, or rather the King of Hungarie after his great victorie Amurath the Turke, and when the said King had compelled him to peace, the most aduantagious that euer was made for the Christians, to breake his faith, and to prouoke the Turke to renew the warre. And though the said King was farre stronger in the field than euer; yet he lost the battaile with 30000. Christians, and his owne life. But I will stay my hand: For this first volume will not hold the repetition of Gods iudgements vpon faith-breakers; bee it against Infidels, Turkes, or Christians of diuers Religions. Lamentable it is, that the taking of oathes now-a-daies, is rather made a matter of custome than of conscience. It is also very remarkeable; That it pleased God to leaue so many Cities of the Canaanites vnconquered by Israel, to scourge and afflict them, by fore-seeing their Idolatrie, and as it is said in the Scriptures, To bee Thornes in their to proue them, . 23. and to teach them to make Warre. For these Cities hereafter named did not onely Iudg. 1. & Iudg. 3. v. 2. remaine in the Canaanites possession all the time of Iosua; but soone after his death, the Children of Dan were beaten out of the plaine Countries, and en∣forst to inhabite the Mountaines, and places of hardest accesse. And those of Iuda were not able to bee Masters of their owne Vallies; because, as it is writ∣ten Iudg. 1. v. 34. in the Iudges, The Canaanites had Chariots of yron. And those principall Cities . 1. v. 19. which stood on the Sea-side, adioyning vnto Iuda, were still held by the remainder of the Anakims, or Philistims: as Azzab, Gath, Asdod; out of one of which Cities came Ios. 11. v. 19. Goliath, remembred in Samuel. Sam. 1. 17. 4. Neither did the children of Manasse ouer expell the , nor the Maa∣chathites: which inhabited the North parts of Basan, afterward . Nor the Nepthalims possesse themselues of Bethshemish: nor of Bethanah, but they Ios. 13. v. 13. inforst those Canaanites to pay them tribute. Neither did expell the Zido∣nians, nor those of Acho, or Acon, Athlab, Achzib; Heblah, Aphike, and Rehob, nor in∣force Ind. 1. v. 31. them to tribute. No more could Zabulon enioy Kitron, and Nahalol, but receiued tribute from them. Also the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among the Ephrams: and among the chil∣dren Ios. 16. v. 10. of Manasse, on the West of Iordan, the Canaanites held , , Dor, Ib∣leam, Iud. 2. v. 27. and Meggado; yea Hierusalem it selfe did the Iebusites defend aboue foure hun∣dred yeeres, euen till Dauids time. Now Iosua liued one hundred and ten yeeres, eighteene of which he gouerned Israel, and then changed this life for a better. The time of his rule is not expressed in the Scriptures, which causeth diuers to coniecture diuersly of the continuance. Iosephus giues him fiue and twentie yeeres, Seder Ollam Rabbi the Authors of the He∣brew Chronologie eight and twentie: And Masseus sixe and twentie: Maimonius ci∣ted by Massius, fourteene: Ioannes Lucidus, seuenteene: Caietanus, ten: Eusebius gi∣ueth him seuen and twentie: and so doth S. Augustine: Melancthon, two and thirtie: Codoman, fiue and twentie. But whereas there passed 480. yeeres from the deliue∣rance of Israel out of Aegypt, vnto the building of the Temple, it is necessarie that wee allow to Iosua onely eighteene of them; as finding the rest supplied other∣wise, which to mee seemes the most likely, and as I thinke, a well approoued opinion. The same necessitie of retaining precisely 480. yeeres from the departure out of Aegypt vnto the building of the Temple, conuinceth of errour, such as haue inser∣ted yeeres betweene Iosua and Othoniel, of whom Eusebius findes eight yeere, to . Praep. E∣uang. which Arius Montanus adhereth; and for which hee giueth his reason in his foure and twentieth and last Chapters vpon Iosua: Bunting reckons it nine yeere: Bucholzer and Reusner but one, Codoman twentie, and Nicephorus no lesse than three and thirtie: whereas following the sure direction of these 480. yeeres, there can be no void yeeres found betweene Iosua and Othoniel, vnlesse they be taken out of those eighteen ascri∣bed vnto Iosua by the account alreadie specified. The prayses and acts of Iosua are briefly written in the sixe and fortieth Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, where among many other things it is said of him, Who was there before him like to him, for hee fought the battells of the Lord? That he wrote the booke called by this name, it was the opinion of Arius Monta∣nus, because it is said in the last Chapter ver. 26. And IOSVA wrote these wordes in the booke of the law of God: which seemeth rather to haue beene meant by the coue∣nant which Iosua made with Israel in Sichem, where they all promised to serue and obey the Lord: which promise Iosua caused to be written in the booke of the Law: and of this opinion were Caictan and : Theodoret doth likewise conceiue that the booke of Iosua was collected out of an ancient Volume, intituled Liber Iustorum; 1. 10. 13. remembred by Iosua himselfe, and others, that it was the worke of Samuel: for whereas Montanus groundeth his opinion vpon these wordes of the 26. verse, And IOSVA wrote these wordes, &c. this place hath nothing in it to proue it, for when the people had answered IOSVA; The Lord our God will we serue, and his voice will we obey, 5. last. v. 24. v. 26 it followeth that Iosua made a couenant with the people, and wrote the same in the booke of the Law of God. There liued at once with Iosua, Ericthonius in Attica, who taught that Nation to yoke beasts together, thereby to till the ground with more case and speede: And about the same time the fiftie Daughters of Danâus (as it is said) slew the fiftie Sonnes of Aegyptus, all but Lynceus who succeeded Danâus, if the tale be true. There liued also with Iosua, Phoenix and Cadmus, and neere the end of Iosuas life, Iupiter is said to haue rauished Europa the Daughter of Phoenix, (afterward marryed to Aste∣rius Lib. . c. 12. De Ciuit. Dei. King of Creta ) and begat on her Minos, Radamanthus, and Sarpedon. But S. Au∣gustine reports this rauishment to be committed by Xanthus, and yet they are more commonly taken for the Sonnes of Iupiter. But it may be doubted whether Minos was Father to Deucalion, and Deucalion to Idomeneus, who was an old man at the war Homer, & Iliad. of Troy, and Sarpedon was in person a young or strong man at the same Troian warre. And so doth Nestor reckon vp in the Councell of the Greekes, Theseus and Perithous for men of antiquitie, and of ages past: Minos being yet more ancient than any of Hom. Iliad. 1. these. But hereof elsewhere. CHAP. VII. Of the Tribes of , that were planted in the borders of Phoenicia, with sundrie Stories depending vpon those places. §. I. The Proaeme to the description of the whole Land of Canaan, with an exposition of the name of Syria. THE Storie of the Iudges ought to follow that of Iosua, after whome the Common-wealth of the Iewes was gouerned by Kings, of which so many of them as ru∣led the tenne Tribes, shall be remembred when wee come to the description of Samaria: but because the Land of Canaan, and the borders thereof, were the Stages and Theaters, whereon the greatest part of the Storie past, with that which followeth, hath beene a∣cted, I thinke it very pertinent (for the better vnder∣standing of both) to make a Geographicall description of those Regions: that all things therein performed by the places knowne, may the better bee vnderstood, and conceiued. To which purpose (besides the addition of the Neighbour Countries) I haue bestowed on e∣uery Tribe his proper portion: and doe shew what Cities and Places of strength, were by the Iewes obtained: and what numbers it pleased God to leaue vnconquered: by whom he might correct and scourge them, when vngrateful for his many graces, they at sundry times forgat or neglected the Lord of all power, and adored those deafe and dead Idols of the Heathen. Diuina bonitas (saith AVGVSTINE) ideo maximè irascitur in hoc saeculo, ne in : & misericorditer temporalem adhibet seueritatem, ne aeternam inferat vltionem; The diuine goodnesse is especially therefore angrie in this world, that it may not be in the world to come, and doth mercifully vse temporall seueritie, that it may not iustly bring vpon vs eternall vengeance. To the Cities heerein described, I haue added a short Storie of the beginnings and ends of diuers Kingdomes and common-weales: and to helpe my selfe herein, I haue perused diuers of the best Authors vpon this subiect: among whom, because I finde so great disagreement in many particulars, I haue rather in such cases aduen∣tured to follow mine owne reason, than to borrow any one of their olde patternes. And because Canaan, with Palaestina of the Philistims, and the Lands of Og and Sihon Kings of Basan, and the Arabian Amorites, were but small Prouinces of Syria: it shall be necessarie, first to diuide and bound the generall, and so to descend to this particular, now called the holy Land. Syrra, now Soria, according to the largest description, and as it was anciently ta∣ken, Ptol. tab. 4. imbraced all those Regions from the Euxine Sea, to the Red Sea: and therefore were the Cappadocians, which looke into Pontus, called Leucosyrians, or white Syrians. Ptol. 5. But taking it shorter, and from the coast of Cilicia, which is the North border, vnto Idumaea towards the South, Tigris towards the Sunne rising, and the Mediterran Sea Westward: it then containeth besides Babylonia, Chaldaea, Arabia the Desart, and Arabia , that Region also which the Greekes call Mesopotamia, the Hebrewes Sy∣ria, of the two Riuers, to wit, Tigris and Euphrates, for so Aram-Nahairaijm is expoun∣ded: also Padan Aram: that is, Iugum Syriae, because the two Riuers goe along in it as it were in a yoke. Edessa, sometime Rages, now Rage, was the Metropolis of this Region of Syria. In . Syria taken largely, there were many small Prouinces, as which the Latines call Syria Caua, because it lay in that fruitfull Valley betweene the Mountaines of Lybanus, and Anti-lybanus, in which the famous Cities of Antioch, Laodicea, Apamea, with many others were seated. Then Damascena or Syria Lybanica, taking name of the Citie Damascus, and the Mountaines of Lybanus, the Regall seate of the Adades, the first Kings of Syria. Adioyning to it was the Prouince of Sophene, or Syria Soba, 1. K. 11. Choba, or Zobal: ouer which Adadezer commanded in Salomons time. Then Phoe∣nicia Herod. in Polym. Dion. l. 27. and the people Syraphoenices: and lastly Syria Palaestina bordering Aegypt: of which Ptolomie maketh Iudaea also a part: and to that Prouince which Moses calleth Ptol. Asiae. tab. 4. Seir and Edom, Pomponius Mela giueth the name of Syria Iudaes. §. II. Of the bounds of the Land of Canaan, and of the promises touching this Land. BVt that Land which was anciently Canaan, taketh a part of Phoenicia, and stretcheth from behinde Lybanus to the great Desarts betweene I∣dumaea and Aegypt: bounded by the Mid-land Sea on the West, and the Mountaines of Hermon; Galaad, and Arnon towards the East: the same Hills which Strabo calleth Traconi or Traconitae, and Ptolomie Hip∣pus. Strab. l. 10. The name of Canaan it had from Canaan the Sonne of CHAM, & lingua appella∣ta fuit CANAAN; The language was also called CANAAN, saith Montanus: and after Hebraea of the Hebrewes: who tooke name from Heber, the Sonne of Sale, according caleb. f. 62. to S. Augustine. But Arias Montanus not so well allowing of this deriuation, makes it a common name to all those of Noahs Sonnes, which past ouer Euphrates towards the West Sea. For the word Heber, saith hee, is as much as transiens or transmittens, of going or passing ouer. And because the children of Abraham had for a long time no certaine abiding: therefore as he thinks, they were by the Aegyptians called Hebraei, as it were passengers, which is also the opinion of C. Sigonius, and of Eusebius long Euseb. Praep. uang. l. 7. c. 3. before them both. It had also the name of Iudaea from Iuda; and then afterwards in∣tituled The holy Land, because therein our Sauiour Christ was borne and buried. Now this part of Syria was againe diuided into foure; namely, into Edom, (other∣wise Seir, or Edumaea ) Galilee, Samaria, and Iudaea. Galilee is double, the superior called Gentium, and the inferiour: and that Galilee and Iudaea are distinguished, it is plaine in Math. 2. the , though both of them belong to Phoenicia. Luke 2. 4. Now besides these prouinces of Phoenicia, and Palaestina (both which the Riuer of Iordan boundeth; sauing that Phoenicia stretcheth a little more Easterly towards Damascus ) that part also to the East of Iordan, and within the Mountaines of Hermon Gilead and Arnon, otherwise Traconi, fell to the possession of halfe Manasse, Gad, and Ruben, and therefore are accounted a part of Canaan also: aswell because anciently possest by the Amorites, as for that they were conquered and enioyed by the Israe∣lites, which Eastermost parts are againe diuided into Basan or Batanea, into Gilead, Moab, Midian, Ammon, and the Territories of the , Gessuri, Argobe, Hus. They are knowne to the later Cosmographers by the name of Arabia in generall: and by the names of Traconitis, Pieria, Batanea, &c. of which I will speake in their pro∣per places. But where Moses describeth the Land of Canaan in the tenth of Genesis, he maketh no mention of the later Prouinces, which fell to Manasse, Gad, and Ruben, for these be his words, Then the border of the Canaanites was from Zidon, as thou commest to Ge∣rar vntill Azzah (which is Gaza ) and this was the length of the Countrey North and South: then it followeth in the Text; And as thou goest vnto Sodome and Go∣morah, and Admah, and Seboijm, euen vnto Lasha: by which words Moses setteth downe the breadth, to wit, from thd Dead Sea to the Mediteran. But in Deuterono∣mie Deut. 11. 24. it seemeth to be farre more large: For it is therein written; All the places whereon the soale of your feet shall tread, shall be yours: your coast shall be from the wildernesse and from Libanon, and from the Riuer Perah, vnto the vttermost Sea. Now for the length of the Countrie North and South, this description agreeth with the former: onely Libanon is put for Zidon: and the Wildernesse for Gerar and Azzah, which make no difference: but for the breadth and extent East and West, if Perah bee taken for Eu∣phrates: then the Land promised stretcheth it selfe both ouer Arabia Petraea, and the Desart as farre as the border of Babylon: which the Israelites neuer possest: at any time did so much as inuade or attempt. And therefore Vadianus doth conceiue that by the Riuer Perah, was meant Iordan, and not Euphrates: taking light from this place of IOSVA: Behold, I haue diuided vnto you by lot these Nations, that remaine to be 23. v. 4. an inheritance according to your Tribes: from Iordan with all the Nations that I haue destroi∣ed, euen vnto the great Sea Westward. And though it bee true that Dauid greatly enlarged the Territorie of the holy Vadian. Epitom∣trium terrae par∣tium. cap. Palae∣stina. Land: yet as Vadianus well noteth, if Perah in the former place be taken for Euphra∣tes, then was it put per gentes in amicitiam recept as. For Dauid did not at any time enter so farre to the East as Assyria, or Babylonia. Neither doth the not possessing of all these Countries giue aduantage to those that would make any irreligious cauill, as touching the promise of God to the Israelites vnperformed: For when both their Kings, Magistrates, and People, fell from his worship and seruice, it pleased him not onely to inclose them within that Territorie, which was for so many people excee∣ding narrow; but therein and elsewhere to subiect them vnto those Idolatrous Na∣tions, whose false and foolish Gods themselues also serued and obeyed. And sure the promise by which the Hebrewes claimed the inheritance of Canaan, and the la∣sting inioying thereof, to wit, as long as the heauens were aboue the earth, was tied to Deut. 11. v. 21. those conditions, both in the Verses preceding, and subsequent; which the Israelites neuer performed. And therefore they could not hope for other than all mankinde could or can expect; who know that all sorts of comforts from the mercifull good∣nesse of God looked for, aswell in this life as after it, are no longer to bee attended, than while wee perseuer in his loue, seruice, and obedience. So in the eighth Verse of the eleuenth of Deuteronomie, the keeping of Gods Commandements was a con∣dition ioyned to the prosperity of Israel. For therein it is written; Therefore shall yee Deut. 11. keepe all the Commandements which I command you this day: that ye may be strong, and goe in, and possesse the Land, whither yee goe to possesse it. Also that you may prolong your dayes in the Land which the Lord sware vnto your Fathers, &c. The like condition was also annexed to the enioying of the land conquered, and the possession thereof, so long as the heauens were aboue the earth. For if yee keepe Deut. 11. diligently, saith he, all these commandements, which I command you to doe, that is, to loue the Lord your God, &c. then will the Lord cast out all these Nations before you, and yee shall possesse great Nations, and mightier than you. And heere, though it bee manifest, that by reason of the breach of Gods Commandements, and their falling away from the worship of his all-powerfull Majestie, to the Idolatrie of the Heathen, the conditionall promises of God were absolutely void, as depending vpon obedience vnperformed: yet I cannot mislike that exposition of Melancthon: For, saith he, osten∣dit promissionem praecipuam non esse de hoc Politico regno; He sheweth that his chiefe pro∣mise is not of a ciuill Kingdome. To which agrees that answere, which S. Hierome made to a certaine Heretique in his Epistle ad Dardanum, who accused S. Hierome that he ouerthrew the reputation of the Iewes Storie, and brought the truth thereof in question, by drawing it altogether into an Allegorie, and adillam duntaxat viuen∣tium terram quae in coelis est; (that is) Onely to that Land of the liuing which is in Heauen. Quoniam tota Iudaeorum Regio adeo angusta sit ambitu, vt vix longitudinem habeat 160. milliarium, latitudinem verò 40. & in his etiam regiones, loca, vrbes & oppida sunt , nunquàm à occupata, sed tantum diuina pollicitatione promissa; Because the whole of the Iewes is so narrow in compasse, that it scarce hath 160. miles in length, and 40. miles in breadth, and in these are Countries, Places, Cities, and many Townes, which the Iewes neuer possest, but were only granted by diuine promise. In like manner the same Father speaketh vpon Esay touching the blessings promised vnto Hierusalem: where hee hath these words: De quo discimus Hierusalem nequaquam in Palaestinae Regione Cap. 49. 14. petendam: quae totius Prouinciae deterrima est: & saxosis montibus asperatur & penuriam patitur sitis: ita vt caelestibus vtatur pluuijs, & raritatem fontium cisternarum extructione soletur: sed in Dei ad quam dicitur festinauerunt structores tui; From whence, saith he, we learne, that Hierusalem is not to be sought in that Region of Palaestina, which is the worst of the whole Prouince, and ragged with craggie Mountaines, and suffereth the pe∣nurie of thirst: so as it preserueth raine water, and supplieth the scarcitie of Wells by building Cesternes, but this Hierusalem is in Gods hands, to which it is said, Thy builders haue haste∣ned, so farre S. Hierome, where also to preuent mistaking, hee thus expoundeth him∣selfe. Neque hoc dico in suggillationem terrae , vt Haereticus Sycophanta mentitur: quo historiae veritatem: quae fundamentum est intelligentiae spiritualis, sed vt decutiam supercilium Iudaeorum: qui Synagogae angustias latitudini Ecclesiae praeferunt. Si enim occidentem tantum sequuntur literam, & non spiritum viuificantem: ostendant ter∣ram promission is lacte & melle manantem; Neither (saith he) say I this to disgrace the land of Iudaea (as the Hereticall sycophant doth belie me) or to take away the truth of the Historie, which is the foundation of spirituall vnderstanding, but to beate downe the pride of the Iewes: which enlarge the straits of the Synagogue farther then the breadth of the Church: for if they follow onely the killing letter, and not the quickening spirit, let them shew the Land of promise, flowing with milke and honnie. By this it may also be gathered, how so euer it be vnlikely (seeing the West-bound in the place, Deut. 11. 24. had his truth in the literall sense, that Euphrates or Perath, which is made the East bound, should be taken only in a spirituall sense) yet neuer∣thelesse that Hieroms opinion inclineth to this, as if this Perath were not to be vnder∣stood for Euphrates: and that the promise it selfe was neuer so large: much lesse the plantation and conquest of Israel. And now for a more particular description of this Holy Land, because Asher, Nephtalim, and Zabulon, held the Northermost , and were seated in Phoenicia, I will begin with these three, taking Asher for the first: of which Tribe yet before I speake, I must admonish the Reader touching the names of places in this, and the other Tribes to be mentioned, that he remember that many names by reason of the diuers fancies of Translators, are diuersly expressed, so that to the vnskilfull they may seeme diuers, when they are one and the same: the reason of this diuersitie (as by those learned in the Hebrew I am taught) is, partly because the ancient Edi∣tions of the Hebrew want vowels, the old Translators imagined other vowels than now the Hebrew Editions haue; and partly because the Ancient expressed or omit∣ted diuers consonants, otherwise than the latter thinke fit. §. III. THE TRIBE OF ASHER. †. I. The bounds of the Tribe of Asher. THe Asherites descended of Asher the Sonne of Iacob by Zelpha, the hand-maid of Lea, were increased while they abode in Aegypt, to the number of 41500. and odde persons, all men aboue twentie yeeres of age, and able to beare armes at the time, when they were mustered by Moses at Mount Sinai: all which number perishing in the Desarts, there remained of their issues, besides women and children 53400. bodies fit for the warres: which past the Riuer of Arnon, into the Plaines of Moab, and after the Conquest of Canaan, had for their portion that part of Phoenicia, from Zidon and the fields of Libanus, vnto Ptolomais Acon alongst the Sea-coast: containing thirtie Eng∣lish miles or thereabout: and from the Mid-land sea to the East border some twelue miles: though Antoninus makes it somewhat larger. This part of Canaan Ant. Itin. was very fruitfull, abounding in Wine, Oile, and Wheate, besides the Balsamum, with other pleasant and profitable commodities: according to that Prophecie, ASSER pinguis panis: concerning Asser, his bread shall be fat: And he shall giue plea∣sures . 4. 9. for a King. †. II. Of Zidon. THe first Citie seated on the North border of the Territorie of Asser, was Zidon, which Iosua calleth the great Zidon, both for ftrenght and magnitude. The Greekes and Q. Curtius make Agenor the founder thereof: and Iustine deriues the . l. 18. name from the abundance of Fish found on those shores: whereof it hath been cal∣led Zidona. But that it was farre more ancient, Moses, Iosua, and Iosephus witnesse, Gen. 10. Ioseph. the same being founded by Zidon the eldest of Canaans Sonnes: and so strong it was in Iosuas time, as neither did himselfe attempt it, neither could the Asserites, or any of their Successors master it: but it continued all the time of the Iudges and Kings, e∣uen vnto the comming of Christ, a Citie interchangeably gouerned, by their owne Princes or other Magistrates: though according to the warnings, and threats of the Esay, Hieremie, Ezekiel, and , it was often afflicted both by the ene∣mies Esa. 23. Hier. 47 Ezek. 28. & 32. . 9. sword, and by the pestilence. Zidon is seated on the very wash of the Phoenician Sea, which is a part of the Me∣diterran or Mid-land Sea. It hath to the North the Citie of Berythus, and the Riuer Leontis: and to the South Sarepta, or Sarphat: which standeth betweene it and Tyre, the distance betweene which two great and famous Cities, to wit, Zidon and Tyre, is fourteene thousand paces, saith Seiglerus: but Vadianus makes it two hundred fur∣longs, Palaest. Seig. f. 19. Vidian. Phoen. f. 278. and so doth in his description of the holy Land, and both from Strabo: which two hundred furlongs make fiue and twentie miles. This difference Strab. l. 16. of distance as well betweene these two knowne Cities, as all the rest, make it ouer dif∣ficult to deuise any new scale to the Map, and description of the holy Land. What Kings it had till Agenors time there is no memorie: The Storie which Zeno the Philosopher, who was a Zidonian, wrote thereof, being by time consumed and lost. It seemeth to bee more ancient than Tyre: which was also built by the Zi∣donians. For as Strabo noteth, Homer speaking of Zidon, neglecteth the memorie of Strab. l. 16. Tyre: because it was but a member of Zidon, and a Citie subiect to the Kings thereof: though it bee true that in after-times it contended with Zidon for Primacie, and be∣came farre more renowned, opulent, and strong: From Zidon had Salomon and , their principall workmen, both in Timber and Stone; for the building of the Temple. For as it flourished in all sorts of learning, so did it in all other Mecha∣nicall Arts and Trades: the Prophet Zacharie calling them the wise Zidonians. The Zach. 9. v. z. Citie was both by nature and art exceeding strong, hauing a Castle or on the North-side, standing vpon an vnaccessible Rocke, and compassed by the Sea, which after the Citizens became Christians, was held and defended by the Knights of the Dutch Order: and another Castle it hath on the South side by the Port of Aegypt, which the Templers guarded. It also sent many other Colonies besides that of Tyre, into places remote: as vnto Thebes, and Sephyra, Cities of Boeotia in Greece. . l. . Plin. l. 5. c. . Strabo and Plinie giue the Zidonians the inuention of It seemes that euen in time they glasse making, us for which ad is as much as combustiones a∣quarum, reades fornaces vitrari∣as. . 11. 8. as it , because these Fornaces were wher ther store of wa ter, either for the mouing of the bellows by the force of the water, or for o∣ther necessarie vses. But there are others that take them for salt pits, and o∣ther againe for hot baths. Glasse, which they vsed to make of those sands which are taken out of the Riuer Belus, falling into the Mediter∣ran Sea, neere Ptolomais or Acon: and from whence the Venetians fetch the matter of those cleare Glasses which they make at Murana: of which S. Hierome and Plinie. ZI∣DON insignis artifex vitri: ZIDON vitarijs Nobilis; ZIDON a famous Glasse∣maker, or a skilfull worker in Glasse-houses. They were in Religion Idolaters (as the rest of the Canaanites ) worshippers of Baal and : which Idols though common to the other of the issue of Canaan (as Pineda gathers out of 1. Sam. 31. 10. and Iud. 10. 6.) yet especially and peculiar∣ly were accounted the Gods of the Zidonians: as appeares 1. Kings 11. 5. in the sto∣rie of Salomons Idolatrie: where Astaroth is called the God of the Zidonians: and 1. Reg. 16. 33 in the storie of Achab, the chiefe worshipper of Baal, where it is said that hee marrying Iezabel the Daughter of the King of the Zidonians, worshipped their Baal. Diuers Baals and diuers Astaroths in their Idolatries they acknowledged: as it appeares by the plurall names of Baalim and Astaroth, 1. Sam. 12. 10. and elsewhere: for euen the name Astaroth, as I am informed by a skilfull , is plurall: the singular being Astoreth: whence Iud. 2. 13. the Septuagint reade : They worshipped the Astarties. The occasion of this their multiplying of their Baals, and Astoreths, may be diuersly vnderstood: either in respect of the diuersitie of the formes of the Images, or of the worship in diuers places, or of the stories depending vpon them: which (as fables vse to bee) were doubtlesse in diuers Cities diuers. Au∣gustine quaest. 16. in Iudg. thinkes Baal and Astarte to bee Iupiter and Iuno. For the Car∣thaginians (which were Tyrians ) call Iuno by some such name as Astarte. Tullie, lib. 3. The forme of Astoreth (or A∣starte ) seemeth to haue beene a sheepe, for Deut. 7. 13. the word in the plu rall number fi∣gnifieth sheep: and this may confirme Au∣gustins opinion, that Astarte was Iuno: for the forme of her husband Iu∣piter was a Ramme. de Nat. Deorum, making diuers Goddesses of the name of Venus, expounds the fourth to be Astarte: whom hee makes to bee borne of Tyrus and Syria, and to haue beene the wife of Adonis: as also Macrob. 2. Saturn. cap. 21. saies that Adonis was with great veneration commonly worshipped of the Assyrians: and Hierome vpon Ezek. 8. 44. notes that Thammuz (whom there the Idolatrous women are noted to bewaile) is the name of Adonis among the Syrians. So that it may seeme that in the worship of Astarte, or Venus, they did bewaile her husband Adonis: as also the Graecians did in their songs of ADONIS. Mourne for ADONIS the faire, dead is ADONIS the faire, How be it others in that place of Ezekiel not without good probabilitie, expound the mourning for Thammuz, to be the mourning for Osiris in the sacrifices of Isis: whose losse of her husband Osiris, was as famous in the Aegyptian Idolatrie, as with the Graecians, Venus losse of Adonis. And to this agreeth that which Plutarch hath, de Isi∣de & Osiride; that Osiris with the Aegyptians is called Ammuz: which word may seeme to be the same with Ezekiels Thammuz. But how soeuer these Zidonians were thus anciently with the milke of Idolatrie: yet they were more apt to re∣ceiue the Doctrine and Gospell of Christ after his Ascension, than the Iewes: who had beene taught by Moses, and the Prophets so many yeeres, whereof our Sauiour in Matthew and Luke. Woe bce to thee Corazin, &c. for if the great works which were Math. 11. v. 20. done in thee, had beene done in Tyrus and Zidon, they had repented long agone, &c. but I say vnto you, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Zidon, at the day of iudgement than for you. It receiued a Christian Bishop with the first: who was afterward of the Diocesse of Tyre. But in the yeere of our Redemption 636. it fell into the hands of the Sa∣racens: and continued in their possession till Baldwinus the first, then King of Hieru∣salem, in the yeere IIII. by the helpe of the Danes and Norwaies, who came with Tyr. 11. Bell. Sacr. 14. a Fleete to visite the holy Land, and tooke Port at Ioppa, it was againe recouered, Vitriac. c. 27. the thereof being giuen to Eustace Gremer, a Noble man of that Countrie. And againe in the yeere 1250. it was reedified and strengthned by Lodo∣wicke the French King: while hee spent foure yeere in the Warre of the holy Land. Lastly, in the yeere 1289. it was reconquered by the Saracens: and is now in posses∣sion Niger Postellus. of the Turke, and hath the name of Zai. †. III. Of Sarepta, with a briefe Historie of Tyre in the same coast. SArepta, or after the Hebrew, Sarphath, is the next Citie Southward from Zidon, betweene it and the Riuer called Near, or Fons hortorum Libani (of which more hereafter) standing in the way towards Tyre, a Citie very famous for the excellent Wine growing neere it: of which Sidonius. Vina mihi non sunt Gazetica, Chia, Falerna, Sareptano palmite missa bibas. I haue no wine of Gaza, nor Falerna wine, Nor any for thy drinking of Sarepta's vine. This Citie had also a Bishop of the Diocesse of Tyre: after it came to the Saracens and Turkes, as the rest: and is now called Saphet, saith Postellus. Not farre from Sarepta was situate that sometime famous Citie of Tyre, whose fleets of ships commanded, and gaue the law ouer all the Mediterran Sea, and the borders thereof: during which time of greatnesse and power, the Tyrians erected V∣tica, Leptis, and Carthage in Affrica, of which VIRGIL. Vrbs antiqua fuit Tyrij te∣nuere Virgil. l. Coloni Carthago. And Carthage was therefore called Punica quasi Phoenicum, a Colonie of the Phoenicians. In Spaine they founded Gades, now Caliz. In Italie, Nola: Plin. l. 5. c. 19. in Asia the lesse, Dromos Achillis, which Citie the Scholiast of Apollonius placeth neere Mercelin. l. 22. the Riuer Phyllis, in Bithynia. It had anciently the name of Zor, or Tzor; and so it is written in Iosua the 19. ta∣king name from the situation; because built on a high Rocke, sharpe at one end. The Latines, as it seemes, knew it by the name of Sarra; for Virgil calleth the purple Gellius. l. 4. c. 6. of Tyre, ostrum Sarranum, by which name Iuuenal and Silius remember it. The Zidoni∣ans built it vpon a high Hill, whereof many ruines remaine to this day; the place be∣ing still knowne by the name of the ancient Tyre: and because it was a Colonie of the Zidonians, the Prophet Esay calleth it the Daughter of Zidon; which Trogus also Cap. 23. confirmeth, though Berosus by affinitie of name makes Thir as the Sonne of Iaphet to be the Parent thereof: and though no doubt it was very ancient (for so much the Prophet Esay also witnesseth, Is not this your glorious Citie whose antiquitie is of ancient Cap. 23. daies: ) yet, that Thir as the sonne of Iaphet set himselfe in the bosome of the Canaa∣nites who built Zidon, and peopled all that Region: I see nothing to perswade mee. But that new Tyre in after-times so renowned, seemeth to bee the worke of Age∣nor: . l. 18. . l. 4. and of this opinion was Curtius: and Iosephus, and make this Citie el∣der than Salomons Temple 240. yeeres: Cedrenus 361. who also addeth that Tyrus . in. Cron. Ioseph. . lit. 8. cap. 2. the Wife of Agenor gaue it her name: but of Agenor I will speake more at large in the storie of their Kings. For strength and for the commoditie of the harbour, and the better to receiue Trade from all places, it was in this new erection founded in an , 700. paces from the continent: and therefore Ezekiel placeth it in the middest of the Sea, as Ezek. 28. 2. 27. vers 3. some reade, or as others in the inner-most part of the Sea, whence hee calleth it situate at the entrie of the Sea, as also the same Prophet calleth the of the people Esai. 23. 3. for many Iles: and ESAY a Mart of the Nations: and so Proude, Wealthie, and Magni∣ficent was this Citie, as the Prophet Esay calleth the Merchants thereof Princes, and 27. 8. their Chapmen the Nobles of the world. It excelled both in learning, and in manu-facture: especially in the making and dying of Purple, and Scarlet-cloth: which, saith Iulius Pollux, was first found out by Hercutes Dogge, who passing alongst the Sea-coast, and eating of the Fish Con∣chilis or Purpura: the haire of his lips became of that colour. It worshipped the same Idolls that Zidon did: sauing that Hercules became their Patron in after-times. For Alexander Macedon, when the Tyrians presented him with a crowne of gold, and other gifts, desiring to remaine his friends and allies, answered them, that he had vowed a sacrifice to Hercules, the Defender of their Citie: and the Ancester of the Macedonians Kings: and must therefore enter it. Whereupon they sent him word, that Hercules his Temple was in the Mountaine of old Tyre: where he might performe that ceremonie: but this auailed not. For Alexander was not so super∣stitious, as ambitious, hee desired to enter the Towne, which being denied, he as one whom no perill could feare, nor labour wearie, gathered together as many ships as he could; and brought from Libanus so great a number of Cedars, and so many waightie Stones, from the old Citie of Tyre adioyning, as not withstanding that his materialls were often washt away with the strength of the Sea, and the Tides, yet he neuer rested, till hee had made a foote passage from the Continent to the Iland: and hauing once approched their Walls, hee ouer. topt them with Tur∣rets of wood, and other frames: from whence (hauing filled the body of force with the violent mouing Spirit of resolution) he became Lord thereof, putting all to the sword that resisted, after which he caused 2000 more to bee hung vp in a ranke all a∣longst the Sea-shore: which exequution vpon cold bloud hee performed (as some Authors affirme) vpon the issues of those slaues which had formerly slaine all their Masters, taking their Wiues, Children, Riches, and power of Gouernement to themselues. This victorie of Alexander ouer the Tyrians, Iosephus remembreth: Iosep. ant. . l. 11. c. 8. and how Sanaballat reuolted from Darius, and came to Alexander with 8000. Soul∣diers: who was the last Satrapa or Prouinciall , which Darius seated in Samaria: the same who hauing married his Daughter to , brother to Iaddus the high Priest of Hierusalem, obtained of Alexander that a Temple might bee built on the Mountaines Garizim ouer Samaria: that the forces of the Iewes being diuided, Alexander might the better hold them in obedience. The Honour of which Priest∣hood he bestowed on his sonne-in-law Manasse, whom the Iewes oppugned, for that he had married out of their Tribes, and with a Gentile: but while Alexander besieged De. sacr l. 13. c. 4. Gaza, Sanaballat, whom Guil. Tyrius calleth Sanabula, died. Long before this desolation of Tyre, by the crueltie of Alexander, it was attempted by Salmanasser the Assyrian King: when the growing pride of the Assyrians, after that they had conquered the ten Tribes, with the rest of Syria, became of the beautie, riches, and power of that Citie. Hee besieged it both on the Land-side, and with three-score ships of Warre held the Port: to the end that neither any vi∣ctualls nor any supply of men might enter it: but the Tyrians with twelue saile scat∣tered that fleete, and tooke 500. prisoners of the Assyrians: notwithstanding, the Iosep. Ant. lib. 9. cap. 14. Assyrian continued his resolution and lay before it by his Lieutenants fiue yeeres, but with ill successe. And this siege Menander Ephesius, cited by Iosephus, made re∣port Et cont. Ap. 1. Guil. Tyrius. de . Sacr. 13. 4. Iosep. Ant. lib. 9. cap. 15. of in his Chronicles, as hee found the Storie among the Annalls of the Tyrians (which the said Menander into Greeke ) adding that Elulaeus, whom Tyrius calleth Helisaeus, was then King of Tyre, hauing gouerned the same sixe and twentie yeeres. Soone after this repulse of Salmanassar, and about 200. yeeres before the victorie of Alexander, Nabuchodonosor at such time as hee destroyed Hierusalem with the Temple, came before this Citie: who indeed gaue to Alexander the example of that despairefull worke, of ioyning it to the Continent. For Nabuchodonosor had formerly done it: though by the diligence of the Citizens, and the strength of the Sea, the same cawsey and passage was againe broken downe, and demolished. Nabuchodonosor, for many yeeres, the Tyrians defended themselues: for so long did these Babylonians continue before it, As euery head was made bald, and eue∣ry . 29. 18. Esai. 23. &c. shoulder made bare, saith Ezekiel, who with the Prophet Esay had manifestly fore∣told the destruction of this proude place. In the end and after thirteene yeeres siege or more, the Tyrians despoiled of all their hopes, and remembring ouer-late the pre∣dictions and threatnings of Gods Prophets, hauing prepared a conuenient number of ships, abandoned their Citie, transporting with themselues the ablest of all that remained: and with their wiues, children, and portable riches sailed thence into Cy∣prus, Carthage, and other Maritimate Cities of their Tributaries, or Confederates: so as the Babylonians finding nothing therein, either to satisfie so many labours and perills, or any person vpon whom to auenge themselues for the losse of so many bo∣dies in that Warre: It pleased God in recompence thereof (who strengthened this resolution, as in a worke of his owne) to make Nabuchodonosor victorious ouer the Aegyptians: and gaue him that Kingdome and the spoile thereof, as it were in wages . 29. v. 19. for his Armie. Whereupon Saint Hierome noteth, that God leaueth not the good deeds of the Heathen vnrewarded: who though they cannot hope by any laudable worldly action, to attaine vnto that eternall happinesse reserued for his Seruants and Saints: yet such is the boundlesse goodnesse of God, as he often repaieth them with many worldly gifts and temporall blessings. Now of this enterprise of Nabuchodonosors against Tyre, prophane Historians haue not beene silent. For both Diocles, and Philostratus (as Iosephus citeth them) the one Iosep. ant. l. 10. c. 13. in his second Booke, the other in his Phoenician Histories remember it. After these two great Vastations by the Kings of Babylon and Macedon: this Citie of Tyre repaired and recouered it selfe againe: and continued in great glorie about 300. yeeres, euen to the comming of our Sauiour Christ: and after him flourished in the Christian Faith neere 600. yeeres: the Archbishop whereof gaue place to none but to the Patriarke of Hierusalem only: who within his owne Diocesse had fourteene great Cities, with their Bishops and Suffragans: namely , otherwise Porphi∣ria, Gul. Tyr. bell. sac. Acon or Ptolomais, Sarepta, Zidon, Caesarea Philippi, Berytus, Byblus, Botrys, Tripolis, Orthosia, Archis, Aradus, Antaradus (or Tortosa ) and . But in the yeere 636. it was with the rest of that beautifull Region of Phoenicia and Palaestina, subiected to the cruell and faithlesse Saracen. Vnder the burthen and yoke of whose tyrannie it suffered with the other Palestine Cities 488. yeeres. In the yeere 1112. it was attempted by Baldwine King of Hierusalem; but in Gul. Tyr. 11. Bell. sacr. 17. vaine: yet in the yeere 1124. by Guaremonde, Patriarke of Hierusalem, Vicegerent to Baldwine the second, with the assistance of the Venetians, and their of Gallies, it was againe recouered, and subiected to the Kings of Hierusalem, and so it remained 165. yeeres. Finally, in the yeere 1189. Saladine hauing first taken Hierusalem, remoued his whole Armie and sate downe before Tyre: drawing his fleete of ships and Gallies from Alexandria into the port, this Citie as then onely remaining in the Christian power. The citizens finding themselues reduced into great famine, and many other mi∣series, they at once with certaine rafters of timber, fiered, burnt, and brake the fleete, and sallying out resoluedly vpon his armie, slew so great numbers of them, and followed their victorie with such furie, as that the Saracens forsaking their Trenches and Tents, remoued in great disorder and dishonour. Two yeeres after which victorie the bodie of that famous Fredericke Barbarossa (who by the la∣mentable accident of following the Christians enemies ouer a Riuer vnfoordable, perished by the weight of his armor therein) brought and interred in the Cathe∣drall church of Tyre, neere vnto that glorious Sepulchre of Origen, garnished and grauen with guilt pillars of Marble, 940. yeeres before therein buried: but in the yeere 1289. the Saracens againe attempted it, and carried it, and it now remaineth subiect to the Turks. †. IIII. Of Ptolomais or Acon. THe third Citie alongst the coast of the Sea, which the Asserites could not ob∣taine, on the South bound of Asser was Acho, which was the ancient name there∣of after Hierome, though other good Authors affirme that it tooke name from Acon the brother of Ptolomie. Plinie calleth it Ace: and otherwise the Colonie of Claudius. Plin. lib. 5. c. 19. In descrip. terr. sanct. It had also the name of Coth or Cod, and by Zeiglerus it is called Hactipos. But lastly, it was intituled Ptolomais after the name of one of the Aegyptian Ptolo∣mies: which Citie also as it is 1. Mac. 11. another of the Ptolomies, infideliously wre∣sted Phi∣lometer. from his sonne in law Alexander, which called himselfe the sonne of Antiochus Epiphanes: the same Alexander hauing married Cleopatra daughter of the said Ptolo∣mie not long before. Therein also was Ionathan Macchabaeus treacherously surprized and slaine, as it is 1. Macc. 12. 48. by the perfidiousnesse of Tryphon, whom soone af∣ter 1. Maccab. 1. 10. Antiochus pursued as it is in the Storie ensuing: and by like reason about the same time was the aforesaid Alexander in the warre against Demetrius one of the sonnes of Antiochus the great with whom Ptolomie ioyned, ouerthrowne and trea∣cherously murthered by Zabdiel the Arabian: to whom he fled for succour: and his head presented vnto his father in law Ptolomie: who enioyed not the glory of his vi∣ctorie and treason aboue three dayes, for God strucke him by death. 1. Macc. 11. 18. For the beautie and strength of this Citie, this Alexander made it his regall seate; two parts of the same being inuironed by the Sea, and the Port for safetie and ca∣pacitie not inferiour to any other in all that Tract. This Citie is distant from Hie∣rusalem some foure and thirtie miles: foure miles to the North from the Moun∣taine Carmel, and as much to the South from Castrum Lamberti: from Tyre, Antoni∣nus Ant. Itin. maketh it two and thirtie Italian miles. In the middest of the Citie there was a Tower of great strength sometime the Temple of Bel-zebub: and therefore the Castle of Flies, on the toppe whereof there was maintained a perpetuall light, Herrold. like vnto that called Pharus in Aegypt: to giue comfort in the night to those ships, which came neere and sought that part. It had in it a Bishops seate, of the Dio∣cesse of Tyre, after it became Christian: but in the yeere 636. (a fatall yeere to the Chri∣stians in those parts) it was forced and taken by Haomarus the Saracen. In the yeere 1104. it was regained by Baldwine the first, by the helpe of the Gallies of : to G. Tyr. bell. sacr. lib. 10. cap. 28. Herrold. lib. . . . . 7. & . 2. . 2. & . whom a third of the reuenew was giuen in recompence. Againe, in the yeere of our Lord God, one thousand one hundred foure-score and seuen Saladine King of Aegypt, and Syria, became Lord thereof. In the yeere of Christ, one thousand one hundred ninetie and one, by Richard King of England, and Philip King of France it was repossessed and redeliuered to the Christians. Lastly, in the yeere 1291. it was by the furie of the Saracens besieged with an Armie of 150000. entred, sackt, and demolished: though in some sort afterward reedified, and it is now Turkish. †. V. Of the Castle of S t . GEORGE. FIue miles from Ptolomais towards the East, is the Castle of S t . George seated, in Broch. which he was borne: the Valley adioyning bearing the same name. And though for the credit of S. Georges killing the Dragon, I leaue euery man to his owne beliefe: Itin. 4. ! Of the place & memorie of his death. See Chap. 9. §. 1. yet I cannot but thinke, that if the Kings of England had not some probable record of that his memorable act, among many others: it was strange that the Order full of Honour, which Edward the third founded, and which his Successours Roially haue continued, should haue borne his name, seeing the world had not that scarcitie of Saints in those dayes, as that the English were driuen to make such an erection vp∣on a Fable, or Person fained. The place is described by Adrichomius in his de∣scription of Asser, to haue beene in the fields of Libanus: betweene the Riuer , and Zidon: his owne wordes are these: Hoc loco qui ab incolis Cappadocia appellatur, non longè à Beryto, memorant inclytum Christi Militem D. GEORGIVM; Regis filiam ab Dracone asseruâsse: mactata bestia parenti restituisse. In cuius rei memoriam Ecclesia postmodum fuit aedificata; In this place, which by the Inhabitants is called Cappadocia, not farre from Berytus, men say that the famous Knight of Christ Saint GEORGE, did rescue the Kings Daughter from a huge Dragon: and hauing killed the beast, deliuered the Virgin to her Parent. In memorie of which deede a Church was after built there: Thus farre . His Authors he citeth Roman. Patric. Nauigationum, l. 1. c. 3. and Bridenbach Itin. 5. The Valley vnder this Castle some∣time called Asser, was afterward called the Valley of S. George. If this authoritie suf∣fice not, we may rather make the Storie allegoricall, figuring the victorie of Christ, than accept of George the Arrian Bishop, mentioned by Am. Marcellinus. †. VI. Of Acziba, Sandalium, and others. BEtweene Ptolomais and Tyre alongst the Sea coast, was the strong Citie of Acziba, or Achazib, which S. Hierome calleth Achziph, and Iosephus Ecdippos, Plinie Ec∣dippa, one of those which defended it selfe against the Asserites. Belsorrest findes Acziba and Sandalium, or the Castle of Alexander to be one, but I know not whence he had it. The twelue searchers of the Land which Moses sent from Cadesbarne, trauailed Hieron. de Hebr. as farre to the North as Roob, or Rechob, in the Tribe of Asser, which , as al∣so Berothae which by Ezekiel cap. 47. v. 16. is placed in these North borders, belonged . . Iud. l. 1. c. 11. in Dauids time to the King Hadarhezer, as it may bee gathered out of the second of . l. 5. c. 19. Samuel the 8. cap. and 8. verse, and cap. 10. vers. 6. and it defended it selfe against the Asserites, as Zidon, Tyre, , Ptolomais, Alab, Helbah, and Aphek did. This Aphek it was, whose Wall falling downe, slew seuen and twentie thousand of Benhadads Souldiers, after that a hundred thousand had beene slaughtered by the Israelites, vnder the conduct of Ahab. Here Iunius finds that the Philistims incamped a little before the battaile at Gilboa, though in his Note vpon the first of Samuel, the 9. and 1. he takes Aphek there mentioned (at which battaile the Arke was taken) to 1. Kings 20. 29. 1. Sam. 29. 1. haue beene in Iuda. Of which Ios. 15. and 53. and in the second of Kings 13. 17. hee reades, Fortiter, for, in Aphek. Where others conuert it, Percutiens Syrosin Aphek. The next place alongst the coast is Sandalium, first called Schandalium of Schander, which we call Alexander, for Alexander Macedon built it, when hee besieged Tyre: and set it on a point of Land which extendeth it selfe into the Sea, betweene Acziba and Tyre: which Castle Baldwine the first rebuilt and fortified; in the yeere of Christ 1157. when he vndertooke the recouerie of Tyre. Not much aboue a mile from this Castle, there ariseth that most plentifull spring Cant. 4. of water, which Salomon remembreth, called the Well of liuing waters: from whence not only all the fields and plaines about Tyre are made fruitfull by large pipes hence drawne: but the same Spring, which hath not aboue a bow-shot of ground to tra∣uaile till it recouer the Sea, driueth sixe great Mills in that short passage, saith Itin. 1. Brochard. Within the Land, and to the East of Acziba, and Sandalium, standeth Hosa: and Ios. 12. 20. beyond it, vnder the Mountaines of Tyre, the Citie of Achsaph, or Axab, or after S. Hierome Acisap, a Citie of great strength, whose King amongst the rest was slaine by Iosua, at the waters of Merom. †. VII. Of Thoron, Giscala, and some other places. FArther into the Land towards Iordan, was seated the Castle of Thoron, which Hugo de Sancto built on the Easter-most Hills of Tyre, in the yeere 1107. thereby to restraine the excursions of the Saracens, while they held Tyre a∣gainst the Christians: the place adioyning being very fruitfull, and exceeding plea∣sant. From this Castle the Lords of Thoron, famous in the Storie of the Warres for the recouerie of the Holy Land, deriue their names, and take their Nobilitie. It had in it a curious Chappell, dedicated to the blessed Virgin, in which Humphrey of Tho∣ron, Constable to Baldwine the third, King of Hierusalem, lieth buried. There were fiue Castles besides this within the Territorie of Asser: whereof foure are seated al∣most of equall distance from each other: to wit, Castrum Lamperti, Montfort, Indin (or Saron ) Castrum Regium, and Belfort: The first neere the Sea vnder the Hills of Saron: the next three, to wit, Indin, Montfort, and Regium, stand more within the Land, and belonged to the Brother-hood and Fellowship of the Teutonici, or Dutch Knights (by which they defended themselues, and gaue succour to other Christians at such time as the Saracens possest the best part of the vpper Galilee ) the chiefe of which Order was in Ptolomais Acon. The first was for beautie and strength called Belfort, seated in the high ground vpon the Riuer Naar, neere the Citie Rama: of which in this Tribe Ios. 19. 29. for which the Vulgar reades Horma: making the ar∣ticle a part of the word, and mistaking the vowells: from the siege of this Castle of . l. 2. c. 4. Continuation is Bell. sac. Belfort, the great Saladine King of Syria and Aegypt, was by the Christians Armie rai∣sed, and with great losse and dishonour repulsed. To the East of Belfort, is the strong Citie of Alab (or Achlab ) which S. Hierome Chalab, one of those that defended themselues against Asser, as Roob (or Re∣chob ) not farre thence did. Towards the South from Roob they place Gabala (which Herod, surnamed the Ascalonite rebuilt) making it of the Territorie of Chabol, Quod lingua dispi∣cere Iosep. ant. 13. 21. & 15. 10. significat (saith Weishenburg ) so called, because Hiram of Tyre was ill pleased with those twentie Cities, seated hereabout, which Salomon presented vnto him in recom∣pence of those prouisions sent him for the building of the Temple. Others thinke this Chabol or Cabul, containing a circuit of those twentie Cities giuen to Hiram, to . annot. in 1. Reg. 9. 11. haue beene without the compasse of the holy Land: though bordering Asher on the North side: as it is said, 1. Reg. 9. 11. that they were in Regione limitis: that is, in li∣mite Regionis, in the border of the Countrie: for it was not lawfull, say they, to giue to strangers any part of the possessions allotted to the Israelites: howsoeuer, that af∣ter Hiram had refused them, they were peopled by the Israelites, it appeares 2. . 8. 14. And it seemes they were conquered by Dauid from the Syri Rechobaei, whose . Sam. 10. 6. Citie Roob, or Rechob, was in these parts. Almost of equall distance from the Castle of Thoron, they place the Cities of Gis∣cala, and Gadara: of which Gadara is rather to be placed ouer Iordan: Giscala was made famous by Iohn the Sonne of Leui, who from a meane estate gathering together foure hundred Theeues, greatly troubled all the vpper Galilee: at such time as the Ro∣mans attempted the conquest of Iudaea: by whose practice Iosephus, who then com∣manded in the vpper Galilee, was greatly indangered: whereof himselfe hath written at large, in his second Booke of those Warres. This Iohn betraying in all hee could Cap. 26. the Citie of Giscala (whereof he was natiue) to the Roman State: and finding a resi∣stance in the Citie, gaue opportunitie, during the contention, to the Tyrians and Ga∣darims, to surprize it: who at the same time forst it, and burnt it to the ground: but being by Iosephus authoritie rebuilt, it was afterward rendred to Titus by composi∣tion. They finde also the Cities of Cana Maior, and See Kadesh in . Matth. 15. Cades: (or Cedessa ) of the first was that Syro-phoenician, whose Daughter Christ deliuered of the euill Spirit. Neere the other, they say, it was that Ionathas Machabaeus ouer-threw the Armie of De∣metrius. Marc. 7. Maccab. 11. 73. Iosephus Antiq. 13. cap. 8. There are besides these forenamed Cities within the Tribe of Asser, diuers others: as on the South border, and neere the Sea, Messall or Misheall: within the Land Of which Iosephus in vita sua. Be∣sara, Of both which Ios. 19. 27 Ezek. 47. 15. Bethdagon, and Bethemec, standing on the South border betweene Asher and Zabulon: on the North side ioyning to Syro-phoenicia, is the Citie of Hethalon, or Cheth∣lon, the vtmost of the holy Land that way: vnder which towards the Sea is Chali, and then Or Enosa. Ioseph. . lib. 1. cap. 4. Enoch supposed to bee built by Cain, and named of his Sonne Enoch, but without probabilitie, as I haue formerly proued: there are others also besides these, as Ammon or Chammon, of which Ios. 19. 28. where also wee reade of Nehiel, Rama, Alamelec, and : the Cities of Alcath, or Chelcath, Habdon, and Rechob, and Misheal, which we haue already mentioned, were by the Asserites giuen to the Leuites. Of o∣thers Ios. 21. 30. held by the , mention is made, Iudg. 1. 30. to which out of Iosua wee may adde Ebron, Amhad, and others, on which no storie dependeth; and therefore I will not pester the description with them. †. VIII. Of the Riuers and Mountaines of Asser. THe riuers to the North of Asser, are Adonis, afterward Canis, to which Ziegler ioy∣neth Lycus, Ptolomie, Leontis: both which fall into the Sea neere Berytus: which Riuer of , Montanus drawes neere vnto Zidon: finding his head notwithstan∣ding, where Ptolomie doth, betweene Zidon and Tyre. It hath also a Riuer called . Tab. 4. fons hortorum Libani, which Adrichome out of Brochard Eleutherus: for which hee also citeth Plinie; and the of Machabees the 11. Chap. but neither of Plin. l. 9. those authorities proue Eleutherus to be in Asser: for this Riuer falleth into the Sea at the Ile of Aradus: not farre from Balanaea, witnesse Ptolomie: and therefore Pine∣tus . Tab. 4. calleth it Valania, and Postellus Velana: which Riuer boundeth Phoenicia on the Post & est Tripolis. North side: to which also agreeth: but this principall Riuer of Asser, Arias Montanus calleth Gabatus. Christianus Schrot out of the mouth and Papers of Peter Laicstan (which Laicstan in this our age both viewed and described the Holy Land) calleth the maine Riuer Fons hortorum Libani: and one of the streames which run∣neth into it from the North side, Naar, and another from the South-west, Chabul: of the Citie adioyning of the same name: for it cannot be. There is also an∣other Riuer described by Adrichome, named Iepthael, which I finde in no other Au∣thor, and for which he citeth the nineteenth of Iosua, but the word The word Nacbal is am∣biguous, either for a Valley or for a Riuer: but this word Gbe is alway a Val∣ley, as in and . Ghe which is added there to Iepthael, is not taken for a Riuer, but for a Valley: and for a Valley the Vulgar, the Geneua, and Arius Montanus turne it. There is also found in Asser, Iosep. lib. 2. Bell. Iud. c. 3. the Riuer of Belus, remembred by Iosephus and Tacitus, which is also called Pagidas, saith L. 5. c. 19. in Iosua, c. 19. v. 26 It is called Shi∣chor, of which name many vnderstand an other . Ios. 13. 3. which running by Pe∣tra of Arabia, falleth into the Lake Sirbonis, & diuideth Ae∣gypt from the promised Land whereabout they place Rhi∣nocolura, which city Iu∣nius taketh Shichor in that place of Iosua: but howsoeuer whether this Shichor, Ios. 13. 3 be a Riuer or a city, it appears that this name is found, both in the North bound of the holy Land, Ios. 19. 26. & in the South bound, Ios. 13. 3. Plinie: out of the sands of this Riuer are made the best Glasse, which some∣time the Zidonians practised: and now the Venetians at Murana. Arias Montanus makes Belus to be a branch of Chedumim, which it cannot be: for Belus is knowne to flow from out the Lake Cendeuia, as all Cosmographers both Ancient and Moderne, and the later Trauailers into those parts witnesse. It is true that the Riuer of Chi∣son taketh water from Chedumim: but not in that fashion which Montanus hath de∣scribed it: neither doth it finde the Sea at Ptolomais Acon; according to Montanus: but farther to the South betweene Caiphas and Sicaminum, witnesse Ziegler, Adricho∣mius, and Schrot. Besides these Riuers there are diuers famous Springs and Fountaines, as that of liuing waters adioyning to Tyre: and See the mar∣ginall Note a∣boue in the se∣cond Section of this Para∣graph. Maserephot, or after S. Hierome, Maserephot∣maim, whose Well filled by the floud of the Sea adioyning, (they say) the Inhabi∣tants by seething the water make salt thereof, as at Nantwich. The Mountaines which bound Asser on the North, are those of Anti-libanus, which with Libanus bound Coelesyria: two great ledges of Hills, which from the Sea of Phoenicia and Syria, extend themselues farre into the Land Eastward: han∣dreth stadia or furlongs, according to Strabo: for that length he giueth to the Valley of Coelesyria: which those Mountaines inclose: but Plinie giues them 1500, furlongs in length from the West (where they beginne at Theipsophon, or Deifacies, neere Tripolis ) to the Mountaines of Arabia beyond Damascus: where Anti-libanus turneth towards the South. These ledges where they beginne to part Traconitis and Basan, from the Desart Arabia, are called Hermon: which Moses also nameth Sion, the Phoe∣nicians Syrion, and the Amorites Sanir, neither is this any one Mountaine apart; but a continuation of Hills: which running farther Southerly, is in the Scriptures called Galaad or Gilead: the same being still a part of Libanus, as the Prophet Hieremie pro∣ueth: Galaad tu mihi caput Libani: noting that this Galaad is the highest of those Hils of Libanus. Strabo knowes them by the name of Traconitae: and Ptolomie by Hip∣pus. Arias Montanus calleth these Mountaines bordering Asser, Libanus, for Anti∣libanus, contrary to all other Cosmographers, but hee giueth no reason of his opi∣nion. They take the name of Libanus from their white tops, because according to Ta∣citus, Strab. l. 10. Plin. l. 5. c. 20. the highest of them are couered with Snow all the Summer, the Hebrew word Deut. 4. 48. Libanon (saith Weissenburg ) signifieth whitenesse. Others call them by that name of Strab. l. 10. the Frankincense which those trees yeeld: because is also the Greeke word Pto. Asiae. Tab. 4 Sueton. for that Gumme. Niger out of Aphrodiseus affirmeth, that on Libanus, there falleth a kinde of honie Nig. pag. 503. dew, which is by the Sunne congealed into hard sugar, which the Inhabitants call Sacchar, from whence came the Latine word Saccarum. The Riuers which Libanus bestoweth on the neighbour Regions are, Chrysor∣rhoas, Iordan, Elentherus, Leontes, Lycus, Adonis, Fons hortorum Libani, and others. The rest of the Mountaines of Asser, are those Hils aboue Tyre, and the Hills of Saron, both exceeding fruitfull: but those are but of a low stature, compared with Libanus: for from Nebo, or the Mountaine of Abarim, in Reuben, Moses beheld Libanus three-score miles distant. §. IIII. THE TRIBE OF NEPHTALIM. †. I. Of the bounds of Nephtalim, and of Heliopolis, and Abila. THe next Portion of the Land of Canaan bordering Asher, was the vp∣per Galilee: the greatest part whereof fell to the lot of Nephtalim, the Sonne of Iacob by Billa, the hand-maide of Rachel: who while they abode in Aegypt, were increased to the number of 53400. persons, able to beare armes, numbred at Mount Sinai: all which leauing their bodies in the Desarts, there entred the Holy Land of their Sonnes 45400. besides, Infants, Women, and Children, vnder twenty yeeres of age. The Land of Neph∣talim tooke beginning on the North part, from the Fountaines of Iordan, and the Hills of Libanus adioyning, as farre South as the Sea of Galilee, bounded on the West Guil. Tyr. Bell. sacri. l. 9. c. 15. Theodor, 4. Hist. Ecclesiast. by Asher, and on the East and South-east by Iordan. On the North-side of Libanus, and adioyning to this Territory of Nephtalim, did the Amorites (or Emorites ) also inhabite, in which Tract and vnder Libanus, was the Mela. l. 3. c. 9. Iustin. Gestel. in itinerar. Citie of Heliopolis: which the heighth of the Mountaines adioyning shadowed from the Sunne, the better part of the day. POSTELLVS calls it Balbec; NIGER, Marbech; Iosep. in plurib. locis. and LEONCLAVIVS, Beallebeca. Of this name of Heliopolis, there are two great Cities in Aegypt: the first called Euseb. 8. De∣monst. On, by the Hebrewes, and the Chaldaean Paraphrast, otherwise Bethsemes, or after the Vola. l. 11. f. 243. Latines, Solis oppidum, or Domus Solis; The Citie of the Sunne: into which, saith Vlpian, Seuerus the Roman Emperour sent a Colonie: the other Gestelius nameth Dealmarach: and of this name Stephanus also findeth a Citie in Thrace, and Glycas in Phrygia. There is also in the same Valley adioyning to Nephtalim, Chalcis, and Abila. Chal∣cis, of whom the Region towards Palmyrena hath the name of Chalcidica, ouer which Herod, Agrippa, and Berenice the Queene commanded. Abila also gaue name to the Region adioyning, of which Lysanius the Sonne of Herod the elder, became Tetrarch or Gouernour: whereof Ptolomie gaue it the additi∣on of Lysanij, and called it Abila Lysanij. Volaterran names it Aphila, of which hee notes that one Diogenes, a famous Sophister, was natiue, who by Volaterran is intituled Aphileus, not Abileus. After that this Citie of Abila or Aphila, had receiued the Chri∣stian Faith, Priscillinus became Bishop thereof: slaine afterward by our British Maxi∣mus at Treuer. For distinction of this Citie (if it be not the same, as it may be thought to be the same) it is to be remembred that in the Tribe of Also a third in Ephraim cal∣led Abel Me∣chola, and a fourth in Reu∣ben called Abel∣Sittim, also A∣bel-Mitsraim, at the Foord of Iordan, and (as it seems) in the same Tribe of Reuben, of ali which in that which follows: to which also we may adde Abel-Magnum, the name as some thinke of a Citie, other∣wise called Betbshemes, neere the bor∣der of the Phi∣listims, or ac∣cording to o∣thers of the great stone in the border. 1. Sam. 6. 18. Ioseph. ant. l. 7. cap. 10. Manasse, ioyning vpon the bounds of the Tribe of Nephtalim, there is another Citie of the same name, sa∣uing that it is written with an (E) for an (I) and called Abela, remembred in the 20. Chapter of the second of Samuel. The same Iosephus calls Abelmachea, and Hierome Bethmacha. In the place of Samuel for distinction sake it is written, Abel Beth-Mahaca, (for belike it was the Towne of Mahaca, the Wife of Macir, the Sonne of Manasse, the Father of Gilead ) in the Chronicles it is called Abel-Maijm. This Citie Ioab besie∣ged: because Seba the sonne of Bichri, who rebelled against Dauid, fled thereinto for suceour: but a certaine wise woman of the Citie perswading the people to cast Seba his head ouer the wall, Ioab retired his Armie. The same Citie was afterward taken by the King of Damascus, Benadad: and after a while by Teglatphalasar. The word Abel may bee expounded, either to signifie bewayling, or a plaine 2. Sam. 20. 1. King. 15. ground, and therefore no maruell, that many Townes (with some addition for di∣stinction 2. King. 15. sake) were thus called: for euen of bewailing many places tooke name, as Bochim, Iudg. 2. 4. and so doubtlesse And Abel Magnum. Abel-Misraim, Gen. 50. 11. and yet Iunius in his note vpon Num. 33. 49. thinkes that Abel-Sittim was so called, rather by reason of 1. Sam. 6. 18. the plaine ground there (to wit, in the Land of Moab, and so perhaps Abel-Meholah Iudg. 7. 24. & 1. heg. 19. 15. in the Tribe of Ephraim: the Towne of Elisha the Prophet: also Abel-Vinearum of Iudg. 11. 35. the , whither Iephta pursued them. †. II. Of Hazor. IN this Tribe of Nephtalim, was that famous Citie of Iabin, in Iosua's time called A∣sor (or after the Chaldaean Paraphrast, Haszor ) by Iosephus, Asora; by Iunius Of two o∣ther Cities of this name in Iuda, See chap. 9. § 1. of a fourth in Ben∣iamin. See that which followes in this place of a fifth in this Tribe of Neph∣talim, called : we reade, Ios. 19. 3. to which we may adde Chatsor-Henan, in the vtter∣most North∣East of Manas∣se, ouer Iordan, . 47. Num. 34. 8. also in Sime∣on, Chatsar-Susima, of which, 1. Chron. 4. 31. which also is called Chatsar-Susima, and Chatsar-Gaddae: and lastly, Chatsar-Shuleb, another Citie of Simeon. fol. 19. 3. Chatzor: which Laicstan names Hesron; the Regall Citie, and Metropolis of Canaan: seated in the West part of Nephtalim, towards Asher. In this Citie was that great Rendenous, and assembly of those foure and twenty Kings against Iosua: who being all ouer∣throwne, slaine, and scattered, this their powerfull Citie was by Iosua taken and burnt to dust. But in processe of time the same being rebuilt by the Canaanites, a se∣cond King Iabin, 137. yeeres after the death of this first Iabin, inuaded the Israelites: and being ordained of God to punish their Idolatry, he preuailed against them, and held them in a miserable seruitude twentie yeeres: till Debora the Prophetesse ouer∣threw Sisera, Iabins Lieutenant, and his Armie, neere the Mountaine Tabor. This Citie Salomon restored at such time as he also reedified Gezar, burnt by Pharao of Ae∣gypt, with 1. King. 9. Megido, Bethoron, and other Cities; but about 260. yeeres after, it fell into the hands of Teglatphalasar, King of the Assyrians. It is now, saith Adrichomius, called Antiopia: it was one of the principall Cities of Decapolis. There is another Ci∣tie of this name in the Territory of Beniamin, seated on the confines of Ascalon, cal∣led the new Hazor, Hieron. loc. Hebr. l. E. Out of Nebem. 11. 33. as it seemes. saith Hierome. †. III. Of Caesaria Philippi. THere was also on the border, and within the Territory of Nephtalim, that re∣nowned Citie of Lais, or Laijsch, as Iunius writes it, or Leschen; which Citie the Iud. 18. 27. children of Dan (being straitned in their Territorie vnder Iuda ) inuaded and ma∣stered; Ios. 19. 47. and gaue it the name of their owne Parent Dan: and by that name it is writ∣ten in Gen. the fourteenth, at which place Abraham surprized Chedorlaomer and his confederates, and followed his victorie as farre as Sobah, formerly remembred in the diuision of Syria, otherwise called Sophena. And after the of the Danites, it had the ioynt name of Leschem-Dan. Weissenburg writes it Lacis, the Laish, IOSEPHVS, Dana; BENIAMIN, Balina; BREITENBACH, Belena: but the now Iudg. 18. Inhabitants know it by the name of Belina to this day: witnesse Neubrigensis, Tyrius, Volaterranus, Brochard the Monke, and Postellus: who also taketh this Citie to bee the same, which in Matthew the 15. v. 39. in the Vulgar is called Magedan, for which Chap. 8. 10. the Greeke Text hath Magdala in that place, and in S. Marke speaking of the same storie, Dalmanutha. At such time as the children of Dan obtained this place, it see∣meth that it was either a free Citie, of the alliance and confederacie of the Zidonians, or else subiect vnto the Kings thereof; for it is written in the eighteenth of Iudges, Vers. . And there was none to helpe, because Lais was farre from Zidon: and they had no businesse with other men, for it was aboue thirty English miles from the Mediterran Sea, and from Zidon. In after times when these Regions became subiect to the State of Rome, it had . l. 5. c. . the name of Paneas, from a Fountaine adioyning so called: and therefore Ptolomie calls it Caesaria Paniae. Hegesippus calls it Parnium, saith Weissenburg: but he had read . 1. c. . it in a corrupt copie: for in Hegesippus set out by Badius, it is written Paneum without an ( R ): and at such time as Philip the sonne of the elder Herod, brother to Herod, Te∣trarch of , became Gouernour of Traconitis, sometime Basan; this Citie was by him amplified and fortified; and both to giue memorie to his owne name, and to flatter Tiberius Caesar, he called it Of another Caesaria (or Cae∣sarea ) called Caesarea . See here∣after in the former part of Manasse. Caesaria Philippi: and so it became the Metropolis, and head Citie of Traconitis: and one of the first Cities of Decapolis. And being by Agrippa in the succeeding age greatly adorned: by him in honour of Nero, it was cal∣led Neronia, or Neroniada. But as nothing remained with that Emperour, but the memorie of his impietie: so in S. Hieromes time the Citizens remembred their for∣mer Paneas, and so recalled it, with the Territorie adioyning by the ancient name. Of this Citie was that woman whom Christ healed of a bloudie issue, by touching Of Dioc asarea, see Sephoris in . the hemme of his Garment with a constant Faith: who afterward, as shee was a wo∣man of great wealth and abilitie, being mindfull of Gods goodnesse, and no lesse gratefull for the same, as Eusebius and Nicephorus report, caused two Statues to bee Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 14. cast in pure Copper: the one representing Christ, as neere as it could bee moulded: the Niceph. l. 6. c. 15. other made like her selfe, kneeling at his feete, and holding vp her hands towardes him. These shee mounted vpon two great Bases or Pedestals of the same Metall, which shee placed by a Fountaine neere her owne house: both which (saith Eusebi∣us ) remained in their first perfection, euen to his owne time: which himselfe had seene, who liued in the Raigne of Constantine the Great. But in the yeere after Christ 363. that Monster Iulius Apostata, caused that worthie Monument to be cast downe, and defaced: setting vp the like of his owne in the same place: which Image of his was with fire from heauen broken into fitters: the head, body, and other parts, sun∣dered and scattered, to the great admiration of the people at that time liuing. The truth of this accident is also confirmed by Sozomenus Salaminius, in his fifth booke, and twentieth Chapter. This Citie built by the Danites, was neere the ioyning together of those two Ri∣uers which arise from the springs of Ior and Dan, the two Iosephus in the booke of the Iewish war 18. saith, that Philip the Te∣trarch cast chaffe into a fountaine cal∣led Phiala, di∣stant 120. sta∣dia North-east from Caesaria, which Chaffe being carried vnder ground was cast vp a∣gaine at or Dan, where∣by it is conie∣ctured that the first Spring of Iordan is from this Fountaine called Phiala, from whence Ior and Dan receiue their waters. apparant Fountaines of Iordan: in a soyle exceeding fruitfull, and pleasant; for, as it is written, Iudg. 18. It is a place which doth want nothing that is in the world. In the fields belonging to this Citie, it was that S. Peter acknowledged Christ to be the Sonne of God: whereupon it was answered, Tues PETRVS, & Super hanc Petram, &c. After this Citie receiued the Christian faith, it was honoured with a Bishops seate: and it ranne the same fortune with the rest, for it was after taken and retaken by the Saracens, and Christians: vnder Fulch the fourth, King of Hierusalem, and after the death of Godfry of Bullion, the King of Damascus wrested it from the Christians; and shortly after by them againe it was recouered. Lastly, now it remaineth with all that part of the world subiected to the Turke. †. IIII. Of Capernaum, and the Cities of Decapolis. AMong the remarkable Cities within this Tribe, Capharnaum is not the least: so often remembred by the Euangelists. This Citie had the honour of Christs pre∣sence three yeeres: who for that time was as a Citizen therof, in which he first prea∣ched and taught the Doctrine of our saluation: according to that notable Prophecie of Esay 9. The people that walked in darknesse, haue seene a great light: they that dwelt in the Land of the shadow of death, vpon them hath the light shined. Capharnaum was seated on Iordan, euen where it entreth into the Sea of Galilee: in an excellent and rich soile: of whose destruction Christ himselfe prophecied in∣these words. And thou Caphernaum which art lifted vp vnto heauen, shalt be brought downe to Hell, &c. which shewed the pride and greatnesse of that Citie: for it was one of the principall Cities of Decapolis, and the Metropolis of Galilee. And although there were some markes of this Cities magnificence in S. Hieromes time, as himselfe confesseth: it being then a reasonable Burge or Towne: yet those that haue since, and long since seene it, as Brochard, Breidenbech, and Saliniac affirme, that it then con∣sisted but of sixe poore Fisher-mens houses. The Region of ten principall Cities called Decapolitana or Decapolis, is in this de∣scription . 4. often mentioned, and in S. Matthew, Marke, and Luke, also remembred; Mark. 7. but I finde no agreement among the Cosmographers, what proper limits it had: and Luke 8. so Plinie himselfe confesseth; for Marius Niger speaking from others, bounds it on Niger. comment. Asiae. 4. f. 503. the North by the mountaine Casius in : and endeth it to the South at Aegypt and Arabia; by which description it imbraceth Phoenicia, a part of Coelesyria, all Palaesti∣na, and Iudaea. Plinie also makes it large, and for the ten Cities of which it taketh name, he num∣breth Plin. l. 5. c. 18. foure of them to be situated towards Arabia: to wit, first these three, Damascus, Opotos, Raphana, then Philadelphia (which was first called Amana, saith Stephanus, or Opotos a Citie standing in the Valley of Coe∣lesyria watered by as Damascus is. Plin. l. 5. as I ghesse Amona rather, because it was the chiefe Citie of the Ammonites, knowne by the name of Rabbah, before Pto. gaue it this later and new name.) Then Scythopolis, sometime Nisa, built (as is said) by , in memorie of his Nurse, who died therein, anciently knowne by the name of Bethsan; for the sixth he setteth Gadara (not that Gadara in Coelesyria, which was also called Antioch and : ) but it is Gadara in Basan, which Plinte in this place meaneth, seated on a high hill, neere the Riuer of Hieromaix. This Riuer Ortelius takes to bee the Riuer Iaboc: which boundeth Gad and Manasseh ouer Iordan: but he mistaketh it; for Hieromaix falleth into the Sea of Galilee, betweene Hippos and Gerasa, whereas Iaboc entreth the same Sea betweene Ephron and Phanuel. For the seuenth he nameth Plinie hath Hippon Dion, for which Volater∣ran reads Hip∣pidion, Ortelius takes them for two Cities. Hippos, or Hippion, a Citie so called of a Colonie of Horsemen there garrisond by Herod, on the East side of the Sea, described hereafter in the Tribe of Manasse ouer Ior∣dan. For the eighth Pella, which is also called Butis, and Berenice, seated in the South border of the Region ouer Iordan, called Peraea. For the ninth Gelasa, which Iosephus takes to be Gerasa: and Gerasa is found in Coelesyria by Iosephus, Hegesippus, and Stepha∣nus: but by Ptolomie (whom I rather follow) in Phoenicia. The tenth and last, Plinie nameth Canatha, and so doth Suetonius and Stephanus, which Volaterran calls Gamala, but Hegesippus rightly Camala, a Citie in the Region of Basan ouer Iordan, so called, because those two Hills on which it is seated, haue the shape of a Camell. But the collection of these ten Cities, whereof this Region tooke name, is better gathered out of Brochard, Breidenbach, and Saligniac, which make them to bee these; Caesaria Philippi, and Asor, before remembred, Cedes Nephtalim, Sephet, Corazin, Capharnaum, Bethsaida, Iotapata, Tiberias, and Scythopolis, or Bethsan. For all other Authors disa∣gree herein and giue no reason for their opinion. One place of the Euangelist Saint Matthew makes it manifest, that this Region called Decapolitana, was all that Tract betweene Zidon, and the Sea of Galilee. For thus it is written: And he departed againe Matth. 4. from the coasts of Tyrus and Zidon, and came vnto the Sea of Galilee, through the middest of the coasts of Decapolis: so that it was bounded by Damascus and Libanus on the North: by the Phoenician Sea, betweene Zidon and Ptolomais on the West: by the Hills of Gelbo and Bethsan on the South: and by the Mountaines Tracones, otherwise Hermon, Sanir, and Galaad, on the East: which is from East to West the whole bredth of the Holy Land: and from the North to the South, neere the same distance which may be each way fortie English miles. †. V. Of Hamath. BVt to looke backe againe towards Libanus, there is seated neere the foote there∣of the Citie of The Septua∣gint write it Ammath, Hierome Emath, Iosephus Amath, Ios c. 19. v. 35. Chammath, c. 21. v. 32. Chammoth-Dor, in the first of 6. 76. Chammon, 2. King. 14. 8. Chammath-Iebudae, as Iunius reads it, whereas also for further distinction there is ad∣ded (in Israel ) to note that it was of old belonging to Iuda, though seated in Israel, that is, in the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes, the other Chamath, being in Syria Soba. Hammath or Chammath, of which (as they say) the Countrey adioyning taketh name: the same which Iosephus calleth Amathitis, and Amathensis: Zeigler. in Neptal. Iacobus Zeigler, Ituraea. Ituraea Regio tenet horealia tribus Nephaii, per montem Libanum vs{que} Trachones. The Countrey of Ituraea, saith hee, containeth the North parts of the Tribe of , along the Mount Libanus to Trachones. But herein following Strabo, who calls Trachonitis , he mistakes the seate of this Region: and so doth Mercator. For indeed were (which Hegesippus calls Peraea, and G. Tyrius, Baccar ) the same with Traconitis, yet Traconitis it selfe is farre more to the East than Hammath in Nephtalim: for Traconitis lieth betweene Caesaria Philippi, and the Mountaines Trachones: which the Hebrewes call Gilead: and this Hammath or Chammath is seated vnder Caesaria, to∣wards the Sea West-ward. And it seemeth that this mistaking grew by confoun∣ding Emath or Hamath the great in Coelesyria, beyond the Mountaines Trachones, which So Hierome in his Com∣ment in Amos cap. 6. ver. 2. where there is mention of Hamath the great, as it seemes, for distinction from the other in , though Matt Beroaldus Hierome, rather follow the opinion of Zeigler aboue men∣tioned, as indeede it cannot easily bee iustified, that ei∣ther one or other of these is either or Epiphania, howbeit that the same Citie which Iosua 19. 35. is called Chammath, and placed in , was also called Cha∣math (whence the word Hamath and , were framed) it may bee gathered partly because the other Hamath, 2. Chron. 8. 3. for distinction is called Chamath Tsoba, as this (as it may seeme by Ios. . 32.) was Chamath Dor, and Cha∣math Iudae, as wee haue noted, 2. Reg. 24. Secondly, be∣cause Num. 34 8. and also 47. 10. Chameth in the North side of the holy Land, is placed too neer the West corner, to bee that Chamath-Tsoba: for in the line which should make the North border which begins at the great Sea, they make Moses to name neuer a place Eastward a∣long all the bredth of the holy Land, vntill we come to Hermon (for so they expound Mount , Num. 34. 7.) and beyond Hermon Eastward in this North side, they make him to name diuers Townes, first Chamath, then Tsedad, then Ziphron, and lastly, , athing most vn∣likely: seeing Israel had little or nothing Eastward be∣yond Hermon. Therefore wee must needes expound Hor to be one of the Hills neere Sidon, and so those Townes, as they are named to lie in order on the North side of A∣sher, Nephthalim, and Manasses: and in like manner those in : first, Chetlon, then Chamath, and so in order, Berotha, Sibraim, Tsedad, Chauran, . Hierome vpon Amos calls Antiochia, with Hammath or Hamath the lesser in Phoenicia, and Nephtalim, which hee calleth Epipha∣nia: for this Hammath, or in our translation Hamath, (and not that which is commonly called Emath, which 2. Chron. 8. 3. is set farre from the North bor∣der of Canaan in Syria Soba ) is remembred in Num∣bers 34. v. 8. and Numbers 13. v. 22. and in Ezekiel 47. 16. In the first of which places it bordereth the Land of promise, these being the wordes: From Mount Hor you shall poynt (that is, direct or draw a line) vntill it come to Hamath: In the second place, thus: So they went vp, and searched out the Land from the Wildernesse of Sin, vnto Rehob to goe to Hamath: Then in EZEKIEL: The West part also shall be the great Sea from the border, till a man come ouer against Hamath: that is, the coast of the Sea shall bee the West border from the Southermost part of the ho∣ly Land, till you come directly ouer against Hamath Northward: from whence if a line bee drawne to the Sea, it will touch the walls of Zidon: which is Of which, Ios. 19. 35. the Northwest corner of the holy Land. Now that this Hamath or Hammath, which Moses also made the confine of the holy Land, is that of Neph∣thalim, both the reference which it hath to the West Sea, and the Citie of Which Rehob, or , in Iosua 19. 28. is placed in Asher towards Zidon, in the confines of . Rehob adioyning prooue it: the other Hamath or Emath (being farre remoued and beyond the forenamed moun∣taines, which inclose all those Lands which Israel euer had possession of) is that E∣math, which is also called Ituraea, witnesse Tilemanus Stella and Peter , in their Tables of the holy Land. Stella and Laicstan; and not that in Neph∣talim, where Ioseph. Ant. 13. 8. Ionathas Macchabaeus attended the Armie of Demetrius, who fled from him, and remoued by night. For though Traconitis be comprehended within Ituraea (and therefore it is said to be finitima Galileae Gentium ) yet it hath beginning ouer the mountaines Traconis, and so it stretcheth into the plaines of the Territory of Ituraea; whence Philip the bro∣ther of Herode was Tetrarch or President both of Ituraea and Trachonitis: both which are ouer Iordan towards the East. But Chamath in Nephtalim, is on the west side of Iordan towards the Mediterran Sea. The Countrie Ituraea was so called of Iethur one of the sonnes of Ismael, it is pla∣ced in the bounds of Coelesyria and Arabia That it doth properly belōg to Arabia, the name of Ietur Ismaels sonne, whose issue set∣led in the Ara∣biaes, may in part giue wit∣nesse. Also the place of the 1. Chro. 5. 19. con∣firms it where Ietur is named among the Ha∣garens, against whom the Ru∣benites and Ga∣dites made war, & whose coun∣try they possest in the time of Ieroboam, as their sore-fa∣thers had done in the time of Saul after his conquest of the , Cbr. 1. cap. . vers. 10. wher the coun∣trie is placed at the East of Gi∣lead. the Desart. The people of Ituraei were valiant and warrelike men and excellent Archers. Of whom Virgil: Ituraeos Taxi torquentur in arcus. Of Eugh the Ituraeans bowes were made. This Citie Chamath or Hamath in Nephtalim seemes to haue beene as ancient as the other in Ituraea, both built by Amatheus the eleuenth sonne of . Whether in the time of Dauid, this, or the other had Tohu for King, it is not certaine; for Ha∣math or Emath beyond the Mountaines, and Hammath in Nephtalim were both neighbours to Damascus: of whose subiugation Tohu reioyced, because Hadadeser whom the Damasceni came to helpe, was his enemie. This Tohu fearing the strength and prosperitie of Dauid, hearing of his approach towards his territorie, bought his peace with many rich presents, and with many ancient vessells of gold, siluer and brasse. But it seemeth that Dauid in such great successe would not haue had peace with Tohu, if he had bin King of any place in Nephtalim, and therefore it is probable that he ruled in Tsoba: which Citie Salomon after his Fathers death made himselfe Ma∣ster of, as a part of the lands ( Of the larger p omise ex∣prest . 1. 7. where is named for one of the bounds; see cap. 7. §. 2. in the larger and conditionall promise) allotted by God to the children of Israel. But this Hammath of Nephtalim, in the end, and after diuers mutations and chan∣ges both of name and fortune, being as it hath beene said, possessed by Antiochus E∣piphanes, it was called Epiphania. While Saint Hierome liued, it remained a Citie well peopled, knowne to the Syri∣ans by the name Amathe, and to the Greekes by Epiphania. Hieron. Locis Hebr. †. VI. Of Reblatha and Rama, and diuers other Townes. IN the border of Hamath or Emath towards Iordan standeth the Citie Reblatha, or Ribla, watered from the fountaine Daphnis: which falleth into the lake of Meron. Hereunto was Zedekias brought prisoner, after his surprize in the fields of Iericho: and deliuered to Nabuchodonosor: who to be auenged of Zedekia's infidelity, beyond the proportion of pietie, first caused the Princes his children to be flaine in his pre∣sence: and to the end that this miserable spectacle might bee the last that cuer heo should behold in this world, and so the most remembred, hee commaunded both his eyes presently to be thrust out: and binding him in yron chaines, hee was led a slaue to Babylon, in which estate he ended his life. Of which seldome-exampled ca∣lamitie, Hicrem. 32. 34. &c. Ezek. 52. though not in expresse words, Hieremie the Prophet fore-told him in Hieru∣salem not long before: But Ezekiel thus directly, speaking in the person of God, I will bring him to Babel to the Land of the Chaldaeans, yet shall hee not see it, though hee shall die therein. There are besides these before remembred, many other strong Cities in Nephta∣lim, as that which is called Or , Ios. 19. 37. & 10 7. & 21. 32. item Iud. 4. 6. Cedes: there are two other of the same name, one in 1. Chron. . which Iosh. 19. 20. is called . I∣sachar, another in Iuda, of which Ios. 15. 23. and therefore to distinguish it, it is knowne by the addition of Sometime in Gali∣lea, 1. Chro. 6. 76. Nephtalim, as Iudg. 4. It is seated on a high hill, whence Ios. 20. 7. Kedesh in Galilaea in monte Nephtali: Iosephus calles it Cedesis, and in Saint Hie∣roms time it was called Cidissus. Belforest greatly mistakes this Cedes, and confounds it with Cades in the Desart of Pharan. After the King thereof among other of the Cananites perished by the hand of Io∣sua, Ios. 12 . it was made a Citie of refuge, and giuen to the Leuites. Herein was Barac borne; 2. Reg. 15. 29. who ouerthrew the Armie of the second Iabin of Hazor, at the Mount Tabor. It was sometime possest by Teglatphalassar, when hee wasted all Nephtalim: afterward by the Romans, and numbred for one of the ten Cities of the Decapolitan Region: When it had imbraced the Christian faith, it was honoured with a Bishops seate, but in time it fell with the rest into the power of the Saracens and Turkes, and by them it was demolished. From Cedes some foure Italian miles towards the South-west, standeth Sephet, o∣therwise Zephet, which was also one of the ten Decapolitan Cities: a place exceeding strong, and for many yeeres the inexpugnable Fortresse of the Christians, and after∣ward of the Saracens; for from hence they conquered all the neighbour Cities of those Regions, both In-land and Maritimate neere it. Touching Rama of Nephtalim, seated North-ward neere Sephet: this is to be noted; that there are See in Ben∣iamin, and in Ephraim. diuers places of this name in Palaestine, all situate on Hills: and therefore called Rama (Rama Hebraeis excelsum; Rama with the Hebrewes is high.) Also that for this Rama Ios. 19. 36. they reade Arama, making the Article (which it hath in the Hebrew, as being a name of diuers Townes) to be a part of the word: whence casting away the aspiration, they reade Arams. From Sephet to wards the West they place Other Cities there were of this name, (which is as much as domus solis ) as that in Iuda, 2. King. 14 . where Ioash King of the ten tribes ouer∣came of , of which also I vnder∣stand the , Ios. 21. 16. & 1. Sam. 6. 14. & 2. . 29. 18. A third as it seemes was in . 1. Kin. 4. 9. which Ios. 19. 41. is written Hir∣shemes, which is as much as . Bethsemes, of which Ios. 19. 38. which defended it selfe against Nephtalim, Iud. 1. 33. but paid them tribute. On the other side of Sephet towards the East was Bethanath, who also kept their Citie from the Nephtalims. Adioyning to which standeth Carthan Iud. 1. . a So it appears by comparing of the places. Ios. 21. 32 and 1. . 6. . both here and else∣wher deceiued by the double name, makes two of one: al∣though I not but that there was ano∣ther . in , of which Ios. 13. 19. or Kiriathaijm a Citie of the Leuites, not farre from the Mountaine out of which the springs of Capharnaum arise, called Mons Christ: a place by our Sauiour often frequented: as also then when calling his Dis∣ciples together, hee made choise of twelue, which he called and ordained to bee his Apostles or Messengers: of which place or the acts therein done, there is often men∣tion in the Marke 3. Euangelists. Adioyning to these are Magdalel, a place of strength, 19. 38. and Masaloth, of which we reade that it was forced by in the time of the 1. . 9. 2. Macchabees: also (according to Adrichomius ) one of the two Berothaes of Nephtalim. For Adrichomius maketh two of this name in this Tribe, Barathena in siue : cum Berothai vna ci∣uitatum Hada∣dezeris, 2. Sam. cap. 8. v. 3. one neere Chamath in the North border, of which . 47. 6. another (vpon a weake coniecture out of Iosep. ant. l. 5. c. 2.) he therefore placeth in this tract neere the waters of Merom; because the Kings that ioyned with Iabin a∣gainst Iosua, which incamped at the waters of Merom, Ios. 11. 5. are by Iosephus said to haue incamped at the Citie Berotha in Galilee, not farre from Cedesa Superior, which is also in Galilee: all which may be true of that Berotha of which Ezek. seeing Matth 10. it is in that Galilee which is called the vpper Galilee or Galilee of the Gentiles. The same 1. Adrichomius placeth the Region of Berim neere Abela (of which Abela or Abel-beth . 5. . 7. Mahacah we haue spoken alreadie) this he doth vpon a coniecture touching the place 2. Sam. 20. 14. where some reade Abel & Bethmahacah, & omnialoca Berim: but the better reading is, & omnes Berim, that is, with all the Beraei: for Shebah being of Benia∣min (in which Tribe also there is a Citie called Berotha or Beeroth ) drew the men of that Citie after him. To the North of Berotha of Nephtalim standeth Sebarim vnder Libanus, remem∣bred by Ezek. 47. and Aroseth gentium, neere the waters of Merom or Samachonitis, the Citie of Sisara Lieutenant of the Armie of the second Iabin: from whence not Ios. . 25. farre off towards the Sea of Galilee, is Edrai, or Edrehi, a strong Citie: besides many Asiroth. Hieron. Iud. 4. Lyr. in Iud. 4. others whereof I finde no particular storie of importance: as Ser in Iosua c. 19. v. 35. called Triddim-Tzer, and named for the first of their fenced Cities: whence they Ios. 19. 37. make two Cities, Assedim and Ser. Then Adima which they call Edama: also Hion Reg. 15. 20. Reg. 25. 29. which they call Ahion of which in the Bookes of Kings. Then the strong Citie of after called Gennezareth, whence we reade of the Land and Lake of Genne∣zareth, Marc. 6. 53. the same Lake which is also called the Sea of Tiberias. In the body of the Luc. 5. . Land they place Galgala to the South border: of which This place of the Maccab. warrants no Galgala or Gil∣gal in , but may wel be vnderstood of Gilgal in or in Manasse. Mac. 1 9. 2. also diuers o∣thers named, Ios. 19. as Vcuca or Chukkok: Horem & -tabor (which they place towards the East parts) and out of the same place of : , Lakkum Iepnaell, Heleb, and This Reccath or Raccath, thinks that it is the same with Karthan (one these being made of the other by of letters) of which Karthan we haue noted already, that it is also called Kiria- . Reccath, which two last they place neere Coesaria Philippi: To these they adde out of Iosua, Nekeb, and Adami: for which two Iunius readeth Fossa Adamai, making it no Towne but a Ditch cast by some of Adamath, as it seemes; or at least the custodie of which March or Limit belonging to the Towne. To these out of Num. 34. 10. they adde Sephana which 1. Sam. 30. 21. seemes to bee called Sipmoth. As for Tichon and Helon, whereof the former they fetch out of . 47. 16. and the latter out of Iosua 19. 33. it may appeare by Iunius his Translation, that neither are to be taken for Cities: for the former he readeth Mediani, and for the latter Querce∣tum. The Citie of In the place, 1. . 4. is, which also they bring to proue that there was a Citie called , as it is euident by the following Verses: the Tribe of Nepthalim is meant, and notany Citie of that name. Nephthalim which they make the natiue place of Tobie, and Naas∣son neere vnto it, they fetch out of the Vulgar Translation, Tob. 7. 7. but in the Greeke Text there is no signe, neither of the one nor of the other. §. V. THE TRIBE OF ZABVLON. OF Zabulon or Zebulon, another of the sonnes of Iacob by Lea, there were mustered at Mount 57400. able men besides women, children, and aged vnable persons: all which dying in the Desarts, there entred the Holy Land of their issues 65000. fit to beare armes: who inhabi∣ted that part of Canaan, from Asher to the Riuer Chison: Southward, and from the Sea of Galilee to the , East and West. The Cities within this Tribe which border Asher, are on the Sea shore, of which Ioseph. Ant. 13. c. 19. Debbaset of Iosua 12. . which Ios. 19. 11. or (whose King was . 2. bel 19 slaine by Iosua, and the Citie was giuen to the Leuites ) and Gaba after called the Citie of Horsemen, of a Regiment there garrisond by Herode. Then the Citie which beareth the name of Zabulon, or the Citie of men, exceeding ancient and magnificent, Iosep. 2. bel. 22 burnt to the ground by , Lieutenant of the Roman Armie. Adrichomius makes it the birth Citie of Iud. 2. 12. Elon Iudge of Israel, because is called Zabulonita: not marking that in the same place he is said to be buried at Aialon. To the East of this Citie of Zabulon is Cateth, of which Ios. 19. 15. on the border of Asher: and beyond it the lesser The greater Cana is in the Tribe of Asser∣lo. 21. 2. Natha∣niel is' said to be in Gali∣lee. Of Simon it may be dou∣bted: An∣gelus reads Matt. 10 4. Kanni∣tes, which word Luc. 6. , hee thinketh, to be expounded by . Cana of Galilee, where Christ conuerted Water into Wine: the natiue Citie of Nathaniel, and as it is thought of Simon Zelotes. Beyond it begin the Mountaines of Zabulon: and then the Citie of Cethron (in Zeigler, ) which defended it selfe against Zabulon. Then Bersabe which standeth in the parti∣tion of the vpper and nether Galilee, fortified by Iosephus against the Romanes. Not farre from hence standeth Shimron of Meron whose King was slaine by Iosua. Then Damna or Dimna, a Citie of the Leuites: then Noa or rather Neha, of which Ios. 19. 13. Then Dothan or Dothain, where Ioseph found his brethren feeding their flocks: the same wherein Elisoeus besieged by the Syrians, strooke them all blinde. Beyond it towards the East they imagine The Hebrew , (for which the Vulgar hath , Ios. 19. 13.) Vatablus expoundeth quoe gyrat, Iu∣nius ioynesit with the word going before it, and reades Rimmonem , Matth. 8. 11. Marc. 1. 6. Luc. 4. 10. Amthar or Amathar: then Remmon of the Leuites. The last of the Cities on the North border of is Bethsaida, one of the ten Cities of Decapolis, situate on the Galiloean Sea, and watered by the springs of Capharnaum, the natiue Citie of the Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and Philip. Herein Christ did many miracles, but these people being no lesse incredulous then the Ca∣pharnaims, and others, receiued the same curse of threatned miseries, as Woe bee vnto thee Bethsaida, &c. Alongst the West border of Galilee, towards the South from Bethsaida, was the strong Castle of Magdalum, the habitation of Marie Magdalen, not long since standing. And beyond it the strong and high seated Citie of Iotapata: fortified by Iosephus in the Roman Warre: but in the end after a long siege surprised by Vespasian: who slaughtered many thousands of the Citizens: and held 1200. prisoners, whereof Iosephus the Historian was one. The last and greatest of the Cities on that The names of the Cities seated about this Sea, or lake, throgh which Iordan runneth, were Capernaum, Ti∣berias, Bethsai da, Gadara, , and they adde Cinnereth, which in fore∣times gaue name to the Lake and Countrie. Matth. 9. Luc. 5. Sea and the Lake of Genezareth within Zabulon was that of Tiberias, from whence afterward the Galilaean Sea also changed name, and was called the Sea of the Citie Tiberias, so named in honour of Tiberius Caesar, it was one of the ten Cities, and the Metropolis of the Region Decapolitan, and the greatest and last of the lower Galilee. From hence our Sauiour called Matthew, from the toll or custom-house, to be an Apostle, and neere vnto it raised the daughter of Iairus from death: it was built (as Iosephus reports) by Herod the Tetrarch, the brother of Philip, in the beginning of the raigne of Tiberius Caesar: in the most fruitfull part of Galilee; but in a ground full of Sepulchres: Quùm iuxta nostras leges (saith hee) ad septem dies impurus habeatur, qui in talibus locis habitet; Where as by our law hee should bee dayes held as vncleane, who inhabited in such a place: by which wordes, and by the whole place of Iosephus it appeares, that this Tiberias is not (as some haue thought) the same as the old Cinnereth, which was seated, not in Zabulon, but in Nepthalim. Neere vnto this Tiberias, at Emaus, there were hot baths, where Vespasian the Em∣perour Iosep. . 18. 3. Ioseph. 10. 15. Zab. encamped against Tiberias: More into the Land toward the South-West is Bethulia, seated on a very high Hill, and of great strength, famous by the story of Ho∣lofernes and Iudeth, such as it is. Neere which standeth Bethleem of Zabulon: and ad∣ioyning vnto it, fortified by Iosephus against the Romans: and Iapha an ex∣ceeding Iosep. in vita sua strong place afterward forced by Titus: who in the entrance, and afterward Iosep. 2. Bel. 25. in furie slew 15000. of the Citizens; and caried away aboue two thousand prisoners. On the South side are the Cities of Cartha of the Leuites, and Gabara, of which Io∣sephus Iosua. 21. 35. o∣therwise Kisloth Thabor, as Iu∣nius thinks vp∣on Ios. 19. 12. whence 1. . 6. 77 it is cal∣led Thabor. in his owne life, then Iafie according to Adrichomius (of which Ios. 19. 12.) for he thinkes that it is not that Iapha of which we spake but now out of Iosephus. of which Ios. 19. 15. Hierome calls it Iadela: vnder it Westward, Legio, (afterward a Bishops seate) and the Citie Belma, in ancient times exceeding strong, remembred Iudeth 7. 3. otherwise Chelma. Between Legio and Nazeret is the Citie Saffa or Saffra, the birth-Citie of Zebedaeus, Alphaeus, Iames and Iohn: Then Sephoris, or Sephora, accor∣ding Ioban. de Mon∣teuilla, c. 4. & 20 to Iosephus: Sephorum according to Brochard: which afterward, saith Hegesip∣pus and Hierome, was called Diocaesaria; the Citie of Ioachim and Anna, the Parents of the Virgin Mary, it was walled by Herod the Tetrarch: and by him, as Iosephus Iosep. ant. 18. 3. & in vita sua. speakes, made the head and defence of Galilee; in another place he saith Vrbium Ga∣lilaearum maximae Sephoris & Tiberias. This Sephoris greatly vexed Vespasian hee wanne it. Herod Antipas when he made it the Regall seate of the nether Galilee, and so rounded it with a strong wal, called it Autocratorida, which is as much to say as Im∣periall, saith Iosephus; and it is now but a Castle called Zaphet. To the South-West of this Sephoris or Diocaesaria was that blessed place of Na∣zareth, the Citie of Marie the Mother of Christ; in which hee himselfe was concei∣ued, it standeth betweene Mount Tabor, and the Mediterran Sea. In this Citie hee abode chiefly foure and twenty yeeres, and was therefore called a Nazarite, as the Christians afterward were for many yeeres. It was erected into an Archbishop∣ricke in the following age. Neere vnto it are the Cities Buria (afterward well defen∣ded against the Turkes ) and Nahalal of which Ios. 19. 15. and Iud. 1. 30. where it is called Nahalal: and Ios. 21. 35. where it is a Citie of the Leuites, neere the Sea; adioyning to the Riuer of Chison is Sarid, noted in Iosua for the vttermost of Za∣bulon. In this Territorie of Zabulon there are diuers small Mountaines: but Tabor is the most renowned, by the Apparition of Moses and Elias: and by the Transfiguration of Christ in the presence of Peter, Iames, and Iohn: vnto whom Moses and Elias ap∣peared; in memorie wherof on the top of the Mountaine, the Empresse Helen built a sumptuous Chappell. The chiefe Riuer of Zabulon is Chison, which rising out of Tabor, runneth with one streame Eastward to the Sea of Galilee, and with an other streame Westward into the great Sea. This Riuer of Chison where it riseth, and so farre as it runneth South∣ward, is called Chedumim or Cadumim: and for mine owne opinion, I take it to bee the same which Ptolomie calleth Chorseus: though others distinguish them: and set Chorseus by Caesaria Palaestinae. There is a second Torrent or Brooke that riseth in the Hills of ; and falleth into the Sea of Galilee by Magdalum: and the third is a branch of a riuer rising out of the Fountaines of Capharnaum, which falleth also into See Laiestans Mappe in Or∣telius. the same Sea, and neere Magdalum: which Torrent they call Dotham, from the name of the Citie, from which it passeth Eastward to Bethsaida, and so ioyning with Iorda∣nis Ios. 19. 14. , which runneth from the Valley of Iephthael which Iosua reckoneth in the bounds of Zabulon, it endeth in the Sea of Galilee. §. VI. THE TRIBE OF JSACHAR. THe next adioyning Territorie to Zabulon, to the South and South∣west, was Isachar, who inhabited a part of the neather Galilee, within Iordan: of whom there were increased in Aegypt, as appeared by their musters at Mount Sinai 54400. able and warlike men, who leauing their bodies with the rest in the Desarts, there entred the Holy Land, 64300. The first Citie of this Tribe neere the Sea of Galilee, was Tarichea, distant from Tarichea in . Tiberias eight English mile, or somewhat more, a Citie wherein the Iewes (by the practice of a certaine mutinous vpstart, Iohn the sonne of Leui ) tooke armes against Iosephus the Historian, then Gouernour of both Galilees. This Citie was first taken by Cassius, and 3000. Iewes carried thence captiue; and afterward with great diffi∣cultie by Vespasian: who entred it by the Sea side, hauing first beaten the Iewes in a sea-fight vpon the Lake or Sea of Galilee: he put to the sword all sorts of people, and of all ages: sauing that his furie being quenched with the Riuers of bloud running through euery street, he reserued the remainder for slaues and bond-men. Next to Tarichea is placed Cession, or Cishton, of the Leuites, and then Isachar, re∣membred Ios. 21. 28. Kishi∣on, which 1. . 6. 7. is called . in the first of Kings, c. 4. v. 17. then Abes or Ebets, Ios. 19. 20. and Remeth of which Ios. 19. 21. otherwise Ramoth. 1. Chron. 6. 73. or Iarmuth, Ios. 21. 29. this al∣so was a Citie of the Leuites, from whose Territorie the Mountaines of Gilboe take beginning: and range themselues to the Mediterran Sea, and towards the West as Iosua. 19. farre as the Citie of Iezrael, betweene which and Ramoth, are the Cities of Bethpheses, 1 Sam. 4. 1. 1. Sam. 3. 19. or Bethpasses, according to Ziegler, and , or Hen-chadda: neere which Saul slew 1. Kings 20. 26. himselfe: vnder those Aphec or Apheca, which Adrichomius placeth in Isachar: be∣tweene In the two places Iu∣nius makes A∣phek in Asser, according to Ios. 19. 30. in the first he pla∣ceth it in Iuda, out of Ios. 15. 53. which and , he saith, that the Philistims incamped against Israel, and af∣terward against Saul: a Land thirstie of bloud, for herein also, saith hee, the Syrians with two and thirtie Reguli assisting Benhadad, incountered Achab: and were ouer∣throwne and slaughtered: to whom the King of Israel made a most memorable an∣swere, when vaunted before the victorie: which was, Tell, BENHADAD, Let not him that girdeth his harneis boast himselfe, as he that putteth it off: meaning that glorie followed after victorie, but ought not to precede it. In the yeere following in 1. Kings . the fields, as they say, adioyning to this Citie, was the same vaine-glorious Syrian vtterly broken and discomfited by Achab: and 100000. footmen of the Aramites or Syrians slaine: before which ouerthrow the seruants and Counsailors of Benhadad (in of the God of Israel ) told him, That the Gods of Israel were Gods of the 1. Kings. 20. 23. Mountaines: and therefore they fought with them in the plaines, they should ouer-come them. Vnder Aphec towards the Sea they set the Citie of Esdrelon, in the plaines of Ga∣lilec, called also the great field of Esdrelon, and Maggedo: in the border whereof are . 1. S. & 7. 3. the ruines of to be seene, saith Brochard, and Breidenbach. After these are the 1. Chron. 6. 73. Ios. 21. 29. Cities of , of which, 1. Maccchab. 9. 2. Anem or Hen-Gannim of the Leuites, and Seesima or Shahatsima, the West border of Isachar, of which Ios. 19. 22. From hence ranging the Seacoast, there is found the Castle of Pilgrimes: a strong Castle inuiro∣ned with the Sea, sometime the store-house and Magasine of the Christians, and built by the Earle of S t . Giles or Tolouse. From the Castle of Pilgrimes the Sea maketh a great Bay towards the North, and the shore beginneth Mount Carmel, not farre from the Riuer Chison: where Elijah assembled all the Prophets, and Priests of Baal, and prayed King and the people assembled, to make trial whether the God of Israel, or the Idoll of Baal, were to be worshipped, by laying a sacrifice without fire on the Altar: which done, the Priests of Baal prayed, and cut their owne flesh after their manner, but the fire kindled not, while Elijah in derision told them that their God was either in pur∣suite of his enemies not at leisure, or perchance a-sleepe, &c. but at the prayer of Elijah his fire kindled, notwithstanding that he had caused the people to cast many Vesselis of water thereon: by which miracle the people incensed, slew all those I do laters on the bankes of Chison adioyning. At the foote of this Mountaine to the North standeth Caiphas, built, as they say, by the high Priest. It is also knowne by the name of Porsina and Porphyria, sometime a Suffragane Bishops seate. Returning againe from the Seacoast towards Tiberias by the bankes of Chison, there are found the Citie of Hapharaim or Aphraim, and the Castles of Mesra, and Saba: of which Brochard and Breidenbach: and then Naim on the Riuer Chison: a beautifull Citie while it stood, in the Gates whereof Christ raised from death the widdowes only sonne. Luc. 7. Then Seon or Shion named Iosua 19. betweene the two Hills of Hermon, in Isa∣char: beyond it standeth Endor, famous by reason of the Inchauntresse that vnder∣tooke to raise vp the body of Samuel at the instigation of Saul. Beyond it stands Anaharath and Rabbith named Ios. c. 19. v. 19. 20. Then as it is named, Ios. 21. 28. or Dobratha, as it is named, 1. Chron. 6. 72. This Citie (which stretcheth it selfe ouer Chison ) was a Citie of refuge belonging to the Le∣uites. Next to Daberath is Arbela situate, neere the Causes of those two which so greatly molested Galilee in Herodes time. It ioyneth on one side to the Mountaine of Isachar or Hermon, and on the other to the Valley of Iesrael: which valley conti∣nueth it selfe from Bethsan or Scythopolis, the East border of Isachar, euen to the Me∣diterran Sea: two parts whereof are inclosed by the Mountaines of Gilboe on the 1. . 5. 23. & 9 2. South, and by Hermon, and the Riuer Chison on the North. In these Called Cam∣pus Magnus, 1. Mac. 12. 49. and Harbathe for Harabath. plaines Ge∣dcon Iudg. 6. ouerthrew the Madianites, and herein, they thinke, Saul fought against the Phi∣listims: 1. Sam. 31. against the Syrians, and the Tartars against the Saracens. 1. Kings. 20. §. VII. THE HALFE OF THE TRIBE OF MANASSE. †. I. Of the bounds of this halfe Tribe: and of Scythopolis, Salem, Thersa, and others. THe next Tribe which ioyneth it selfe to Isachar towards the South, is the halfe of Manasse, on the West side of Iordan. Manasses was the first begotten of Ioseph, the eleuenth sonne of Iacob. His mother was an Aegyptian, the daughter of Putiphar, Priest and Prince of Heliopolis: which Manasses with his brother Ephraim, the grand-children of Iacob, were by adoption numbred amongst the sonnes of Iacob, and made vp the number of the twelue Patriarkes. Of Manasse there were increased in Aegypt, as they were numbred at Mount , 32200. able men: all which being consumed in the Desarts, there entred of their issues, 52700. bearing armes. The Territory which fell on this one halfe of Manasse, was bounded by Iordan on the East, and Doraea vpon the Mediterran Sea on the West, Iesrael on the North, and Machmata is the South border. The first and principall Citie which stood in this Territorie was Bethsan, some∣time Nysa, saith Plinie, built by Liber Pater, in honour of his Nurse there buried, of Plin. lib. 5. . . the same name; which Solinus confirmes. Afterward when the inuaded A∣sia the lesse, and pierst into the South, to the vttermost of Coelesyria, they built this Citie a-new, and very magnificent: and it had thereupon the name of Scythopolis, or the Citie of Scythians giuen it by the Greekes. These barbarous Northren people constrained the Iewes to fight against their owne Nation and kindred, by whose handes when they had obtained victorie, they themselues set on the Iewes which serued them, and slew them all. Stephanus makes it the vtmost towards the South of Coelesyria: and Strabo ioynes it to Galilee. It is seated betweene Iordan and the Hills of Gilboe, in aulone ad montes acrabitenae, saith Ziegler. But I finde it in the East part of the Valley of Iesrael neere Iordan: after that, Iordan streightneth it selfe againe into a Riuer: leauing the Sea or Lake Genezareth. Notwithstanding, Montanus describes it farre to the West, and the Medi∣terran Sea, neere Endor, contrarie to Stella, Laicstan, Adrichome, and all other the best Authors. This Citie was the greatest of all those of Decapolis: but the children of Manasse could not expell the Inhabitants thereof: and therefore called it Sane an ene∣mie, or Beth-san, the house of an enemie. Ouer the walls of this Bethsan the Philistims hung the bodie of Saul, and his sonnes, . 1. Ios. 17. de Bell. sacr. slaine at Gilboe. It had, while the Christian Religion flourished in those parts, an Archbishop, who had nine other Bishops of his Diocesse, numbred by Tyrius, in his 14. Booke and 12. Chapter: but the same was afterward translated to Nazareth. The later trauailers in those parts affirme, that there is daily taken out among the rubble and the ruines of that Citie, goodly pillers and other pieces of excellent marble, which witnesse the stately buildings, and magnificence which it had in elder times, but it is now a poore and desolate Village. From Bethsan keeping the way by Iordan, they finde an ancient Citie called , which Citie the ancient Rabbines, saith Hierome, doe not finde to be the same H. . in Epist. at . & in Loc. Hebr. with Hierusalem: there being in the time of Hierome and since, a towne of that name, neere Scythopolis before remembred, which if the place of Scripture Gen. 13. 18. doe not confirme, where the Vulgar readeth transiuit{que} in Salem vrbem Sichemorum (for which others reade, venit incolumis ad Ciuitatem Sechemum, making the word not to be a proper name, but an adiectiue) yet the place Iohn 3. 13. where it is said, that Iohn was baptizing in Aenon neere Salem, may somewhat strengthen this opini∣on, and yet it is not vnlikely that this Salem of which S. Iohn speaketh, is but contra∣cted of Shahalim, of which in the Tribe of , 1. Sam. 9. 4. This word maketh to be the plurall of Shuhal: of which wee reade, 1. Sam. 13. 17. for as for that which is added out of Cant. 6. 12. of Shulammitis, as if it had been as much as a Wo∣man of this Saleim, neere Aenon, it hath no probability. Not farre from thence where they place Salem, they finde Bezech the Citie of This Citie by the place, Iud. 1. 3. seemeth to haue been in Iuda. Adonibezet, Iosephus calls it Bala, here it was that Saul assembled the strength of Is∣rael, and Iuda, to the number of 330000. when hce meant to relieue Iabesh Gilead, a∣gainst Naash the Ammonite: who would giue them no other conditions of peace, than to suffer their right eyes to be thrust out. Neere Bezech is the Citie of Bethbera Iosep. ant. 6. . 5. . 1. c. 11. or rather Beth-bara, of which Iudg. 7. 24. in the storie of Gideon: and then Ephra or Ho∣phra, wherein Gedeon inhabited: in the border whereof stood an Altar consecrated to Baal: which he pulled downe and dcfaced: and neere it that stone, on which the Bastard slew his 70. brothers: a Heathenish cruclty, practised by the Turke to this day; and not hence, betweene the Village of Asophon and Iordan, Ptolo∣maeus Lathurus ouerthrcw Alexander King of the Iewes: and slaughtered as Ios. l. 13. c. 21. ant. numbreth them 3000. but according to Timagenes 50000. after which victory, as Ptolomie past by the Villages of the Iewes; he slew all their women: and caused the yong children to bce sod in great caldrons, that the rest of the Iewes might thereby thinke that the Aegyptians were growne to be man-eaters, and strike them with the greater terrour. Towards the West and on the border of Isachar, they place the Cities of This Aner vpon 1. Chron. 6. 70. makes to bee the same with Tabanac, of which Ios. 21. 25 Hierom names it from Aner the Confede∣rate of Abra∣ham, Gen. 14. 13 12. 17. . King. 14. of the Leuites, and Abel-Mehola, which Iunius, Iudg. 7. 22. placeth in Ephraim, it was the habitation of the Prophet, numbred among those places, 1. Reg. 4. 12. which were in charge to Baana by Salomon, to whose charge also be∣longed, a place of great strength, which at the first resisted Iosua, though their King was afterward hanged, and their Citie giuen to the Leuites. In the bodie of this Territory of Manasse, but somewhat neerer Iordan, than to the Mediterran Sea, were three great Cities, to wit, Thersa, whose King was one of those that Iosua slew: which the Kings of Israel vsed for their Regall seate: till such time as Samaria was built. From hence the wise of Ieroboam went to Achia to en∣quire of her sonnes health: who knowing her, though she were disguised, told her of her sonnes death. The second was Thebes neere Samaria, of which name therc are both in Aegypt, and Greece, of grcat fame: in the assault of the Tower of this Towne, whereinto the Citizens retired, the Bastard Abimilec was wounded by a waighty stone, throwne by a Woman ouer the Wall, who despairing of his recouery, commanded his Page to Iudg. 9. v. . slay him out-right, because it should not be said that he perished by the stroke of a Woman. But others set this Citie in Ephraim neere Sichem or Neapolis. The third is Acrabata, of which the Territory adioyning is called Acrabatena, . Mac. 1. c. 5 (one of the ten Toparchies or Gouernments in Iudaea ) for which Hicrome, 1. Macc. 5. reades Arabathena: but in the Greeke it is Acrabatine: Isidore calls it Agrabat. This Citie had one of the largest Territories of all Palaestine belonging to the Gouernour thereof. Iosephus remembreth it often, as in his second Booke of the Iewes Warres, c. 11. 25. 28. and elsewhere. The difference betweene a Tetrarchie and a Toparchie, was, that the first was ta∣ken for a Prouince, and the other for a Citie with some lesser Territory adioyning, and a Tetrarch is the same with Praeses in Latine, and President in English, being com∣monly . l. 5. the fourth part of a Kingdome: and thereof so called: Plinie nameth seuen∣teene Tetrarchies in Syria: the Holy Land had foure, and so hath the Kingdome of Ireland to this day, Lemster, Vlster, Connath, and Mounster. Euseb. in Chron. To the South-west of Acrabata they placc the Cities of Balaam or Bilham, and Ge∣thremmon of the Leuites: but Iunius out of Ios. 21. 25. and 1. Chron. 6. 70. gathers that these two are but one: and that Iibleham Ios. 16. 11. is another name of the same Citie. Then is Iesrael a Regall Citie, set at the foot of the Mountaines of Gilboe, towards the South-west: herein by a false accusation caused Naboth to bee stoned, to the end shee might possesse his Vincyard adioyning to the Citie, which Naboth re∣fused to sell, because it was his inheritance from his Father. Ioram also was cast vnburied into the same field: for which his Mother Iezabel King. 2. cap. 2. murthered Naboth. Toward the Sea from Iesrael is the Citie which they call Gaber: in whose ascent as Ahaziah King of Iuda fled from Iehu, when hee had slaine Ioram, hee was wounded with the shot of an arrow, of which wound hee died at Mageddo adioyning. The . King. 9. 27. Scripture calls this Citie of Gaber, Gur. Then Adadremmon, neere vnto which the good King Iosias was slaine by Necho, King of , in a Warre vnaduisedly vndertaken. For Necho marched towards Assyria against the King thereof; by the commaundement of God: whom Iosias thought to resist in his passage. It was afterward called Maximianopolis. A neighbour Citie to was Maggeddo, often remembred in the Scrip∣tures; Iud. 1. c. 5. whose King was slaine among the rest by Iosua; yet they defended their Ci∣tie Jos. 12. 17. for a long time against Manasse. The Riuer which passeth by the Towne, may perhaps bee the same which Ptolomie calleth Chorseus: and not that of which wee haue spoken in Zabulon. For because this name is not found in the Scriptures, many of those that haue described the Holy Land delineate no such Riuer. Moore only sets it downe in his Geographie of the twelue Tribes: but the Riuer which passeth by Maggeddo hee vnderstandeth to bee but a branch, falling thereinto. Laicstan and Schrot make a great confluence of waters in this place: agreeable to this Scripture in the fifth of Iudges: Then fought the Kings of Canaan in Tanaac by the waters of Mag∣geddo. But these Authors, and with them Stella, giue it no other name then the Tor∣rent so called. But seeing that ancient Cosmographers stretch out the bounds of Phoenicia, euen to Sebaste or Samaria; and Strabo farre beyond it on the Sea-coast: And Iosephus calls Strab. l. 16. Caesaria Palaestinae a Citie of Phoenicia, yea Laurentius Coruinus extendeth Phoenicia as Iosep. l. 15. c. 13. Niger. farre as Gaza: seeing also Ptolomie sets downe Chorseus for the partition of Phoenicia and Iudaea: this Riuer running East and West paralell with Samaria: it is very proba∣ble that this Torrent called Maggeddo, after the name of the Citie, which it wate∣reth, is the same which Ptolomie in his fourth Table of Asia calleth Chorseus. The later trauailers of the holy Land call Maggeddo Subimbre at this day. †. II. Of Caesaria Palaestinae, and some other Townes. FRom Maggeddo toward the West, and neere the Mediterran Sea, was that glo∣rious Citie of Caesaria Palaestinae: first, the Tower of Straton: the same which Pli∣nie calls Apollonia: though Ptolomie sets Apollonia elsewhere, and toward Egypt, be∣tweene this Citie and Ioppe, to which Vespasian gaue the name of Flauia Colonia. It was by Herod rebuilt, who therein laboured to exceede all the workes in that part of the world. For besides the edifices, which hee reared within the Walls, of cut and polisht marbles, the Theater and Amphitheater, from whence he might looke o∣uer the Seas farre away, with the high and stately Towers and Gates: hee forced a Harborow of great capacitie, being in former times but an open Bay: and the winde blowing from the Sea the Merchants haunting that Port, had no other hope, but in the strength of their cables and Anchors. This worke hee performed with such charge and labour, as the like of that kinde hath not beene found in any Kingdome, nor in any age: which, because the Materialls were fetcht from farre, and the waight of the stones was such as it exceedeth beliefe, I haue added Iosephus owne wordes of this worke: which are these: Hanc locorum incommoditatem correcturus, circulum Iosep. l. 15. c. 13. portus circumduxit, quantum magnae classi recipiendae sufficere: & in viginti vlna∣rum profundum, praegrandia saxa demisit: quorum plera{que} pedum quinquaginta longitudi∣nis, latitudinis verò octodecim, altitudine nouem-pedali: fuerunt quaedam maiora, mi∣nora alia; To mend this inconuenience of place (saith IOSEPHVS) hee compast in a Bay wherein a great fleete might well ride: and let downe great stones fadome deepe: whereof some were fiftie foote long, eighteene foote broade, and nine foote thicke: some bigger, and some lesser. To this he added an arme or cawsie of two hundred foote long, to breake the waues: the rest he strengthened with a stone wall, with diuers, stately Towers thereon builded: of which the most magnificent hee called Drusus after the name of Drusus the sonne in law of Caesar: in whose honour hee intituled the Citie it selfe, Caesaria of Palaestine: all which he performed in twelue yeeres time. It was the first of the Easterne Cities that receiued a Bishop: afterward erected into an Archbishopricke, commanding twentie others vnder it, saith Tyrius. . 14. c. 12. bell. . St. Hierome nameth Theophilus, Eusebius, Acacius, Euzorus, and Gelasius to haue beene Bishops thereof. In this Citie was Cornelius the Centurion baptized by S. Peter: and herein dwelt Philip the Apostle: S. Paul was heerein two yeeres prisoner, vnder the President Foelix, vnto the time and gouernment of Porcius Festus: by whom ma∣king his appeale, he was sent to Caesar. Here, when Herod Agrippa was passing on to celebrate the Quinquennalia, taking delight to bee called a God by his flatterers, hee was stricken with an Angell vnto death, saith Iosephus. To the North of Caesaria standeth Dora, or Naphoth Dor, as some reade Ios. 1. 2; so called (saith Adrichomius ) because it ioyneth to the Sea, whose King was slaine by Iosua. But Iunius for in Dor, reades in tractibus Dor: and so the Vulgar, in regionibus Dor: although 1. Reg. 4 11. for the like speech in the Hebrew it readeth omnis Nephath Dor: The Septuagint in the place of Iosua call it Nepheth-Dor, and in the other of the Kings, Nepha-Dor: but the true name by other places (as Ios. 12. 23. Iudg. 1. 27.) may seeme to bee Dor. It was a strong and powerfull : and the fourth in account of those twelue Principalities or Sitarchies, which Salomon ere∣cted. Iunius vpon Macchab. 15. 11. placeth it betweene the Hill Carmel and the mouth of the Riuer Cherseus: for so some name the Riuer Chorseus, of which wee haue spo∣ken already. Into this Citie, for the strength thereof, Tryphon fled from Antiochus the sonne of Demetrius: where he was by the same Antiochus besieged with 120000. foote-men and 8000. Horse: the same perfidious villaine that receiued 200. talents for the ran∣some Macc. 1. 13. 15. of Ionathan Macchabaeus (whom he had taken by treacherie) and then slew him: and after him slew his owne Master, vsurping for a while the Kingdome of Syria. It had also a Bishops seate of the Diocesse of Caesaria. From Caesaria towards the South, they place the Cities of Capharnaum, Gabe, and . Tyr. de Bell. . 10. c. 6. Galgal: for besides that Capharnaum famous in the Euangelists, they find in these parts neere the West Sea, another of the same name. Of Gabe Hierome in locis Hebratcis. The famous Galgal or Gilgal, was in Beniamin: but this Gilgal, they say, it was whose King was slaine by Iosua. Then Antipatris so called of Herode, in honour of his Father: but in the time of . . v. 31. the it was called Capharsalama: in the fields whereof Iudas Macchabaeus ouerthrew a part of the Armie of Nicanor, Lieutenant to Demetrius: an armie drawn into Iudaea by a traiterous Iew, called Alcimus: who contended for the Priest-hood, first vnder Bacchides, and then vnder Nicanor. To this was S. Paul carried prisoner from Hierusalem, conducted by 470. Souldiers, to defend him from the furie of the Iewes. In after-times the Armie of Godfrey of Bulion attempted it in vaine: yet was it taken by Baldwine. It was honoured in those dayes with a Bishops seate, but it is now a poore Village called Assur, saith Brochard. Neere vnto this Citie the Prophet Iones was three dayes preserued in the bodie of a Whale. Into the Land, from Antipatris and Caesaria, standeth Narbata, whereof the Ter∣ritorie taketh name: which Cestius the Romane wasted with fire and sword, because the Iewes which dwelt at Caesaria fled thence, and carried with them the Bookes of Moses. Neere vnto it is the Mountaine of Abdia, the Steward of King Achab: where∣in he hid an hundreth Prophets, and fed them, after which hee himselfe is said to haue obtained from God the Spirit of prophecie also. CHAP. VIII. Of the Kingdome of Phoenicia. §. I. The bounds and chiefe Cities, and Founders, and Name, of this Kingdome: and of the inuention of Letters ascribed to them. BECAVSE these fiue Tribes, of Asser, Nephtalim, Za∣bulon, Issachar, and the halfe of Manasse, possest the bet∣ter part of that ancient Kingdome of Phoenicia, to wit, of so much as lay to the South part of Anti-libanus: I haue therefore gathered a briefe of those Kings which haue gouerned therein: at least so many of them as time (which deuoureth all things) hath left to posteritie: and that the rest haue perished, it is not strange: seeing so many volumes of excellent learning in so long a race and reuolution, and in so many chan∣ges of Estates and Conquests of Heathen Princes, haue been torne, cast away, or otherwise consumed. The limits of this Kingdome, as touching the South parts, are very vncertaine: but all Cosmographers doe in effect agree, that it takes beginning from the North, where that part of Syria, which is called Casiotis, : most of them bounding it by Orthosia, to the North of Tripolis. Ptolomie makes it a little larger, as reaching from . 4. Tab. Asiae. the Riuer Eleutherus, that falls into the Sea at the Iland of Aradus, somewhat to the North of Orthosia, and stretching from thence alongst the coast of the Mediterran sea, as farre as the Riuer of Chorseus, which seemes to be that which the Iewes call the Plin. lib. 5. c. 19. Torrent, or Riuer of Maggeddo. Plinie extends it farther and comprehends Ioppe within it: Coruinus and Budaeus, Ioppe and Gaza. Phoenicia apud priscos appellata (saith BVDAEVS) quae nunc Palaestina Syriae dicitur; It was called Phoenicia of old (saith hee) which now is called Palaestina of Syria. Strabo comprehends in this Countrey of Phoenicia, all the Sea side of Iudaea, and Strab. l. 16. . de . l. 4. Palaestina, euen vnto , the first Port of Aegypt. On the contrary Diodorus Si∣culus foldeth it vp in Coelesyria, which hee boundeth not. But for my selfe I take a middle course, and like best of Ptolomies description, who was seldome deceiued in his owne Art. It had in it these famous Maritimate Cities (besides all those of the Ilands) to wit, Aradus, Orthosia, Tripolis, Botrys, Byblus, Berytus, Sidon, Tyre, Ptolomais (or Acon ) Dora, and Caesaria Palestinae: and by reason of the many Ports and goodly Sea-townes, it anciently commanded the Trades of the Easterne world: and they were absolute Kings of the Mediterran Sea. The ancient Regall Seate of those Princes was Zidon, built by Zidon the first sonne of Canaan: and the people then subiect to that people were called Zidonians: the same slate continuing euen vnto Iosuas time. For till then it is probable that there was but one King of all that Region; afterward called Phoenicia: which Proco∣pius also confirmeth in his second Booke of Vandall Warres. But in processe of time the Citie of Tyre adioyning became the more magnificent: yet according to the Pro∣phet, Esay. 23. it was but a Daughter of Zidon, and by them first built and peopled. But after the death of Moses, and while Iosua yet gouerned Israel, Agenor an Ae∣gyptian of Thebes, or a Phoenician bred in Egypt, came thence with his sonnes Cadmus, Phoenix, Cyrus, and clilix, (say Cedrenus and Curtius ) and built and possest the Cities F. 17. of Tyre and Zidon: to wit, the new Tyrus, and brought into Phoenicia (so called after the name of his second Sonne) the vse of letters: which also Cadmus in his pursuite after his sister Europa taught the Graecians. For Taurus King of Crete, when he surprised Tyre, had stollen her thence: of which the Poets deuised the fable of Iupiters trans∣formation into a Bull, by whom that stealth was also supposed to be made. Pompo∣nius Sabinus makes Belus the first King of Phoenicia: and findes Cadmus his successour: whom he calleth his grand-child: and it seemeth that was the Father of Age∣nor, and not Neptune: because the successors of Dido held that name alwayes in re∣uerence, making it a part of their owne, as Asdrubal, Hannibal: which memorie Virgil also toucheth in these Verses: Hic Reginagrauem gemmis auro{que} poposcit Impleuit{que} moro pateram: quam BEIVS & omnes A BELO soliti. The Queene anon commands the waighty bowle (Waightic with precious stones and massie gold) To flow with wine. This Belus vs'd of old, And all of Belus Line. Whether this Belus were Father or Grand-father to Agenor, the matter is not great. But it seemeth to me by comparing of times, that Belus was Ancestor to these Phoenicians, and preceded Agenor. For were Belus, or Iupiter Belus, the sonne of Nep∣tune by Libya, the Daughter of Epaphus, or were he the Sonne of Telegonus, according to Eusebius; yet it is agreed that Cecrops then ruled in Attica: and in the end of Ce∣crops time, saith S. Augustine, Moses left Aegypt: Agenors successour liuing at once with Iosua. Now that Agenor returned about the same time into the Territory of Zidon, I cannot doubt: neither doe I denie, but that he gaue that Region the name of Phoenicia, in honour of his Sonne. But in stead of the building of Tyre, and Zidon, it is probable that he repaired and both: and therefore was called a Foun∣der, as Semiramis and Nabuchodonosor were of Babylon. For bee it true that Agenor was of the same Nation, and brought vp in Aegypt: where he learnt the vse of letters ( Aegypt flourishing in all kind of learning in Moses time) or were he by Nation an Aegyptian: yet is it very likely that either he came to saue his owne Territory: or otherwise to defend the of Canaan, from the Is∣raelites: who were by Moses led out of Aegypt, to the great losse and dishonour of that Nation: and by Iosua conducted ouer Iordan, to conquer and possesse the Ca∣naanites Land. For though the Aegyptians, by reason of the losse which they recei∣ued by the hand of God, in the Red Sea, and by the ten plagues cast on them before that, and by the slaughter of so many of the Male children at the same time, could not hinder the Hebrewes from inuading Canaan by Land: which also they knew had so many powerfull Nations to defend it: the Desarts inter-jacent, and the strong E∣domites, Moabites, Emorites, and Ammonites their borderers: yet Aegypt hauing such Vessells, or Ships, or Gallies, as were then in vse: did not in all probabilitie neglect to Garrison the Sea coast, or assist Agenor with such forces, as they had to spare; and which they might performe with the greater facilitie, in that the Philistims which held the shores of Canaan, next adioyning vnto them, were their Friends and Con∣federates. Now as it appeareth by the course of the storie, those Cities of Phoenicia, which Agenor was said to haue built (that is, to haue fortified and defended against Iosua, and against the Tribes after him, as Zidon, Sor, or Tyre, by Iosua called the strong Ci∣tic, c. 19. v. 29. Accho after ward Ptolomais, Aczib and Dor ) were all that Phoenicia had in those dayes. That the Kings of Phoenicia were mightie, especially by Sea, it appeareth, first by their desence against Israel: secondly by this, that Dauid and Salomon could not ma∣ster them: but were glad of their alliance: thirdly, that one of their Cities, though they were then but Reguli, defended it selfe 13. yeeres against a King of Kings, Na∣buchodonosor: and that Alexander the great (who being made victorious by the pro∣uidence of God, seemed vnresistable) spent more time in the recouerie of Tyre; than in the conquest of all the Cities in Asia. Other opinions there are, as that of Berosus out of Iosephus, who conceiues that Tyre was founded by Tyras the sonne of Iaphet. And for the Region it selfe, though Callisthenes deriue it ab arbore dactylorum; and the Greekes from the word Phonos, of slaughter, because the Phoenicians slew all that came on their coasts, yet for my selfe I take it that Phoenix the sonne of Agenor gaue it that name. But that either Agenor in Phoenicia, or Cadmus his sonne in Greece, were the Inuentors of Letters, it is ridicu∣lous: and therefore the dispute vnnecessarie. The Aethiopians affirme that Atlas, Orion, Orpheus, Linus, Hercules, Prometheus, Cadmus, and others, had from them the first light of all those Arts, Sciences, and ciuill Policies, which they afterward profest, and taught others: and that Pythagor as himselfe was instructed by the Libyans: to wit, from the South and Superior Aegyp∣tians: from whom those which inhabited neerer the out-let of Nilus, as they say, borrowed their Diuinitie and Philosophie: and from them the Greekes, then barba∣rous, receiued Ciuilitie. Againe, the Phoenicians challenge this inuention of Letters and of Learning: acknowledging nothing from the Aegyptians at all; neither doe they allow that Agenor and his sonnes were Affricans; whence Lucan. Phoenices primi (famae sicreditur) ausi Lucan. l. 5. 3. Mansurani radibus vocem signare figur is. Phoenicians first (if fame may credit haue) In rude Characters dar'd our wordes to graue. And that Cadmus was the sonne of Agenor, and was a Phoenician, and not an Ae∣gyptian, it appeareth by that answere made by Zeno; when hee in a kinde of reproch was called a stranger and a Phoenician: Si patriaest Phoenix, quidtum? nam CADMVS & ipse Athen. 1. Dipnos. Phoenix; cui debet Graecia doct a libros. If a Phoenician borne I am, what then? CADMVS was so: to whom Greece owes The Bookes of learned men. Out of doubt the Phoenicians were very ancient: and from the Records and Chronicles of Tyre, Iosephus the Historian confirmes a great part of his Antiquities. Ioseph. contra Appionem. The Thracians againe subscribe to none of these reports: but affirme constantly, that the great Zamolxis flourished among them: when Atlas liued in Mauritania: Nilus and Vulcan in Aegypt: and Ochus in Phoenicia. Yea, some of the French doe not blush to maintaine, that the ancient Gaules taught the Greekes the vse of Letters, and other Sciences. And doe not we know that our Bardes and Druids are as ancient as those Gaules, and that they sent their sonnes hither to bee by them instructed in all kinde of learning? Lastly, whereas others bestow this inuention on Moses, the same hath no proba∣bilitie at all, for hee liued at such time as learning and arts flourished most, both in Aegypt, and Assyria, and he himselfe was brought vp in all the learning of the Ae∣gyptians, from his infancie. But true it is that letters were inuented by those excellent Spirits of the first age, and before the generall floud: either by Seth, or Enos, or by whom else God knowes; from whom all wisedome and vnderstanding hath proceeded. And as the same in∣finite God is present with all his Creatures, so hath hee giuen the same inuention to diuers Nations: whereof the one hath not had commerce with the other; as well in this as in many other knowledges: for euen in Mexico, when it was first discouered, there was found written Bookes after the manner of those Hieroglyphicks, anciently vsed by the Aegyptians, and other Nations: and so had those Americans a kinde of Heraldrie; and their Princes differing in Armes and Scutchions, like vnto those vsed by the Kings and Nobilitie of other Nations. Iura naturalia communia, & generalia, &c. . Naturall Lawes are common and generall. §. II. Of the Kings of Tyre. BVt whatsoeuer remaineth of the storie and Kings of Phoenicia (the bookes of Zeno, Sachoniatho, Mnaseas, and others of that Nation, be∣ing no where found) the same is to be gathered out of the Scriptures, Iosephus, and Theophilus Antiochenus. Agenor liued at once with Iosua, to whom succeeded Phoenix, of whom that part of Canaan, and so farre towards the North as Aradus, tooke the name of Phoenicia: what King succeeded Phoenix it doth not appeare: but at such time as the Graecians besieged Troy, Phasis gouerned Phoenicia. In Hieremies time and while Iehotakim ruled in Iuda, the Tyrians had a King apart: for Hieremie speaketh of the Kings of Zidon, of Tyre, of Edom, &c. as of seuerall Iehoiakim. 27. v. 3. Kings. In Xerxes time, and when he prepared that incredible Armie wherewith hee inua∣ded Greece, Tetramnestus ruled that part of Phoenicia, about Tyre, and Zidon: who commanded, as some Writers affirme, Xerxes fleete, or rather, as I suppose, those 300. Gallies, which himselfe brought to his aide: for at this time it seemeth, that the Phoenicians were Tributaries to the Persian: for being broken into Reguli, and pet∣tie Kings in Hieremies time, they were subiected by Nabuchodonosor; of whose con∣quests in the Chapter before remembred, Hieremie prophecied. Tennes, though not immediately, succeeded Tetramnestus: remembred by D. Si∣culus in his 14. Booke. Strato, his successor, and King of Zidon, Alexander Macedon threw out, because of his dependancie vpon Darius, and that his Predecessors had serued the East Empire against the Graecians. But diuers Kings, of whom there is no memorie, came be∣tweene Tennes and Strato. For there were consumed 130. yeeres and somewhat more betweene Xerxes and Alexander Macedon. And this man was by Alexander esteemed the more vnworthie of restitution, because (saith Curtius ) hee rather sub∣mitted L. 4. himselfe by the instigation of his Subiects (who foresaw their vtter ruine by resistance) than that hec had any disposition thereunto, or bare any good affection towards the Maecedonians. Of this Strato, Athenaeus out of Theopompus reporteth, that hee was a man of ill . l. 12. c. 13 liuing: and most voluptuous; also that hee appointed certaine games and prizes for Women dancers, and singers: whom he to this end chiefly inuited, and assembled: that hauing beheld the most beautifull and liuely among them, hee might recouer them for his owne vse and delights. Of the strange accident about the death of one Strato King of these coalts, S. Hierome and others make mention: who hauing heard Hieron. l. 1. cont. Iouin. that the Persians were neere him with an Armie too waightie for his strength, and finding that hee was to hope for little grace, because of his falling away from that Empire, and his adhering to the Aegyptians: hee determining to kill himselfe, but fainting in the , his wife being present wrested the sword out of his hand and slew him: which done shee also therewith pierced her owne bodie, and died. After Alexander was possest of Zidon, and the other Sprato driuen thence, Hee gaue the Kingdome to Hephaestion, to dispose of: who hauing receiued great enter∣tainement of one of the Citizens, in whose house he lodged, offered to recompence him therewith; and willingly offered to establish him therein: but this Citizen no lesse vertuous than rich, desired Hephaestion that this Honour might bee inferred on some one of the bloud and race of their ancient Kings: and presented vnto him Ba∣lonymus, whom Curtius calls Abdolominus, IVSTINE Abdolomius, and Plutarch Aly∣nomus: who at the very houre that hee was called to this regall Estate, was with his owne handes working in his Garden, setting hearbes, and rootes, for his reliefe and sustenance: though otherwise a wise man and exceeding iust. These were the ancient Kings of Zidon: whose estate being afterward changed in∣to Popular or Aristocraticall: and by times and turnes subiected to the Emperours of the East: there remaineth no farther memorie of them, than that which is for∣merly deliuered in the Tribe of Asser. The Kings of Tyre, who they were before Samuels time, it doth not appeare: Io∣sephus the Historian, as is saide, had many things wherewith hee garnished his Anti∣quities from the Tyrian Chronicles: and out of Iosephus, and Theophilus Antiochenus, there may be gathered a descent of some twentie Kings of the Tyrians, but these Au∣thors, though they both pretend to write out of Menander Ephelius, doe in no sort agree in the times of their raignes; nor in other particulars. Abibalus is the first King of the Tyrians, that Iosephus and Theophilus remember: whom Theophtlus calls Abemalus: the same perchance that the sonne of Sirach men∣tioneth C. 46. in his fourtie and sixth Chapter, speaking of the Princes of the Tyrians. To this Abibalus, Suron succeeded, if hee be not one and the same with Abibalus. Dauid (saith Eusebius out of Eupolemus ) constrained this Suron to pay him Tribute, of Praep. Euang. l. 9. c. 4. whom also Dauid complaineth Psal. 83. Hiram succeeded Suron, whom Iosephus calls Irom, and Theophilus sometime Hie∣romenus, sometime Hieromus, but Tatian and Zonaras Chiram. He entred into a league with Dauid, and sent him Cedars with Masons, and Carpenters, to performe his buil∣dings in Hierusalem: after he had beaten thence the Iebusites. The same was hee that so greatly assisted Salomon: whom he not only furnished with Cedars, and other Ma∣terialls towards the raising of the Temple, and with great summes of money, but al∣so he ioyned with him in his enterprize of the East India, and of Ophir: and furnished Salomon with Mariners and Pilots: the Tyrians being of all Nations the most excellent Nauigators: and lent him 120. talents of gold. Of this Hiram there is not onely mention in diuers places of Scripture, but in Iosephus in his Antiquities the 7. and 8. 2. Sam. 5. &c. chap. 2. & 3. in Theophilus his 3 d ^ booke, in Tatianus his Oration against the Greekes: and 2. Sam. c. 5. in Zonaras Tome the first. This Prince seemed to be very mighty and magnificent, 1. King. c. 1. 9. 20 1. Chron. 14. he despised the 20. townes which Salomon offered him: he defended himselfe against 2. Chron. 2. 8. 9. that victorious King Dauid gaue his Daughter in marriage to Salomon, called the Zidonian: for whose sake he was contented to worship Asteroth, the Idoll of the 1. King. 11. Phoenicians. Hiram liued 53. yeeres. Baleastartus whom Theoph. Antiochenus, calleth Bazorus, succeeded Hiram, King of Theoph. 17. yeeres. Tyre and Zidon, and raigned 7. yeeres according to Iosephus. Abdastartus the eldest sonne of Baleastartus, gouerned 9. yeeres, and liued but 20. yeeres according to Iosephus: but after he raigned 12. yeere, and liued 54. who being slaine by the foure sonnes of his owne Nurce, the eldest of them held the Kingdome 12. yeeres. Astartus brother to Abdastartus, recouered the Kingdome from this Vsurper, and raigned 12. yeeres. Astarimus, or Atharimus, after Theophilus, a third brother followed Astartus, and Ioseph. 54. ruled 9. yeeres, and liued in all 54. Theoph. 58. Phelles the fourth sonne of Baleastartus, and brother to the three former Kings, Theoph. slew Astarimus, and raigned 8. Moneths; liued 50. yeeres. Ithobalus (or Iuthobalus, in Theophilus ) son to the third brother Astarimus, who was the chiefe Priest of the Goddesse Astarta, which was a dignitie next vnto the King, reuenged the death of his father, and slaughtered his Vncle Phelles: and raigned 32. Ioseph. 32. yeeres, the same which in the first of Kings chap. 16. is called Ethbaal, whose Daughter Theoph. 12. Iezabel, Achab married. Badezor or Bazor the sonne of Ithobalus or Ethbaal, brother to Iezabel, succeeded his 1. King. 16. v. 31 Father, and raigned 6. yeeres, and liued in all 45. Ioseph 6. yeeres Mettimus succeeded Badezor, and raigned but 9. yeeres, (saith Iosephus ) he had two Theoph. 26. Ioseph. 9. sonnes Pygmalion and Barca, and two Daughters Elisa and Anna. Theoph. 29. Pygmalion raigned after Mettimus his Father 40. yeeres, and liued 56: In the 7. yeere of whose raigne, Elisa sailed into Affrica, and built Carthago, 143. yeeres and 8. Moneths, after the Temple of Salomon: which by our accompt was 289. yeeres after Troy taken, and 143. before Rome: and therefore that fiction by Virgil of Ae∣neas and Dido must be farre out of square. For Pygmalion couetous of Sicheus his ri∣ches, who had married his sister Elisa, slew him traiterously as hee accompanied him in hunting: or if wee beleeue Iustine and Virgil, at the Altar: whereupon Elisa fearing Iustin. l. 11. to be despoiled of her husbands treasure, fled by Sea into Affrica as aforesaid: whom Virgil. l. 1. when Pygmalion prepared to pursue, he was by his Mothers teares, and by threates from the Oracle arrested. Barca accompanied his sister, and assisted her, in the erecti∣on of Carthage: and from him sprang that noble Familie of the Barcae in Affrica, of which race descended many famous Captaines, and the great Hannibal. Seruins in∣terprets this name of Dido by Virago, because of her man-like acts, others from Iedi∣dia, a surname of Salomon. Eluleus succeeded Pygmalion: and raigned 36. yeeres: the same that ouerthrew the fleete of Salmanassar, in the Port of Tyre: notwithstanding which hee continued his siege before it on the Land side fiue yeeres, but in vaine. After Eluleus, Ethobales gouerned the Tyrians, who vaunted himselfe to bee as wise as Daniel: and that he knew all secrets (saith Ezekiel ) of whom the Prophet writeth at large in his 28. Chapter: out of whom it is gathered, that this Prince died, or was slaine in that long siege of Nabuchodonosor: who serrounded and attempted Tyre 13: yeeres together, ere he preuailed. Baal followed Ethobales, and raigned 10. yeeres a tributarie, perchance, to Nabucho∣donosor: for after his death it was gouerned by diuers Iudges, succeeding each other: First, by Ecnibalus, then by Chelbis, Abarus the Priest, Mittonus, and Gerastus, who held it among them some 7. yeeres, and odde Moneths: after whom Balatorus commanded therein as a King for one yeere: after him Merbalus sent from Babylon 4. yeeres: after him Irom sent thence also, 20. yeeres. In the 17. of whose raigne Cyrus beganne to gouerne Persia. §. III. Of BOZIVS his conceit that the Edumaeins inhabiting along the Red Sea, were the Progenitors of the Tyrians, and that the Tyrtans from them receiued and brought into Phoenicia the know∣ledge of the true GOD. OF the great mutations of this Kingdome and State of the Tyrians, mix∣ed with a discourse of diuers other Nations, there is one Bozius that hath written a Tract at large, intituled de ruinis Gentium. And although the great, and many alterations found in this and other Cities, yea in all things vnder Heauen; haue proceeded from his ordinance who onely is vnchangeable, and the same for euer; yet whereas the said Bozius, inforcing heere∣hence, that the prosperitie and of the Tyrians were fruits of their imbracing or for saking the true Religion, to proue this his assertion, supposeth the Tyrians to haue beene Edumaeans, descended from Esau, Iacobs brother: first, it can hardly be beleeued that Tyre, when it flourished most in her ancient glorie, was in any sort truely deuout and religious. But to this end (besides the proofe which the Scriptures giue of Hi∣rams good affection when Salomon built the Temple) he brings many coniecturall ar∣guments: Boz. de ruin. Gent. l. 5. 6. 7. whereof the strongest is their petigree and descent: it being likely in his opinion, that the posteritie of Esau receiued from him by Tradition the Religion of Abraham and Isaeac. That the Tyrtans were Edumaeans, he endeuours to shew, partly by weake reasons, painefully strained from some affinitie of names, which are argu∣ments of more delight than waight: partly by authoritie. For Strabo, , Plinie, and others witnesse, that the Tyrians came from the Red Sea, in which there were three Ilands, called Tyrus, Aradus, and Sidon: which very names (as he thinketh) were afterwards giuen to the Cities of Phoenicia. Considering therefore that all the coast of the Red Sea, was (in his opinion) vnder the Edumaeans: as Elah and Esiongaber; or vnder the , who descended of Amalec the Nephew of Esau, whose chiefe Citie was Madian, so called of Madian the sonne of Abraham by Cethura, whose po∣steritie did people it: the consequence appeares good (as he takes it) that the Tyrians originally were Edomites: differing little or nothing in Religion from the children of Israel. Hereunto hee addes that Cadmus and his Companions brought not into Greece the worship of Astartis, the Idoll of the Sidonians. That the Parents of Thales and Pherecydes being Phoenicians, themselues differed much in their Philosophie from the Idolatrous of the Greekes. That in Teman, a Towne of the Edumaeans, was an Vniuersitie, wherein as may appeare by Eliphas the Temanite, who disputed with Iob, Religion was sincerely taught. Such is the discourse of Bozius, who labouring to proue one Paradoxe by an other, deserues in both very little credit. For neither doth it follow, that if the Tyrians were Edumaeans, they were then of the true Religion, or well affected to God and his People: neither is it true that they, were Edumaeans at all. In what Religion Esau brought vp his children it is no where found written, but that himselfe was a pro∣phane man, and disauowed by God, the Scriptures in plaine termes expresse. That his posteritie were Idolaters, is directly proued in the fiuc and twentieth Chapter of the second booke of Chronicles. That the Edomites were perpetuall enemies to the House of Israel, saue only when Dauid and some of his race, Kings of Iuda, held them in subiection, who knowes not? or who is ignorant of Dauids vnfriendly behauiour amongst them, when first they were subdued? Surely it was not any argument of Kindred or Alliance, betweene Tyrus and Mount Seir, that Hiram held such good correspondence with Dauid: euen then when Ioab slew all the Males of Edom: nei∣ther was it for their deuotion to God, and good affection to Israel, that the Edomites were so ill intreated. It seemeth that the pietie and ancient wisedome of Eliphaz the Themanite was then forgotten, and the Edumaeans punished, for being such as Dauid in his owne dayes found them. Although indeed the Citie of Teman whence Eli∣phaz came to reason with Iob, is not that in Edumaea, but another of the same name, lying East from the Sea of Galilee, and to Hus, the Countrie of Iob: and to the Citie of Bildad the Suhite, as both such Chorographers who best knew those parts, doe plainely shew, and the holy T ext makes . For Iob is said to haue exceeded in riches; and Salomon in wisedome, all the people of the East; not the in∣habitants of Mount Seir, which lay due South from Palestina. True it is that Eli∣phaz the sonne of Esau had a sonne called Teman: but that Fathers were wont in those dayes to take name of their sonnes, I no where finde. And Ismael also had a sonne called Thema: of whom it is not vnlike that Theman in the East had the name: for as much as in the seuenth Chapter of the booke of Iudges, the Midianites, Ama∣lekites, and all they of the East are called Ismaelites. And he that well considers how great and strong a Nation Amalec was, which durst giue battaile to the Host of Israel, wherein were 600000. able men, will hardly beleeue that such a people were des∣cended from one of Esau his grand-children. For how powerfull and numberlesse must the forces of all Edom haue beene: if one Tribe of them, yea one Familie of a Tribe had beene so great? surely Mount Seir and all the Regions adioyning could not haue held them. But wee no where finde that Edom had to doe with : or assisted the Amalekites: when Saul went to roote them out. For Amalec is no where in Scripture named as a Tribe of Edom: but a Nation of it selfe, if distinct from the . The like may be said of Midian, that the Founder thereof being sonne to Abraham by Cethura, doubtlesse was no Edomite. And thus much in gene∣rall for all the Seigniorie of the Red Sea-coast, which Bozius imagines the to haue held: if the Edomites in after-times held some places as Elan and Esiongaber on the Red Sea shore, yet in Moses time, which was long after the building of Tyre, they held them not. For Moses himselfe saith, that Israel did compasse all the bor∣ders of Edom: within which limits had Midian stood, Moses must needs haue knowne it: because he had sojourned long in that Countrie: and there had left his Wife and Children, when he went into Aegypt. But coniecturall Arguments, how probable soeuer, are needlesse in so manifest a case. For in the 83. Psal. Edom, Amalec, and Tyre, are named as distinct Nations: yea the Tyrians and Sidonians being one people, as all good Authors shew, and Bo∣zius himselfe confesseth, were Canaanites, as appeares, Gen. c. 10. v. 15. & 19 ap∣pointed by God to haue beene destroyed, and their Lands giuen to the children of Asser Ios. 29. because they were euer Idolaters, and of the cursed seede of Canaan, not Cousins to Israel, nor professors of the same Religion. For though Hiram said, Blessed be God that hath sent King DAVID a wise sonne, wee cannot inferre that hee was of Dauids Religion. The Turke hath said as much of Christian Princes, his con∣federates. Certaine it is that the Sidonians then worshipped Astaroth; and drew Sa∣lomon also to the same Idolatrie. Whereas Hiram aided Salomon in building the Temple, hee did it for his owne endes, receiuing therefore of Salomon great prouision of Corne, and Oile, and the offer of twentie Townes or Villages in Galilee. And if wee rightly consider things, it will appeare that Hiram, in all points, dealt Merchant-like with Salomon, Hee al∣lowed him Timber, with which Libanus was, and yet is ouer-pestered: being o∣therwise apt to yeeld silkes: as the Andarine silkes which come from thence, and o∣ther good commodities. For Corne and Oile, which hec wanted, hee gaue that which hee could well spare to Salomon. Also gold for Land: wherein Salomon was the wiser: who hauing got the gold first, gaue to Hiram the worst Villages that hee had: with which the Tyrian was ill pleased. But it was a necessarie police which in∣forced Tyrus to hold league with Israel. For Dauid had subdued Moab, Ammon, E∣dom, the Aramites, and a great part of Arabia, euen to Euphrates: through which Countries the Tyrians were wont to carrie and recarrie their Wares on Cammells, to their fleetes on the Red Sea; and backe againe to Tyrus: so that Salomon being Lord of all the Countries through which they were to passe, could haue cut off their Trade. But the Israelites were no Sea-men, and therefore glad to share with the Tyrians in their aduentures. Yet Salomon as Lord of the Sea-townes, which his Father had ta∣ken from the Philistims, might haue greatly distressed the Tyrians, and perhaps haue brought them euen into subiection. Which Hiram knowing, was glad (and no mer∣uaile) that Salomon rather meant as a man of peace to employ his Fathers treasure, in magnificent workes, than in pursuing the conquest of all Syria. Therefore hee wil∣lingly aided him, and sent him cunning workmen, to increase his delight in goodly buildings, imageries, and instruments of pleasure. As these passages betweene Salomon and Hiram, are no strong Arguments of pic∣tie in the Tyrians: so those other proofes which Bozius frames negatiuely vpon parti∣cular examples, are very weake. For what the Religion of Cadmus was, I thinke, no man knowes. It seemes to me, that hauing more cunning than the Greekes, and be∣ing very ambitious, hee would faine haue purchased diuine honours: which his Daughters, Nephewes, and others of his house obtained, but his owne many mis∣fortunes beguiled him of such hopes, if hee had any. Thales and Pherecydes are but single examples. Euery saluage Nation hath some whose wisedome excelleth the Vulgar, euen of ciuill people. Neither did the morall wisedome of these men ex∣presse any true knowledge of the true God. Only they made no good mention of the Gods of Greece: whome being newly come thither, they knew not. It is no good argument to say, that Cadmus and Thales being Tyrians, are not knowne to haue taught Idolatrie, therefore the Tyrians were not Idolaters. But this is of force, That Carthage, Vtica, Leptis, Cadiz, and all Colonies of the Tyrians (of which, I thinke, the Ilands before mentioned in the Red Sea to haue been, for they traded in all Seas) were Idolaters, euen from their first beginnings: therefore, the Tyrians who plan∣ted them, and to whom they had reference, were so likewise. This their Idolatry from Salomons time on-wards is acknowledged by Bozius, who would haue vs thinke them to haue been formerly a strange kinde of denout Edomites. In which fancie he is so peremptory, that he stileth men of contrary opi∣nion, impios politicos, as if it were impiety to thinke that God (who euen among the Heathen, which haue not knowne his name, doth fauour Vertue and hate Vice) hath often rewarded morall honestie, with temporall happinesse. Doubtlesse this doctrine of Bozius would better haue agreed with Iulian the Apostata, than with Cyril. For if the Assyrians, Greekes, Romanes, and all those Nations of the Gentiles, did then prosper most, when they drew necrest vnto the true Religion: what may bee said of the foule Idolatry which grew in Rome, as fast as Rome it selfe grew: and was inlarged with some new superstition, almost vpon euery new victory? How few great battailes did the Romanes winne, in which they vowed not either a Temple to some new God, or some new Honour to one of their old Gods? yea, what one Na∣tion, saue onely that of the Iewes, was subdued by them, whose Gods they did not af∣terward entertaine in their Citie? Onely the true God, which was the God of the Iewes, they reiected, vpbraiding the Iewes with him, as if hee were vnworthy of the Romane Maiestie: shall we herevpon enforce the lewd and foolish conclusion, which Heathen writers vsed against the Christians in the Primitiue Church: That such Idola∣trie had caused the Citie of Rome to flourish, and that the decay of those abominati∣ons did also bring with it the decay of the Empire? It might well be thought so, if prosperitie were a signe or effect of true Religion. Such is the blind zeale of Bozius, who writing against those whom he falsely termes impious, giues strength to such as are impious indeede. But such indiscretion is vsually found among men of his hu∣mour; who hauing once either foolishly imbraced the dreames of others, or vaine∣ly fashioned in their owne braines any strange Chimaera's of Diuinitic, condemne all suchin the pride of their zeale, as Athetsts and Infidels, that are not transported with the like intemperate ignorance. Great pittie it is that such madde Dogges are often∣times incouraged by those, who hauing the command of many tongues, when they themselues cannot touch a man in open and generous opposition, will wound him secretly by the malicious vertue of an Hypocrite. CHAP. IX. Of the Tribe of EPHRAIM, and of the Kings of the tenne Tribes, whose head was EPHRAIM. §. I. Of the memorable places in the Tribe of EPHRAIM. HAVING now past ouer Phoenicia, we come to the next Territory adioyning: which is that of Ephraim: som∣time taken per excellentiam for the whole Kingdome Psal. 5 9. 78. 108 Par. . of the tenne Tribes. Ephraim was the second sonne of Ioseph, whose issues when they left Aegypt were in number 45000. all which dying in the Desarts ( excepted) there entred the Holy Land of their chil∣dren growne to bee able men 32500. who sate downe on the West side of Iordan, betweene Ma∣nasse, and Beniamin: who bounded Ephraim by the North and South; as Iordan, and the Medi∣terran Sea, did by the East and West: The first and chiefe Citie which Ephraim had, was Samaria, the Metropolis of the Kingdome of Israel, built by Amris or Homri King thereof, and seated on the top of the Mountaine , which ouer-looketh all the bottome, and as farre as the Sea-coast. It was afterward called Sebaste, or Augusta, in honour of August. Caesar. This Citie is often remembred in the Scriptures: and magnificent it was in the first building; for as Brochard obserueth, the ruines which yet remaine, and which Bro∣chard found greater then those of Hierusalem, tell those that behold them, what it was when it stood vpright: for to this day there are found great store of goodly marble pillars, with other hewne and carued stone in great abundance, among the rubble. It was beaten to the ground by the Sonnes of Hircanus the high Priest: restored and built by the first Herod the sonne of Antipater: who to flatter Caesar called it Se∣baste. Herein were the Prophets Helisaeus, and Abdias buried: and so was Iohn Baptist. It now hath nothing but a few Cottages filled with Grecian Monkes. Neere Samaria toward the South, is the Hill of Bethel, and a towne of that name: on the top of which Mountaine Ieroboam erected one of his golden Calues, to bee worshipped: with which he seduced the Israelites. In sight of this Mountaine of Bethel, was that ancient Citie of Sichem; after the re∣stauration called Neapolis, now Pelosa, and Napolasa: It was destroyed by Simeon and . Ioh. 4. 5. Maborthan. Leui, in reuenge of the rauishment of their sister Dina: and after that by Abimelec Ioseph. 11. . 1. cuened with the soyle. Ieroboam raised it vp againe: and the Damascens a third time cast it downe. Vnder Sichem toward the Sea standeth Pharaton or Pirhathon on the Mountaine Iudg. 12. 15. Amelec, the Citie of Abdon Iudge of Israel. And vnder it Bethoron of the Leuites, 2. King. 13. built as it is said by Sara, the Daughter of Ephraim. Neere to this Citie Iudas Maccha∣baeus ouerthrew Seron and Lysias, Lieutenants to Antiochus. This Citie had Salomon formerly repaired and fortified. Betweene Bethoron and the Sea, standeth Samir, of which Ios. 10. And Saron whose King was slaine by Iosua: it is also mentioned Acts 9. 35. and of this Saron the Ios. c. 12. 18. Valley taketh name, which beginning at Caesarea Palaestinae, extendeth it selfe alongst the coast as farre as Ioppe, saith Adrichome. Though indeed the name Sarona is not particularly giuen to this Valley, but to euery fruitfull plaine Region; for not onely this Valley is so called, to wit, betweene Caesarea and Ioppe, but that also betweene the Mountaine Tabor and the Sea of Galilee: for so S. Hierome vpon the fiue and thir∣tieth Chapter of Esay interprets the word Saron: and so doth the same Father in his Commentaries vpon Abdia, reade Saron for Assaron: vnderstanding thereby a Plaine neere Lidda: which Lidda in his time was called Diospolis, or the Citie of Iupiter, one of the Toparchies of Iudaea, the fist in dignitie (or the third after Plinie ) where Saint PETER ( non suased Christi virtute ) cured Aeneas. Niger calls all that Region from Act. 6. Luc. 23. Anti-libanus to Ioppe Sarona. This Ioppe was burnt to the ground by the Romanes, Niger. Comm. 4. those Rauens and spoylers of all Estates, disturbers of Common-weales, vsurpers of Asiae. fol. 503. 14. other Princes Kingdomes; who with no other respect led than to amplifie their owne glory, troubled the whole world: and themselues, after murthering one an∣other, became a prey to the most saluage and barbarous Nations. In Diospolis (saith Will. of Tyre ) was S. George beheaded, and buried: in whose ho∣nour Of this Saint George see more aboue in this second Booke. and memorie Iustinian the Emperour caused a faire Church to bee built ouer his Tombe, these be Tyrius his wordes: Relicta à dextris locis maritimis Antipatride, & Ioppe, per latè patentem planitiem Eleutheriam pertranseuntes, quae est Diospolis, C. 7. §. 3. †. 5. vbi & egregij Martyris GEORGIJ vsque hodtè Sepulchrum ostenditur, peruenerunt, eius Ecclesiam quum ad honorem eiusdem Martyris pius & orthodoxus Princeps Romanorum, AVGVSTVS IVSTINIANVS multo studio & deuotione prompta aedificari praecepe∣rat, &c. They hauing left (saith he) on the right hand, the Sea Townes Antipatris, and Ioppe, passing ouer the great open plaine of Eleutheria, came to Lidda, which is Diospolis: where the sumptuous Tombe of the famous Martyr S. GEORGE is at this day shewed; whose Church, when the Godly and Orthodoxe Prince of the Romanes, High and Mightie IVSTINIAN had commanded to bee built, with great earnestnesse and present deuotion, &c. Thus farre Tyrius, by whose testimonie we may coniecture that this S. George was not that Arrian Bishop of Alexandria; but rather some better Christian: for this of Alexandria was slaine there in an vprore of the people, and his ashes cast into the Sea, as Ammianus Marcellinus reports. And yet also it may bee, that this Geor∣gius 22. c. 11. was a better Christian, than hee is commonly thought: for his wordes of the Temple of GENIVS, How long shall this Sepulchre stand? occasioned the vprore of the people against him: as fearing lest hee would giue attempt to ouerthrow that beautifull Temple. This also Marcellinus reports; who though hee say that this Georgius was also deadly hated of the Christians, who else might haue rescued him: yet hee addeth that his ashes, with the ashes of two others, were therefore cast into the Sea, lest if their Reliques had been gathered vp, Churches should bee built for them, as for others. But for my part, I rather thinke that it was not this Georgius, whose name liues in the right honourable Order of our Knights of the Garter, but rather another, whom Tyrius, aboue cited, witnesseth to haue been buried at Lidda or Diospolis. The same also is confirmed by Vitriac. S. Hierome affirmes that it was Salig. Tom. 6. . sometime called Tigrida, and while the Christians inhabited the Holy Land, it had a Bishop Suffragan. Neere to Lidda or Diospolis standeth Ramatha of the Leuites, or Aramathia: after∣ward Rama, and Ramula, the natiue Citie of Ioseph, which buried the body of Christ. There are many places which beare this name of Rama; one they set in the Tribe of See in the Tribe of Benia∣min, cap. 12. §. 1. Iuda neere Thecua in the way of Hcbron; another in Nephtalim, not farre from Sephet; a third in Zabulon, which, they say, adioyneth to Sephoris; a fourth, which they make the same with Silo, a fifth, which is this Rama, in the Hils of Ephraim, called Ra∣ma-Sophim, where Samuel liued; and wherin he is buried. Sam. 1. 6. 25. v. 5 From hence to the North alongst the coast are Helon, or Aialon of the Leuites, of which 1. Chron 6. Apollonia, of which Iosephus in his Antiquities, and in the Warre of Ant. 13. 21. de Bell. Ind. 1. 6. the Iewes. Also Balsalisa (for which Innius, 2. Reg. 4. 42. reades planities Shalistae ) they place hereabout in this Tribe of Epbraim; but Iunius vpon 1. Sam. 6. where we reade of the Land of , findeth it in Beniamin. On the other side of the Mountaines of Ephraim standeth Gosna, one of the Topar∣chies or Cities of gouernment, the second in dignitie, of which the Countrey about it taketh name. Then Thamnath-sara, or according to the Hebrew, Thimnath-Serach: one also of the Iudg 2. 9. It is called Thim∣nath Chores. ten Toparchies or of , which they call Thamnitica; a goodly Citie and strong, seated on one of the high Hills of Ephraim; on the North of the Hill called . 19. 50. Gaas; which Citie and Territory Israel gaue vnto their Leader Iosua; who also am∣plified it with buildings, neere which he was buried. His Sepulchre remained in S. Hieron, in locis Hebr. Hieroms time, and ouer it the Sunne ingrauen, in memory of that greatest of wonders, which God wrought in Iosua's time. In the places adioyning standeth Adarsa, or Adasa; where Iudas Maccabeus with 3000. Iewes ouerthrew the Armie of Nicanor, Lieutenant of Syria; neere to Gaser or Maccab. 1. 7. 40. Gezer which Iosua tooke, and hung their King; a Citie of the Leuites. It was after∣ward taken by Pharao of Aegypt; the people all slaine, and the Citie razed; Salomon rebuilt it. To the East of this place is the Frontier Citie of Iefleti, of which Ios. 16. 3. other∣wise Pelethi, whence Dauid had part of his Praetorian Souldiers, vnder the charge of Benaia. Then that high and famous Mountaine and Citie of Silo, whereon the Arke of God kept so many yeeres, till the Philistims got it. To this they ioyne the Citie of Machmas or Michmas: in which Ionathas See in Benia∣min. Micchabaeus inhabited, a place often remembred in the Scriptures. It standeth Maccab. 1. 9. v. vlt. in the common way from Samaria towards Hierusalem: and is now called Byra. Then the Village of Naioth where Saul prophecied; and ncere it Ephron, one of King. 1. c. 4. and see Rana in Beniamin. those Cities which Abijah recouered from Ieroboam; after the great ouerthrow gi∣uen him. Then Kibtsaim of the Leuites, of which Iosua 21. 22. which Iunius thinkes to be the same with Iokmeham, of which 1. Chro. 6. 28. As for Absaloms Baalasor, which they finde hereabout, Iunius reades it the Plaine of Chatzor; and finds it in the Tribe of Iuda; as Ios. 15. wee reade of two Chatzors in that Tribe; one neere Kedesh v. 23. and the other the same as Chetzron v. 25. In this Tribe also they finde the Citie of Mello; whose Citizens, they say, ioyned with the in making the Bastard Abimelec King: adding that for the buil∣ding thereof with other Cities, Salomon raised a Tribute vpon the people. But it seemes that or Millo is a common name of a strong Fort or Cittadell: and so Iu∣nius Iud. 9. v. 6. & 20 for domus Millo, reades incolae munitionis, and for Salomo aedificabit Millo, he reades 1. Reg. 11. 27. aedificabat munitionem, and so the Septuagint reade in that place. And without Vatablus ex∣pounds Millo in this place, locum publicum neccessarium Ierosoly∣mitanis atque Israelitis. doubt the Millo which Salomon built, cannot be that of Sichem, but another in Hieru∣salem. The other Cities of marke in Ephraim, are Taphuach, whose King was slaine by Io∣sua; and or Ianoah spoyled by Teglatphalassar; Pekah then gouerning Israel; with diuers others, but of no great fame. The Mountaines of Ephraim sometime signifie the greatest part of the Land of 2. King. 15. 29. the Sonnes of Ioseph, on the West of Iordan: seuerall parts whereof are the Hill of Ios. 17. v. 15. 16. Samron or Samaria, 1. Reg. 16. 24. the Hill of , where Eleazar the high Priest the son of Aa∣ron, was buried, Ios. 24. 33. And the two tops of Hils, Gerizzim wher the bles∣sings, & Hebal where the cur∣sings were to be read to the people: of which Deut. 11 & 17. & Ios. 8. the Hill of Gahas, Iudg. 2. 9. the Hill of Tsalmon or Salmon, Iudg. 9. 48. the Hills of the Region of Tsuph or Tsophim, Iudg. 9. 5. where Ra∣ma-Tsophim stood, which was the Citie of Samuel. The great plentie of fruitfull Vines vpon the sides of the Mountaines, was the occasion that Iacob in the Spirit of Prophecie, Genes. 49. 22. compared Iosephs two branches, Ephraim and Manasse, to the branches of a fruitfull Vine planted by the Weil side, and spreading her It seemeth that Iacob in this prophecie the rather v∣seth the word Daughters for branches, ther∣by the more plainely to sig∣nifie Colonies: which in the Hebrew phrase are called Daughters of the Metropolis: as in and elswhere . Daughter-branches along the Wall: which Allegory al∣so Ezekiel c. 22. in his Lamentation for Ephraim (that is, for the tenne Tribes, whose head was Ephraim ) prosequutes: as also in his Lamentation for Iuda, hee followeth the other Allegorie of Iacob, Gen. 49. 9. comparing Iuda to a Lyon. Vpon the top of one of the highest of these Hills of , which ouer-looketh all the plaines on both sides of Iordan, they finde the Castle called Dok: which they make to bee the same with Dagon, of which Ioseph. 1. Bell. Iudg. c. 2. in which Castle as it is 1. Maccab. 16 Ptolomie most traiterously, at a banquet, slewe Simon Maccabeus his Father-in∣Law. Among the Riuers of this Tribe of Ephraim, they name Gaas, remembred in the second of Samuel, c. 23. v. 30. where though reade Hiddai ex vna vallium Gahasi: yet the Vulgar and Vatablus read of the Riuer of Gaas. Also in this Tribe they place. the Riuer of Carith, by which the Prophet Eltas abode during the great droughth: where he was 1. Reg. 17. 3. 1. Reg. 17. fed with the Rauens: and after that the Riuer was dried vp, he trauailed (by the Spirit of God guided) towards Sidon: where he was relieued by the poore Widow of Zarepta, whose dead sonne he reuiued, and increased her pit∣tance of Meale and Oyle: whereby she sustained her life. §. II. Of the Kings of the ten Tribes from IEROBOAM to ACHAB. OF the first Kings of Israel, I omit in this place to speake: and reserue it to the Catalogue of the Kings of Iuda: of whom hereafter. Touching the acts of the Kings of the ten Tribes, but briefly, be∣ginning after the diuision from Iuda and Beniamm, now it followeth to speake. The first of these Kings was Ieroboam, the sonne of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, who being a man of strength and courage, was by Salomon made ouer-seer of the buildings of the Millo or Munition in Hierusalem, for as much as be∣longed to the charge of the Tribes of Ephraim and Manasse: and so many of them as wrought in those workes. During which time as he went from Hierusalem, hee en∣countred the Prophet Ahijah: who made him know that he was by God destinied to be King of Israel: and to command ten of the twelue Tribes. After this fearing that those things might come to Salomons knowledge, hee fled into Aegypt to Shishak, whom Eusebius calleth Osochores, whose Daughter hee married: the Predecessour of which Shishak (if not the same) did likewise entertaine Adad the Idumaean, when he was carried yong into Aegypt from the furie of Dauid, and his Captaine Ioab; which Adad, the King of Aegypt married to his Wiues sister Taphnes; vsing both him and Ieroboam as instruments to shake the Kingdome of Iudaea; that himselfe might the 1. Reg. 14. easilier spoile it, as he did: for in the fifth yeere of Rehoboam, Shishak sackt the Citie of Hierusalem, and carried thence all the treasure of Dauid and Salomon, and all the spoiles which Dauid tooke from Adadezer of Soba, with the presents of Tohu, King of Hamath, which were of an inestimable value. This Ieroboam after the death of Salomon became Lord of the ten Tribes: and though he were permitted by God to gouerne the Israelites, and from a meane man exalted to that state: yet preferring the policies of the world before the seruice and honour of God (as fearing that if the Tribes vnder his rule should repaire to Hierusa∣lem to doe their vsuall Sacrifices, they might bee drawne from him by degrees) he erected two golden Calues, one in Dan, and another in Bethel, for the people to wor∣ship (an imitation of the Aegyptian Apis, saith S. Ambrose, or rather of Aarons Calfe Ambrose vpon the 1. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romanes. in Horeb ) further he made election of his Priests out of the basest and vnlearned peo∣ple. This King made his chiefe seate and Palace at Sichem: He despised the warning of the Iudaean Prophet, whome Iosephus calleth Adon, and Glycas Ioel: His hand there-after withered, and was againe restored: but continuing in his Idolatry, and hardened vpon occasion that the Prophet returning was slaine by a Lyon, Ahijah makes him know, that God purposed to roote out his posteritie. He was afterward ouerthrowne by Abia King of Iuda, and died after he had go∣uerned 1. King. 11. 12. 13. 14. two and twenty yeeres; whom Nadab his sonne succeeded: who in the se∣cond 15. Chron. 13. yeere of his reigne, together with all the race of Ieroboam was slaine, and roo∣ted out by Baasha, who reigned in his stead: so Nadab liued King but two yeeres. Baasha the sonne of Ahijah, the third King after the partition, made warre with Asa King of Iuda: hee seated himselfe in Thersa: and fortified Rama against Iuda, to restraine their excursions. Hereupon Asa entertained Benhadad of Damascus against him, who inuaded Nephtalim, and destroyed many places therein: the meane while Asa carried away the Materials, with which Baasha intended to fortifie Rama; but being an Idolater, he was threatned by Iehu the Prophet, that it should befall his 1. Kin. 15. & 16 race, as it did to Ieroboam: which afterward came to passe: He ruled foure and twen∣tie yeeres and died. To Baasha succeeded Ela his sonne, who at a feast at his Palace of Thersa, was in his cups slaine by Zambris after he had reigned two yeeres: and in him the prophe∣cie of Iehu was fulfilled. Zambris succeded Ela, and assumed the name of a King seuen dayes; But Am∣bris in reuenge of the Kings Murther, set vpon Zambris, or Zimri; and inclosed him 1. King. 16. in Thersa, and forst him to burne himselfe. Ambris or Homri succeeded Ela, and transferred the Regall seate from Thersa to Samaria: which he bought of Shemer, built, and fortified it. This Ambris was also 1. King. 16. an Idolater, no lesse impious than the rest: and therefore subiected to Tabremmon, King of Syria; the Father of Benadad according to Eusebius, Nicephorus, and Zonaras: but how this should stand, I doe not well conceiue; seeing Benadad the Sonne of Tabremmon was inuited by Asa King of Iuda, to assaile Baasha King of Israel, the Fa∣ther . King. 15. of Ela who forewent Ambris. This Ambris raigned twelue yeeres, sixe in Ther∣sa, and sixe in Samaria, and left two children, Achab and Athalia. §. III. Of ACHAB and his Successors, with the captinitie of the ten Tribes. ACHAB or Ahab succeeded Omri, who not onely vp-held the Idolatrie of Ieroboam, borrowed of the Aegyptians: but hee married Iezabel the Zidonian: and as Ieroboam followed the Religion of his Aegyptian Wife: so did Achab of his Zidonian: and erected an Altar and a Groue to Baal in Samaria. He suffered to kill the Prophets of the most high God. GOD sent famine on the Land of Israel. Achab met Elias: Elias pre∣uailed in the triall of the Sacrifice, and killeth the false prophets: and afterward fli∣eth for feare of Iezabel. Benadad, not long after, besieged Samaria: and taken by Achab, was by him set at libertie: for which the Prophet (whom Glycas calleth Michaeas ) reproueth him: af∣terward hee caused Naboth by a false accusation to bee stoned. Then ioyning with Iosaphat in the warre for the recouerie of Ramoth, hee was slaine as Michaeas had fore∣told him. Hee had three sonnes named in the Scripture, Ochozias, Ioram, and Ioas: besides seuentie other sonnes by sundry wiues and Concubines. Ochozias succeeded his sather Achab. The Moabites fell from his obedience: hee Beelse-bub was the same with Belus and Plu∣to, saith Vigi∣nere vpon . bruised himselfe by a fall: and sent for counsaile to Beel- the God of Acharon. Eliah the Prophet meeteth the messenger on the way: and misliking that Ochozias sought helpe from that dead Idoll, asked the messenger, If there were not a God in Israel? Ochozias sendeth two Captaines, and with each fiftie souldiers to bring Eliah vnto him, both which with their Attendants were consumed with fire. The third Captaine besought mercie at Eliahs hands, and hee spared him, and went with him to the king; auowing it to the king that he must then die, which came to passe in the second yeere of his raigne. Ioram the brother of Ochozias by Iezabel, succeeded: He allured Iosaphat king of Iuda, and the king of Edom to assist him against the Moabites, who refused to pay him the tribute of 20000. sheepe. The three kings wanted water, for themselues and their horses, in the Desarts. The Prophet Elisha causeth the ditches to flow. The Moa∣bites 2. King. 3. are ouerthrowne: their king flieth to Kirharaseth, and being besieged, according to some Expositors, burnt his sonne on the walles as a Sacrifice, whereat the three kings moued with compassion returned and left Moab, wasting and spoyling that Region. Others, as it seemes with better reason, vnderstand the Text to speake of the sonne of the king of Edom, whom they suppose in this irruption to haue beene taken prisoner, by the Moabites, and that the king of Moab shewed him ore the walls, threatning, vnlesse the siege were dissolued, that he would offer him in sacrifice to his Gods. Whereupon the king of Edom besought those of Iuda and Israel to breake off the siege for the safetie of his sonne: which when the other kings refused to yeeld vnto, and that Moab according to his former threatning had burnt the king of Edoms sonne vpon the rampire, that all the assailants might discerne it, the king of Edom being by this sad spectacle inraged, forsooke the partie of the other kings; for want of whose assistance the siege was broken vp. After this the king of Aram sent to Ioram, to heale Naaman the Captaine of his Armie of the leprousie. The answere of Ioram was; Am I God to kill, and to giue life, that hee doth send to heale a man from his leprousie? adding, that the Aramite sought but matter of quarrell against him. Elisha hearing thereof, willed the king to send Naaman to him; promising that hee should know that there was a Prophet in Israel, and so Naaman was healed by washing himselfe seuen times in Iordan. E∣lisha refused the gifts of Naaman. But his seruant Gehazi accepted a part thereof: from whence the sellers of spirituall gifts are called Gehazites, as the buyers are Simonians 2. King. 1. 5. of Simon Magus. Afterward Benhadad king of Aram or Damascus, hauing heard that this Prophet did discouer to the king of Israel whatsoeuer the Aramite consulted in his secretest councell, sent a troupe of horse to take Elisha: all whom Elisha strooke blinde, and brought them captiues into Samaria: Ioram then asking leaue of the Prophet to slay them, Elisha forbade him to harme them: but caused them to be fed and sent backe to their owne Prince in safetie. The king of Aram notwithstanding these benefits, did againe attempt Samaria, and brought the Citizens to extreme famine. Ioram imputeth the cause thereof to the Prophet Elisha. Elisha by prayer caused a noise of Charriots and armor to sound in the ayre, whereby the Aramites affrighted, fled away, and left the siege; an act of great admiration as the same is written in the second of Kings. After this, when 2. King. 7. Azael obtained the kingdome of Syria by the death of his Master, Ioram entring vpon his frontire tooke Ramoth Gilead: in which warre he receiued diuers wounds, and returned to Iesrael to be cured. But whilest hee lay there, Iehu (who comman∣ding the armie of Ioram in Gilead, was anoynted king by one of the children of the Prophets sent by Elisha) surprized and slew both him and all that belonged vnto him, rooting out the whole posteritie of Ahab. who raigned after Iehoram, destroyed not onely the race of his , but also their Religion; for which hee receiued a promise from God, That his seede should occupie the Throne vnto the fourth generation. Yet hee vpheld the idola∣trie of Ieroboam, for which hee was plagued with grieuous warre, wherein he was beaten by Hazael the Aramite, who spoiled all the Countries to the East of Iordan: Pag. 86. in which warre he was slaine, saith Cedrenus: whereof the Scriptures are silent. Iehu raigned 28. yeeres. Ioachaz or the sonne of Iehu succeeded his father, whome Azael and his sonne Benhadad often inuaded, and in the end subiected, leauing him onely 50. horse, 20. chariots, and 10000. foot; and as it is written in the Scriptures, he made them 2. King. 13. like dust beaten into powder. Ioachaz raigned 17. yeeres. After Ioachaz Ioas his sonne gouerned Israel, who when hee repaired to Elisha the Prophet as he lay in his death-bed, the Prophet promised him three victories ouer the Aramites: and first commaunded him to lay his hand on his bowe, and Elisha couered the kings hands with his, and bad him open the window westward (which was toward Damascus) and then shoot an arrow thence out. He againe willed him to beate the ground with his arrowes, who smote it thrice, and ceased: The Prophet then told him, that hee should haue smitten fiue or sixe times, and then hee should haue had so many victories ouer the Aramites as hee gaue strokes. And so it succee∣ded with Ioas, who ouerthrew the Aramites in three battells, and recouered the Cities and Territorie from the sonne of Azael, which his father Ioachaz had lost. He also ouerthrew Amazia king of Iuda, who prouoked him to make the war, whereupon hee entred Hierusalem, and sacked it with the Temple. This Ioas 2. King. 14. raigned sixteene yeeres and died; in whose time also the Prophet Elisha exchanged this life for a better. Ieroboam the third from Iehu, followed Ioas his father, an Idolater as his prede∣cessors; but hee recouered all the rest of the lands belonging to Israel, from Hamath which is neere Libanus, to the dead Sea, and raigned one and fortie yeeres. Zacharias the fift and last of the house of Iehu, by Shallum his vassall, who raigned in his stead, gouerned six moneths. Shallum held the kingdome but one moneth, being slaughtered by of the Gadites. Menahem who tooke reuenge of Shallum, vsed great crueltie to those that did not acknowledge him: ripping the bellies of those that were with child. This Menahem being inuaded by Phul, bought his peace with ten thousand talents of siluer, which 2. King. 16. 19. he exacted by a Tribute of fiftie shckels from euery man of wealth in Israel. Mena∣hem gouerned twentie yeeres. Pekahiah or Phaceia, or after Zonar as Phacesia, succeeded, and after hee had ruled two yeeres, hee was slaine by Phaca or Pekah the Commaunder of his armie, who raigned in his place. In this Pekahs time Phulassar or Tiglat-Phylassar inuaded the kingdome of Israel, and wan Iion, Abel-Bethmaaca, Ianoach, Kedesh, Hasor, and Gi∣lead, with all the Cities of Galilee, carrying them captiues into Assyria: he was drawn 2. King. . 29. in by Achas king of against Pekah and Rezin, the last of the Adades. For Achas being wasted by Pekah of Israel and by Rezin of Damascus, did a third time borrow the Church riches, and therewith ingaged the Assyrian, who first suppressed the Monarchie of Syria and Damascus, and then of Israel: and this inuiting of the great Assyrian, was the vtter ruine of both States, of Israel and of . Pekah raigned twentie yeeres. Then Hoshea or Osea, who slew Pekah, became the vassall of Salmanassar; but ho∣ping to shake off the Assyrian yoke, he sought aide from So, or Sua, or Sebicus king of Egypt: which being knowne to the Assyrian, he cast him into prison, besieged Samaria, and mastred it: carried the ten idolatrous. Tribes into Niniuie in Assyria, and into Rages in Media, and into other Easterne Regions, and there dispersed them; and re-planted Samaria with diuers Nations, and chiefly with the Cuthae (inhabiting about a Riuer in Persia, or rather in Arabia Deserta ) and with the people Cata∣nei Ptol. l. 5. bounding vpon Syria, and with those of Sepharuaijm (a people of Sephar in Me∣sopotamia Esai. 37. vpon Euphrates, of whose conquest Senacherib vaunteth) also with those of Aua: which were of the ancient Auins who inhabited the Land of the Philistims in Abrahams time, dwelling neere vnto Gaza, whom the Caphtorims rooted out: and at this time they were of Arabia the Desart, called , willing to returne to their an∣cient seates. To these he added those of Chamath or , the ancient enemies of the Israelites, and sometime the Vassalls of the Adads of Damascus, which so often af∣flicted them. And thus did this Assyrian aduise himselfe better than the Romanes did. For after Titus and Vespasian had wasted the Cities of , and Hierusalem, they car∣ried the people away captiue: but left no others in their places, but a very few simple labourers, besides their owne thin Garrisons, which soone decaied: and thereby they gaue that dangerous entrance to the Arabians and Saracens, who neuer could be driuen thence againe to this day. And this transmigration, plantation, and displantation, hapned in the yeare of the world 3292. the sixth yeare of Ezekia King of : and the ninth of Hosea the last King of Israel. A Catalogue of the Kings of the ten TRIBES. 1. Ieroboam, Raigned 22 Yeares. 2. Nadab, 2 Yeares. 3. Baasha, 24. Yeares. 4. Ela, 20. Yeares. 5. Zambris, 7. Daies. 6. Omri, 11. Yeares. 7. Achab, 22. Yeares. 8. Ochozias, 2. Yeares. 9. Ioram, 12. Yeares. 10. Iehu, 28. Yeares. 11. Ioachaz, 17. Yeares. 12. Ioas, 16. Yeares. 13. Ieroboam, 41. Yeares. 14. Zacharias, 6. Moneths. 15. Shallum, 1. Moneth. 16. Menahem, 10. Yeares. 17. Pekahia, 2. Yeares. 18. Phaca, 20. Yeares. 19. Hosea. 9. Yeares, about whose time writers differ. CHAP. X. Of the memorable places of DAN, SIMEON, IVDA, RVBEN, GAD, and the other halfe of MANASSE. § I. Of DAN, where of Ioppe, Gath, Accaron, Azotus, and other Townes. NOw following the coast of the Mediterran Sea, that portion of Land assigned to the Tribe of Dan, ioyneth to Ephraim, whereof I spake last: of which familie there were numbred at Mount Sinai 62700. fighting men, all which leauing their bodies with the rest in the Desarts, there entred the Holy Land of their sonnes 66400. bearing armes. The first famous Citie in this Tribe on the Sea coast was Ioppe, or Iapho, as in the V. 46. 19. of Iosua: one of the most ancientest of the World, and the most famous of others on that coast, because it was the Port of Hierusalem. From hence Ionas imbarked himselfe when hee fled from the seruice of God, towards Tharsis in Cilicia. In the time of the Macchabees this Citie receiued many changes: and while Iudas gouerned the Iewes, the Syrians that were Garrisond in Ioppe, hauing their fleet in the Port, inuited 200. prin∣cipall Citizens aboord them, and cast them all into the Sea: which Iudas reuenged by Macc. 2. 12. firing their fleet, and putting the companies which sought to escape to the sword. It was twice taken by the Romanes, and by Cestius the Lieutenant vtterly burnt and ruined. But in the yeare of Christ 1250. Lodouick the French King gaue it new Walls and Towers: It is now the Turkes, and called Iaffa. There are certaine Rocks in that Port, whereunto it is reported that Andromeda was fastried with chaines: and from thence deliuered from the Sea-Monster by Perseus. This fable (for so I take it) is confirmed by Iosephus, Solinus, and Plinie. Marcus Scaurus during his office of L. 3. 1. 15. de bel. . Solin. c. 47. Aedileship, shewed the bones of this Monster to the people of Rome. S. Hierome . l. 5. c. 9. vpon Ionas speakes of it indifferently. The next vnto Ioppe was Iamnia, where Iudas Macchabaeus the rest of the Sy∣rian 2. Macc. 12. fleet: the fire and flame whereof was seene at Hierusalem 240. furlongs off. It De Bell. sacr. had sometime a Bishops seate, saith Will. of Tyre; But there is no signe of it at this time that such a place there was. After Iamnia is the Citie of Geth or Gath, sometime Anthedon, saith Volaterran. And so Montanus seemes to vnderstand it. For he sets it next to Aegypt, of all the Phili∣stim . 244. Cities, and in the place of Anthedon. But Volaterran giues neither reason nor au∣thoritie for his opinion; for Ptolomie sets Anthedon farre to the South of Ioppe: And Geth was the first and not the last (beginning from the North) of all the great Ci∣ties of the Philistims: and about sixteene miles from Ioppe; where S t . Hierome in his time found a great Village of the same name. It was sometime the Habitation and Seminarie of the Anakims: strong and Giant-like-men, whom Iosua could not expell, Hieron. in Mi∣cheam. nor the Danites after him: nor any of the Israelites, till Dauids time: who slew Goliath, as his Captaines did diuers others not much inferiour in strength and stature vnto Goliath. Roboam the Sonne of Salomon rebuilt Geth: Ozias the sonne of Amazia destroied it againe. It was also laid waste by Azael King of Syria. the fourth King of Hierusalem, built a Castle in the same place out of the old ruines. Whether this Geth was the same that Will. of Tyre in the holy Warre calls Ibijlin, I much doubt: the L. 21. c. 18. errour growing by taking Gath for Anthedon. Not farre from Geth or Gath standeth or the house of the Sunne. In the fields adioyning to this Citie (as is thought) was the Arke of God brought by a yoke of two Kine, turned loose by the Philistims: and the Bethsemites presuming to looke Sam. 1. c. 6. v. 18. therein, there were slaine of the Elders 70. and of the people 50000 by the ordinance of God. After which slaughter and the great lamentation of the people: it was cal∣led the great Or rather not the citie it selte, but the great stone in the field, vpon which stone the Philistims set the Arke, the change be∣ing easie from Eben or Aben, which signifi∣eth a stone, to Abel which sig∣nifieth mour∣ning. Abel, saith S t . Hierome. Benedictus Theologus finds three other Cities of this name; one in See in Nepth. C. 7. §. 4. †. 6. 2. King. 1. Nepthalim: another in Iuda: and another in Isachar. Hierome finds a fifth in Beniamin. Keeping the Sea-coast, the strong Citie of Accaron offereth it selfe, sometime one of the fiue Satrapies, or Gouernments of the Philistims. S t . Hierome makes it the same with Caesaria Palaestinae. Plinie confounds it with Apollonia: It was one of those that defended it selfe against the Danites and Iudaeans. It worshipped Beel-zebub the God of Hornets or Flies. To which Idoll it was that Ahaziah King of Israel sent to enquire of his health: whose Messengers Eliah meeting by the way caused them to returne, with a sorrowfull answere to their Master. This Citie is remembred in many places of Scripture. Christianus Schrot placeth Azotus next to Geth, and then Accaron or Ekron. This Azotus or Asdod was also an habitation of the Anakims, whome Iosua It was besie∣ged by Psam∣metichus the fa∣ther of Neco for 29 yeers together whence Ieremy 25. v. 20. speaks of the residue of Ashdod, to wit, the grea∣test part ha∣uing perished in this siege. failed to de∣stroy, though he once possest their Citie. Herein stood a sumptuous Temple dedi∣cated to the 1. Sam. 5. 4. Idoll Dagon: the same Idoll which fell twice to the ground of it selfe, after the Arke of God was by the Philistims carried into their Temple; and in the second fall it was vtterly broken and defaced. Neere it was that famous Macc. 1. c. 9. Iudas Ma∣chabaeus slaine by Bacchides and Alcimus, the Lieutenants of Demetrius. Afterward it was taken by Ionathas: and the rest of the Citizens being put to the sword, all that fled into the Temple of Dagon, were with their Idoll therein consumed with fire: neere which also he ouerthrew Apollonius. Gabinius the Romane rebuilt it. It had a Bishops seate while Christianitie flouri∣shed in those parts. But in S t . Hieromes time it was yet a faire Village. And this was the last of the Sea-Townes within the Tribe of Dan. The Cities which are within the Land Eastward from Azotus, and beyond the Fountaine of Aethiopia, wherein Philip the Apostle baptized the Eunuch, are Tsorah, Macc. 1. c. 10. or Sarara, and Esthaol, and betweene them Castra Danis neere Hebron: though this Ios. 19. 41. Iud. 13. 25, &c. 18. v. 2. place where Sampson was borne, may seeme by the words Iud. 18. 12. to bee in the Tribe of Iudah, as the other also were bordering Townes betweene Dan and . After these within the bounds of Iuda, but belonging to the Danites, they finde Gedor, or as it is 1. Mac. 15. Cedron, which Cendebaeus the Lieutenant of Antiochus for∣tified against the Iewes, and neere which himselfe was by the Macchabees ouer∣throwne. 1. Macc. 15. 16. Then Modin the Natiue Citie of the Macchabees: and wherein they were buried, on whose Sepulcher the seuen Marble Pillars, which were erected of that heighth as they serued for a marke to the Sea-men, remained many hundreds of yeeres after their first setting vp, as Brochard and Breidenbach witnesse. There are besides these the Citie of Cariathiarim, that is, the Citie of the woods: Alias and Baal, or 1. Sam. 7. 1. & Sam. 6. 2. seated in the border of Iuda, Beniamin, and Dan, wherein the Arke of God remained twentie yeeres in the house of Aminadab: till such time as Dauid carried it thence to Hierusalem: Of this place (as they say) was Zacharias the sonne of Barachias, or le∣hoida, who was slaine betweene the Temple and the Altar: also Vrias whom Ioachim 2. Chron. 24. 22. Mat. 23. 33. King of Hierusalem slaughtered as we finde in Ieremie. Many other places which Ier. 26. 20. they place in this Tribe, rather as I take it vpon presumption than warrant, I omit: as that of Caspin taken with great slaughter by Iudas Machabaeus: and Lachis, whose 2. Macc. 12. 13. Ios. 12. 11. King was slaine by Iosua, in which also Amazias was slaine: The same which Sena∣cherib 2. Reg. 14. 19. tooke, Ezechias raigning in Iuda. Of other Cities belonging to this Tribe, see in Iosua c. 19. from the Verse 41. where also it is added that the Danites portion was too little for their number of Families: and therefore that they inuaded Leshem, and inhabited it: which Citie after ampli∣fied by Philip the brother of Herod Antipas, was called Caesarea Philippi, as before, and made the Metropolis of Ituraea, and Trachonitis: of which coasts this Philip was Te∣trarch: but of this Citie see more in Nepthalim. In this Tribe there are no Mountaines of fame. It hath two Riuers or Torrents: the Norther-most riseth out of the Mountaines Hieron. in Esay. & Micheam. 1. of Iuda: and passing by Modin, falleth into the Sea by Sachrona. The other hath the name of Sorek or Sored, whose bankes are plentifull of Vines which haue no Broch. seedes or stones: The wine they yeeld is red, of excellent colour, taste, and sauour, . &c. In this Valley of Sorek, so called from the Riuer, inhabited Dalila whom Samp∣son loued. . 16. 4. §. II. THE TRIBE OF SIMEON. THe Tribe of Simeon takes vp the rest of the Sea-coast of Canaan, to the border of Aegypt: who being the second Sonne of Iacob by Lea, there were increased of that familie while they abode in Aegypt, as they were numbred at Mount Sinai, 59300. able men, all which ending their liues in the Desarts, there entred the Land of Promise of their is∣sues 22200. bearing armes, who were And there∣fore no maruel that diuers pla ces named, Ios. 15. in the large portion of Iuda be reckoned in this Tribe: see Ios. 19. v. 1. & 9. where much is ex∣presly noted. Volat. Geog. l. 11 fol. 244. in part mixed with Iuda, and in part seuered, inhabiting a small Territorie on the Sea-coast, belonging to Edumaea, of which the first Citie adioyning to Dan, was Ascalon. The Reguli or pettie Kings thereof were called Ascalonitae: of which Volaterran out of Xanthus, in the Historie of the Lydians, reports, that Tantalus and Ascalus were the sonnes of Hymenaeus: and that Ascalus being imployed by Aciamus King of the Lydi∣ans, with an Armie in Syria, falling in loue with a yong Woman of that Countrie, built this Citie and called it after his owne name: the same hath Nicolaus in his Histo∣rie, saith Volaterran. Diodorus Siculus in his third Booke remembreth a Lake neere Ascalon, wherein there hath beene a Temple dedicated to Derceto, the Goddesse of the Syrians: hauing the face of a Woman and the bodie of a Fish: who, as I haue said before, in the storie of Ninus, was the Mother of Semiramis, fained to be cast into this Lake, and fed and releeued by Doues. And therefore was the Doue worshipped both in Babylonia and Syria, of which Tibullus the Poet: Alba Palaestino sancta Columba Syro. The white Doue is for holy held, in Syria Palaesline. It was one of the chiefest and strongest Cities of the Philistims. It bred many lear∣ned men (saith Volaterran ) as Antiochus, Sosus, Cygnus, Dorotheus the Historian, and Artemidorus who wrote the storie of Bithynia. Vol. vt supra. In Ascalon, as some say, was that wicked Herod borne, that seeking after our Sa∣uiour, caused all the Male-children of two yeeres old and vnder to be slaine. In the Christian times it had a Bishop, and after that when it was by the Saladine defaced, Richard King of England, while he made Warre in the holy Land, gaue it a new wall and many buildings. Eius muros cum SALADINVS diruisset, RICHARDVS An∣glorum Adrich. in Trib. Simeon. Rex instaurauit, saith Adrichomius. In Dauids time it was one of the most renowned Cities of the Philistims: sor hee nameth Gath and Ascalon onely, when hee lamenteth the death of Saul, and , 2. Sam. 1. not speaking of the other three. Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it not in the streetes of Ascalon: It is now called Scalone. Gabinius restored it as hee did Azotus and . Next to Ascalon stood Gaza or Gazera, which the Hebrewes call Hazza, the Syrians Azan: of Azonus (as they say) the sonne of Hercules. Other prophane writers af∣firme, that it was built by Iupiter. Pomp. Mela giues the building thereof to Cambyses the Persian: because belike hee rebuilt it, and Gaza in the Persian tongue is as much to say as Treasure. This Gaza was the first of the fiue Satrapies of the Philistims: and the Vol. l. 11. South bound of the Land of Canaan towards Aegypt. But this Citie was farre more ancient than Cambyses, as it is proued by many Scriptures. It was once taken by Ca∣leb: but the strength of the Anakims put him from it. At such time as Alexander Ma∣cedon Steph. de Vrb. Iud. 1. 6. 16. inuaded the Empire of Persia, it receiued a Garrison for Darius: in despight whereof it was by the Macedonians after a long siege demolished, and was called Gaza 1. King. 6. & alib. of the Desart. Alexander Ianneus King of the Iewes surprised it: and slew 500. Senators in the Iosep. 13. ant. 19. Temple of Apollo which fled thither for Sanctuarie: but this Gaza was not set vp in the same place againe, to wit, on the foundations which Alexander Macedon had o∣uer-turned, but somewhat neerer the Sea side: though the other was but two mile off. It was a Towne of great account in the time of the Machabees, and gaue many wounds to the Iewes till it was forst by Simon: of which hee made so great account as he purposed to reside therin himselfe, in his absence left Iohn his Sonne and Suc∣cessour Macc. 1. 15. Broch. . to be Gouernour. In Brochard his time it was still a goodly Citie, and knowne by the name of Gazara. At the very out-let of the Riuer of Besor, standeth Maioma the Port of Gaza: to which the priuiledge of a Citie was giuen by the great Constantine, and the place cal∣led Constance after the name of the Emperours Sonne. But Iulian the Apostata soone Hist. trip. l. 6. c. 4. Niceph. 10. hist. cap. 4. after fauouring the Gazeans, made it subiect vnto them, and commanded it to be cal∣led Gaza maritima. On the other side of Besor, standeth Anthedon, defaced by Alexander Ianneus, re∣stored Iosep. 13. ant. 19. 21. by Herod, and called Agrippias, after the name of Agrippa, the fauourite of Augustus. Then Raphia, where Philopater ouerthrew the great Antiochus: and beyond it Rhi∣nocura, Iosep. 13 . 19. 21. 14. &c. whose Torrent is knowne in the Scriptures by the name Iunius calls it Vallis Aegypti the name of the streame seemes to be Shichor. See in Asser, Chap. 7. §. 3. †. 8. in the margent of the Torrent of Aegypt, till the Septuagint conuerted it by Rinocura: to difference it, Es. 27. 12. giuing the name of the Citie to the Torrent that watereth it. Plinie cals it Rhinocolura; and Iosephus, Rhinocorura: Epiph. tom. . in . Manich & in Ancorato. Gone. 10. 19. Epiphanius reports it as a Tradition, that at this place the world was diuided by lots, betweene the three Sonnes of Noah. Within the Land and vpon the Riuer of Besor they place Gerar: which the Scrip∣ture placeth betweene Kadesh and Shur, Gene. 20. 1. That it was neere to the Wilder∣nesse of Beer-shebah, it appeares Gene. 20. 31. and therefore no maruaile that as else∣where Beer-shebah, so sometime Gerar, bee made the South bound of Canaan. It was of olde a distinct Kingdome from the Philistim Satrapies, the Kings by one com∣mon name were called Abimelechs; Saint Hierome saith that afterward it was called Regio salutaris; the healthie Countrie: so that it was no maruaile that Abraham and Isaac liued much in these parts. Of King Asa's conquest of the Cities about Gerar, see 2. Chron. 14. 14. More within the Land was Siceleg or Tsiglak, which was burnt by the Amale∣kites, when Dauid in his flying from Saul to the Philistims had left his carriages there, 1. Sam. 30. but Dauid followed them ouer the Riuer of Besor, and put them to the slaughter, and recouered the prey. Next Dabir sometime Cariath-Sepher, the Citie of Letters, the Vniuersitie, as they Iosep. 10. 11. 12. say, or Academie of old Palaestine. In S t . Hieromes time it seemes it had the name of Daema: Iosua 15. 49. it is called Vrbs Sannae: from the name, as it seemes, of some of the Anakims, as Hebron was called Vrbs Arbahi. For euen hence also were these Giants expelled. It was taken chiefly by Othoniel, incouraged by Calebs promise Ios. 11. v. 21. of his Daughter in marriage: but that Iosua and the Hoast of Israel were at the sur∣prise, it appeares Ios. 10. 39. This Citie Ios. 21. 15. is named among those which out of Simeon and Iuda were giuen to the Leuites. And hence it seemes they attribute it to this Tribe. Besides these, there are many others in the Tribe of Simeon, but of lesse fame, as Haijn, of which Ios. 19. 7. which also Ios. 21. 16. is reckoned for one of the Cities of the Leuites, giuen out of the portion of and Simeon (for which Iunius thinkes Hasham is named 1. Chron. 6. 59. though And also 1. Chron. 4. 32. in the place of Iosua these two are distin∣guished) also Tholad so named 1. Chron. 4. 29. for which Iosua 19. 4. wee haue El∣tholad. Chatzar-Susa so named Iosua 19. 5. for which Iosua 15. wee haue Chatzar∣Gadda, both names agreeing in signification: for Gadda is Turma, and Susa E∣quitatus. In the same places of Iosua and of the Chronicles Chorma is named, which they thinke to be the same with that of which Numb. 14. 45. to which the Amalekites and Canaanites pursued the Israelites. But that Chorma cannot bee in Simeon, nor within the Mountaines of Edumaea. For Israel fled not that way: but backe againe to the Campe, which lay to the South of Edumaea, in the Desart. Deut. 1. The same places also name Beersheba in this Tribe: so called of the Oath be∣tweene Abraham and : neere vnto which Hagar wandred with her Sonne Gen. 21. 31. Ism ael. It was also called the Citie of Isaac, because hee dwelt long there. While the Christians held the Holy Land, they laboured much to strengthen this place, stan∣ding on the border of the Arabian Desart, and in the South bound of Canaan. It hath now the name of Gibelin. The other Cities of Simeon which are named in the pla∣ces of Iosua, and of the Chronicles, aboue noted, because they helpe vs nothing in storie, I omit them. In the time of Ezekia King of Iuda, certaine of this Tribe be∣ing streightned in their owne Territories, passed to As it seemes in the Land of Iuda. See in the first Para∣graphe of this Chapter in the Cities of Dan. Iud. 16. 3. Gedor, as it is 1. Chron. 4. 39. (the same place which Ios. 15. 36. is called Gedera and Gederothaima ) which at that time was inhabited by the issue of Cham: where they seated themselues: as also fiue hun∣dred others of this Tribe, destroied the Reliques of Amalec in the Mountaines of Edom, and dwelt in their places. The Mountaines within this Tribe are few, and that of Sampson the chiefest: vnto which he carried the Gate-post of Gaza. The Riuers are Besor, and the Torrent of Aegypt called Shichar, as is noted in Asser. §. III. THE TRIBE OF JVDA. OF Iuda the fourth Sonne of Iacob by Lea, there were multiplied in Ae∣gypt 74600. all which ( Caleb excepted) perished in the Desarts. And of their sonnes there entred the Land of Canaan 76500. bearing armes: Agreeable to the greatnesse of this number was the greatest Territorie giuen, called afterward Iudaea: within the bounds whereof were the portions allotted to Dan and Simeon included. And many Cities named in these Tribes, did first, as they say, belong vnto the children of Iuda: who had a kind of So∣ueraigntie ouer them: as Succoth, Cariathiarim, Lachis, Bethsemes, Tsiglag, Beersheba, and others. The multitude of people within this small Prouince (if it be meated by that ground giuen to this Tribe onely) were vncredible, if the witnesse of the Scrip∣tures had not warranted the report. For when Dauid numbred the people, they were found fiue hundred thousand fighting men. The Cities of Iuda were many. But I will remember the chiefest of them: begin∣ning with Arad, or Horma, which standeth in the entrance of Iudaea from Idumaea: whose King first surprised the Israclites as they passed by the border of Canaan to∣wards Num. 21. v. 3. Moab, and tooke from them some spoiles, and many prisoners: who being Ios. 12. v. 14. Iud. 1. v. 16. afterward ouerthrowne by the Israelites, the sonnes of Keni, the Kinsmen of Moses, obtained a possession in that Territorie: who before the comming of the Israelites, dwelt betweene Madian and Amalek. Following this Frontier towards Idumaea and the South, Ascensus Scorpionis, or Num. 34. 4. Deut. 8. 15. Acrabbim is placed, the next to Arad: so called because of Scorpions, which are said to be in that place: from which name of Acrabbim, Hierome thinks that the name of the Toparchie called Acrabathena was denominated: of which we haue spoken in Ma∣nasses. On the South side also of Iudaea they place the Cities of Iagur, Dimona, Adada, Cedes, Ashna, Iethnam, and Asor or Chatsor, most of them Frontier Townes. And then Ziph: of which there are two places so called: one besides this in the body of Iuda, of which the Desart and Forrest adioyning tooke name: where Dauid hid himselfe from Saul. After these are the Cities of Esron, Adar, Karkah and Asemo∣na, or Hatsmon, of no great fame. Turning now from Idumaea towards the North, we finde the Cities of Danna, She∣mah, Amam, the other Asor, or Chatsor, Behaloth, and the two Sochoes: of all which see Ios. 15. also Carioth by Iosua c. 15. v. 25. called Kerioth: whence Iudas the Traitor Iudg. 15. 8. 1. Chron. 11. 6. Iun. out of the 1. Chron. 4. 32. was called Is-carioth, as it were a man of Carioth. Then Hetham the abode of Samp∣son which Rehoboam reedified. Beyond these towards the North border, and to∣wards Eleutheropolis, is the Citie of Iethar, or Iatthir, belonging to the Leuites. In Saint notes that this Hetham though it were within the bounds of Iuda belonged to Simeon. Hieromes time it was called Iethira: and inhabited altogether with Christians: neere vnto this Citie was that remarkeable battaile fought betweene Asa King of Iuda, and Zara King of the Arabians, who brought into the field a Million of fighting men: and was notwithstanding beaten and put to flight: Asa following the victorie as farre as Ios. 15. 48. Gerar, which at the same time he recouered. Hieron. in loc, Hebr. Not farre from Iether, standeth Iarmuth, whose King was slaine by Iosua, and the Citie ouerturned. Next vnto it is Maresa the natiue Citie of the Prophet Michaea: Betweene it and Odolla, Iudas Macchabaeus ouerthrew Gorgias: and sent thence ten 2. Macc. 12. 35. thousand Dragmas of siluer to be offered for Sacrifice. Odolla or Hadullam it selfe was an ancient and magnificent Citie, taken by Iosua, Gen. 38. v. 1. Ios. 12. 15. and the King thereof slaine. Ionathas Macchabaeus beautified it greatly. Then Ceila or Keila afterward Echela, where Dauid sometime hid himselfe: and which 1. Sam. 23. 1. afterward he deliuered from the assaults of the Philistims: neere which the Prophet Abacuc was buried: whose monument remained and was seene by S t . Hierome. Neere it is Hebron sometime called the Citie of Arbah, for which the Vulgar hath Cariatharbe: the reason of this name they giue as if it signified the Citie of foure: be∣cause the foure Patriarchs, Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, were therein buried, but of Adam it is but supposed: and it is plaine by the places Iosua 14. 14. and 15. 13. and 20. 11. that Arbah here doth not signifie foure, but that it was the name of the Father of the Giants called Anakim, whose sonne as it seemes Anak was: and Achi∣man, Sheshai, and Talmai (whom Caleb expelled Ios. 15.) were the sonnes of this A∣nak, Num. 13. 23. The name of Anak signifieth Torquem, a chaine worne for orna∣ment: and it seemes that this Anak inriched by the spoiles which himselfe and his Father got, wore a chaine of gold, and so got this name: and leauing the custome to his posteritie, left also the name: so that in Latine the name of Anakim may not amisse be expounded by Torquati. The Citie Hebron was one of the Cities of Canaan, built seuen yeeres before Tsoan or Tanis in Aegypt: and it was the head and chiefe Citie of the Anakims, whom Caleb expelled: to whom it was in part giuen, to wit, the Villages adioyning, and the rest to the Leuites. It had a Bishop in the Christian times, and a magnificent Temple built by Helen the Mother of Constantine. Not farre hence they finde Eleutheropolis or the free Citie, remembred often by S t . Hierome. Then Eglon whose King Dabir associated with the other foure Kings of the Amorites, to wit, of Hierusalem, Hebron, Iarmuth, and Lachis, besieging the , Ios. 10. v. 11. were by Iosua vtterly ouerthrowne. From hence the next Citie of fame was Emaus, afterward Nicopolis, one of the Cities of Gouernment or Praesidencies of Iudaea. In sight of this Citie Iudas Macchabaeus (after he had formerly beaten both Apollonius and Seron ) gaue a third ouerthrow to Gorgias Lieutenant to Antiochus. Macc. 1. 3. In the yeare 1301. it was ouer-turned by an earth-quake, saith Eusebius. In the Euseb. in Chron. Broch. Itin. 6. Christian times it had a Bishops seate of the Diocesse of Caesaria of Palaestine. From Emaus toward the West Sea there are the Cities of Nahama, Bethdagon, and Gader or Gedera, or Gederothaima, of which and of Gederoth Also 1. Chron. 4. 39. as is a∣boue remem∣bred in the Tribe of Si∣meon. Ios. 15. v. 36. & 41. Then Azecha, to which Iosua followed the slaughter of the fiue Kings before named, a Citie of great strength in the Valley of Iunius in Valle hath in valle querceti. Terebinth or Turpintine, as the Vulgar rea∣deth 1. Sam. 17. 2. whence (as it seemes) they seat it neere vnto Soco, and vnto Lebna of the Leuites. It reuolted from the subiection of the Iewes while Ioram the sonne of Iosaphat ruled in Hierusalem: And next vnto this standeth Maceda, which Iosua vtter∣ly dispeopled. On the other side of towards the East standeth Bethsur, otherwise Bethsora, Vatablus keeps the Hebrewe reading in val∣le Elah. and Bethsor: one of the strongest and most sought for places in all Iuda. It is seated on a high Hill; and therefore called Bethsur (the house on the Rocke, or of strength ) It was fortified by Roboam, and afterward by Iudas Macchabaeus. Lysias forst it, and Antiochus Iosep. 13. ant. 9. Macc. 1. 6. Eupator by famine: Ionathas regained it: and it was by Simon exceedingly fortified against the Syrian Kings. Bethleem is the next vnto it within sixe miles of Hierusalem, otherwise Lehem: Genes. 53. 48. sometime Ephrata; which name, they say, it had of Calebs wife, when as it is so called by Moses before Caleb was famous in those parts Gen. 38. 16. Of this Citie was A∣bessan or Ibzan, Iudge of Israel, after Iephtah, famous for the thirtie Sonnes and thirtie Daughters, begotten by him. Elimelec was also a Bethlemite, who with his wife sojourned in Moab during the famine of Iuda in the time of the Iudges, with whom Ruth the daughter in law of Naomi returned to Bethleem: and maried Booz, of whom Ruth. 1. Obed, of whom Ishai, of whom Dauid. It had also the honour to be the natiue Citie of our Sauiour Iesus Christ; and therefore shall the memorie thereof neuer end. In Zabulon of Galilee there was also a Citie of the same name: and therefore was Hicron. in comm. super . c. 2. this of our Sauiour called Bethleem Iuda. Math. 2. 1. From Bethleem some foure or fiue mile standeth Thecua, the Citie of Amos the Amos 1. v. 1. Prophet: and to this place adioyning is the Citie of Bethzacaria, in the way between 1. Macc. 6. 32. Bethsura and Hierusalem: on whose Hills adioyning the glorious gilt shields of An∣tiochus Ioseph. Ant. 12. c. 14. shined like lamps of fire in the eies of the lewes. The Citie of See in Manass. Bezek was al∣so 1. Macc. 6. v. . neere vnto Bethleem, which Adoni-bezec commanded; who had during his raigne tortured 70. Kings, by cutting off the ioynts of their Fingers and Toes: and made C. 7. §. 7 †. 1. them gather bread vnder his Table: but at length the same end befell himselfe by Iudg. 1. v. 6. & 7 the sonnes of Iuda, after they had taken him prisoner. The rest of the Cities in this part (most of them of no great estimation) wee may passe by vntill we come to the magnificent Castle of Herodium, which Herod erected on a Hill, mounting thereunto with 200. Marble steps, exceeding beautifull and Iosep. 14. ant. 22. strong. And towards the Dead Sea, and adioyning to the Desart of , between it and Tekoa, is that floridus, where in the time of Iehosaphat, the Iewes stood and 2. Chro. 20. v. 16. 26. lookt on the Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites, massacring one another, when they had purposed to ioyne against Iuda: neere which place is the Valley of blessing, where the Iewes the fourth day after, solemnely came and blessed God for so strange deliuerance. Now the Cities of Iuda which border the Dead Sea, are these; beautified 2. Chron. 11. by Roboam: and Tsohar which the calleth Some call it and Vitula . See in Gad c. 10. §. 5. post in Harober. Segor: so called because Lot in his for it vrged that it was but a little one: whence it was called Tsohar, which si∣gnifieth a little one: when as the old name was Belah, as it is Gen. 14. 2. In the Romans times it had a Garrison, and was called (as they say) Pannier: in Hieromes time Bale∣zona. Then Engaddi or Hen-gaddi, first Asasonthamar: neere vnto which are the Gardens of Balsamum, the best that the world had called : the most part Gen. 19. 20. of all which Trees Cleopatra Queene of Aegypt sent for out of Iudaea, and Herod who on. in Ose. Hebr. -thamar. either feared or loued Anthonie her husband, caused them to be rooted vp and pre∣sented vnto her: which shee replanted neere Heliopolis in Aegypt. This Citie was 2. Chron. 20. 2. first taken by Chedorlaomer, and the Amorites thence expelled. It was one of the most Gen. 14. 7. remarkable Cities of Iudaea: and one of the Praesidencies thereof. The rest of the Cities are many in the In-land, and among them Iesrael; not that 1. Reg. 21. which was the Citie of Naboth, of which alreadie: but another of the same name, the Citie of Achinoan, the wife of Dauid, the mother of that Ammon, whom 2. Sam. 17. 25. slew: also as some thinke the Citie of Amasa, Absaloms Lieutenant, and the comman∣der of his Armie. But this seemeth to be an errour grounded vpon the neerenesse of the words, Israel and Iesrael: and because the 2. Sam. 17. 25. Amasaes father is called a Iisraelite, who first of the Chron. 2. 17. is called an : indeede the Hebrew Or∣thographie sheweth that Amasaes Father is not said to be of the Citie Iesrael, but an Israelite in Religion, though otherwise an Ismaelite. In this Tribe there were many high Hills or Mountaines, as those of Engaddi vp∣on the Dead Sea: and the Mountaines of Iuda, which begin to rise by Emaus, and end neere Taphna, and these part Iuda from Dan and Simeon. Of others which stand single there is that of Hebron: at the foote whereof was that Oake of Mambre, where the three Angells appeared to Abraham, which S t . Hierome calleth a Fir-tree; and Hieron. in loc. Hebr. & quaest. Hebr. saith, that it stood till the time of Constantine the yonger. There is also that Moun∣taine called Collis Achillae, on the South side of Ziph: on the top whereof the great Iosep. 14. Ant. c. 20. Herod, inclosing the old Castle, erected by Ionathas , and called Massada, garnished it with seuen and twentie high and strong Towers: and therein left Ar∣mour and furniture for an hundreth thousand men; being as it seemeth a place vn∣accessable, and of incomparable strength. In the Valley afterward called the Dead Sea, or the Lake Asphaltitis, this Countrie had foure Cities, Adama, Sodom, Seboim, and Gomorra, destroied with fire from Hea∣uen for their vnnaturall sinnes. §. IIII. THE TRIBE OF REVBEN and his Borderers. †. I. The seates and bounds of Midian, Moab, and Ammon, part whereof the Reubenites wanne from SEHON King of Hesbon. ON the other side of the Dead Sea, Reuben the eldest of Iacobs sonnes inhabited: of whose children there were numbred at Mount Sinai 46000. who dying with the rest in the Desarts, there remained to pos∣sesse the Land promised 43700. bearing armes. But before wee speake of these or the rest that inhabited the East side of Iordan, something of their borderers: to wit, Midian, Moab, and Ammon, whose land in our wri∣ters are confusedly described, and not easily distinguished. And first wee are to re∣member that out of Abrahams kindred came many mightie Families: as by Isaac and Iacob the Nation called Israel, and afterward lewes: by Esau or Edom the Idumaeans: by Ismael the eldest sonne of Abraham, the : and by Keturah his last wife the Midianites. And againe by Lot, Abrahams brothers sonne, those two valiant Nations of the Moabites, and Ammonites: all which being but strangers in the Land of Canaan (formerly possest by the Canaanites, and by the Families of them descended) these issues and alliances of Abraham, all but Iacob, whose children were bred in Aegypt, inhabited the frontier places adioyning. Esau and his sonnes held Idumaea, which bounded Canaan on the South. Ismael tooke from the South-east part of the Dead Sea; stretching his possession ouer all Arabia Petraea, and a part of Arabia the Desart, as farre as the Riuer of Tigris, from Sur to . Moab tooke the rest of the coast of the Dead Sea, leauing a part to Midian, and pas∣sing ouer Arnon, inhabited the plaines betweene Iordan and the Hills of Abarim or Arnon, as far North as Essebon, or Chesbon. Ammon sate downe on the North-east side of Arnon, and possest the Tract from Rabba afterward Philadelphia, both within the Mountaines of Gilhead, and without Iosua. 13. them as far-forth as Arroer, though in Moses time he had nothing left him in all that Valley: for the Amorites had thrust him ouer the Riuer of Iaboc, as they had done Num. . v. 24. Moab ouer Arnon. As these Nations compassed parts of Canaan, so the bor∣der betweene the Riuer of Iaboc and Damascus was held by the Amorites themselues, with other mixt Nations: all which Territorie on the East side of Iordan, and on the East side of the Dead Sea, was granted by Moses to the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and halfe Manasse; whereof that part which Moab had, was first possest by the Emims a Gen. 14. Nation of Giants weakned and broken by Chedorlahomer, after expulsed by the Mo∣abites, as before remembred. That which the Ammonites held, was the Territorie and ancient possession of the Zamzummims or Zuraei, who were also beaten at the same time by Chedorlahomer, Amraphel, and the rest: and by them an easie way of conquest was prepared for the Ammonites. Now where it is written that Arnon was the border of Moab, the same is to bee vnderstood according to the time when Moses wrote. For then had Sehon or his An∣cester beaten the Moabites out of the plaine Countries, betweene Abarim and Ior∣dan, and driuen them thence from Hesbon ouer Arnon, and this happened not long before Moses arriuall vpon that border, when Vaheb gouerned the Moabites. For he that ruled Moab when Moses past Arnon, was not the sonne of Vaheb, but his name was Balac the sonne of Zippor. And it may be that those Kings were electiue, as the Edumaeans anciently were. Now all that part of Moab betweene Arnon and Iordan, as farre North as Esse∣bon was inhabited by Reuben. And when Israel arriued there out of Aegypt, it was in the possession of Sehon, of the race of Canaan by Amoreus: and therefore did Iephtah the Iudge of Israel iustly defend the regaining of those Countries against the claime of the Ammonites: because (as hee alleaged) Moses found them in the possession of the Amorites, and not in the handes of Moab or Ammon: who (saith Iudg. 11. lephtab ) had three hundred yeeres time to recouer them, and did not: whence he inserreth that they ought not to claime them now. And left any should maruaile why the Ammonites in Iephtah his time should make claime to these Countries: whereas Moses in the place Numb. 21. verse 26. rather accounts them to haue beene the ancient possession of the Moabites then of the Ammonites: it is to bee noted that Deut. 3. 11. when it is said that the yron bed of Og was to be seene at Rabbath, the chiefe Citie of the Ammonites, it is also signified, that much of the Land of Og, which the Israelites possessed, was by him or his An∣cestors got from the Ammonites, as much of Sehons was from the Moabites. And as the Canaanite Nations were scated so confusedly together that it was hard to distinguish them: so also were the sonnes of Moab and Ammon, Midian, Amalek, Ios. 13. vers. 25. Iunius notes that the one halfe of the Land of Ham∣mon which in this place of Iosua is said to haue beene gi∣uen to the Ga∣dites, was taken first from the Ammonites by Sehon: but the place Deu. 3. 11 proueth that aswell Og, as Sehon, had got∣ten Lands out of the hands of the Ammonites. and Ismael. Yet the reason seemeth plaine enough why Ammon commanded in chiefe, in Iephtahs time; for sometime the one Nation, sometime the other of all those borderers acquired the Soueraigntie: and againe that one part of the Land which Gad held, namely within the Mountaines of Galaad, or Gilhead, and as farre as Arroer belonged to the Ammonites. And therefore taking aduantage of the time, they then sought to recouer it againe. Yet at such time as Moses ouer∣threw Sehon at Iahaz, the Ammonites had lost to the Amorites, all that part of their possession which lay about Arroer, and betweene it and Iaboc: Sehon and Og two Kings of the Amorites hauing displanted both Moab and Ammon of all within the Mountaines. For it is written in the one and twentieth of Numb. v. 24. that Is∣rael conquered the Land of Sehon from Arnon vnto Iaboc, euen vnto the children of Ammon, so as at this time the Riuer of Iaboc was the South bound of Ammon, with∣in the Mountaines, when as anciently they had also possessions ouer laboc which at length the Gadites possest, as in the thirteenth chapter of Iosua vers. 25. it ap∣peares. †. II. Of the memorable places of the Rubenites. THe chiefe Cities belonging to Reuben were these, Kedemoth, for which the Vul∣gar, without any shew of warrant, readeth Iethson. The Vulgar or Hierome fol∣lowed . 21. 37. the Septuagint those two verses 36. and 37. and 21. Ios. being wanting in the old Hebrew Copies, and the Septuagint read Kedson for Kedmoth, which Kedson by wri∣ting slipt into Iethson. This Citie which they gaue to the Leuites, imparts her name to the Desart ad∣ioyning: Deut. . . from whence Moses sent his Embassage to Sehon. In the same place of It was a mar∣ginall note out of the 3. Deut. where the 70. kept the word Misor, signifi∣ing a plaine which after crept into the Text. Iosua where this Kedemoth is mentioned, the Vulgar for Betser & villa eius, reades Bosor in solitudine Misor, without any ground from the Hebrew: whence Adri∣chomius makes a Towne called Misor, in the border betweene Reuben and Gad. Farther from Kedemoth neere the Dead Sea (for the Countrie betweene being Mountainous hath fewe Cities) they place two Townes of note, Lasa or Leshah of which Genesis 10. vers. 19. the Greekes call it : neere which there is a Hill, from whence there floweth Springs both of hot and cold, Iosep. 17. ant. c. 9 & . in qu. est. . in Gen. bitter and sweete water, all which soone after their rising, being ioyned in one streame, doe make a very wholesome bath, especially for all contractions of sinews: to which Herod the elder, when hee was desperate of all other helpe, repaired, but in vaine. Others say that these Springs arise out of the hills of Machaerus in this Tribe. The like fountains are found in the Pyrenyes: and in Peru, called the Baths of the Acosta. l. 3. or Kings. The other towne is Machaerus the next between Lasa and Iordan: of all that Iosep. 13. ant. c. . & 14. ant. c. 10. & alibi. part of the world the strongest In-land Citie and Castle, standing vpon a mountaine euery way vnaccessible. It was first fortified by Alexander , who made it a Iosep. bell. lud. l. 7. c. 25. frontier against the Arabians: but it was demolished by Gabinius, in the warre with , saith Iosephus. It was thither (saith Iosephus ) that Herod sent Iohn Bap∣tist, and wherein hee was slaine: his armie soone after being vtterly ouerthrowne by king of Arabia, and himselfe after this murther neuer prospering. Not Deut. 4. 43. farre from Machaerus was Bosor or Bozra, a towne of refuge, and belonging to the Le∣uites, Ios. 8. and neere it Liuias vpon Iordan, which Herod built in honour of Liuia the mo∣ther Euseb. in Chron. Hier. in loc. hebr. of Tiberius Caesar. To the North of Liuias is Setim, or Sittim: where the children of Israel embraced the daughters of Midian, or Moab: and where Phineas pierced the bodie of Zimri Num. . 1. and Cosbi with his speare bringing due vengeance vpon them, when they were in the middest of their sinne: and from hence Iosua sent the Discouerers to view Ierico, staying heere vntill hee went ouer . As for the Torrent Setim, which in this Ios. 3. 1. place Adrichomius dreames of, reading Iocl 3. 18. irrigabit torrentem Setim: The vul∣gar hath torrentem spinarum: and vallem Cedrorum: expounding it not for any particular place in Canaan: but for the Church, in which the iust being placed, grow as the Cedars, as it is Psal. 92. 13. The plaine Country hereabout, by Moses called The Plaines of Moab, where he ex∣pounded the Booke of Deuteronomte to the people, a little before his death, is in the Deut. 34. 1. beginning of the same booke precisely bounded by Moses. On the South it had the great Desart of Paran: where they had long wandred. On the East it had Chatse∣roth, and Dizahab (of which two the former is that Gazorus, of which Ptolomie in Palaestina, the later was a Tract belonging to the Nabathaei in Arabia Petraea, where was The same as it seems which Num. 21. 30. is called Medeba, whence wee reade of the plaines of Mc∣deba, Ios. 13. v. 9. 16. of which al∣so we reade in the warres of Dauid against Hanum the . 1. Chron. 19. 7. Also 1. Macc. 9. 36. Mezahab, of which Gen. 36. 39.) by the Geographers called Medaua and Me∣daba. On the West it had Iordan: and on the North it had Laban (in Iunius Edi∣tion, by the fault of the Print, Lamban Deuteron. 1. 1.) the same which the Geo∣graphers call Libias: and some confound it with , of which euen now wee spake. Also on the same North side towards the confines of Coelesyrea, it had Thophel: whereabout sometime Pella of Coelesyria stood: which was in the region of Decapolis, and as Stephanus saith, was sometime called Butis. It is also noted in Moses to be ouer against or neere vnto Suph, for which the Vulgar hath the red Sea, as also Num. 2. 14. it translateth the word Suphah in like manner: whereas in this place of Deuteronomie there is no addition of any word in the Hebrew to signifie the Sea: and yet the Scrip∣ture, when this word is so to be taken, vseth the addition of Mara, thereby to distin∣guish Esai. 16. 2. it from the region of Suph or Suphah: which doubtlesse was about these Plains See before, c. 5. §. 7. of Moab towards the dead Sea: where the Country being full of reedes, was there∣fore thus called: as also the red Sea was called Mare Suph, for like reason. The place in these large plaines of Moab, where Moses made those diuine exhor∣tations, some say was Bethabara where Iohn baptized, which in the Storie of Gedeon Iob. 1. 28. is called Beth-bara. Iosephus saies it was where after the Citie Abila stood, neere Ior∣dan, Iud. 7. 24. in a place set with Palme trees: which sure was the same as Abel-sittim in the Iosep. ant. 4. 7. Plaines of Moab, Numb. 33. 49. (that some call Abel sathaim and Bel-sathim) which is reckoned by Moses in that place of Numbers for the 42. and last place of the Israelites incamping in the time of Moses: This place is also called Sittim; which word if we Num. 25. 1. should interpret, we should rather bring it from Cedars, than from Thornes, with Exod. 25. 10. Adrichomius and others. It was the wood of which the Arke of the Tabernacle was made. Toward the East of these plaines of Moab, they place the Cities, Nebo, Baal-Meon, Num. 31. v. 37. Sibma and Hesbon the chiefe Citie of Sehon, and Elhahel, and Kiriathaima the seate of Gen. 14. v. 5. the Giants Emim. Of the two first of these Moses seemes to giue a note that the Num. 32. names were to be changed: because they tasted of the Moabites Exod. 23. 13. Nomen deorum alienorum ne re∣cordamini, ne audiatur in ore tuo. Ps. 16. 4. non assumpturus sum nominaeorum in labijs meis Hos. 2 17. no∣mina Babalimo∣rum ab ore eius. Idolatrie. For Nebo (in stead of which Iunius Es. 46. 1. reades Deus vaticinus) was the name of their Idoll-Oracle, and Baal-meon is the habitation of Baal. Of the same Idoll was the Hill in these parts denominated: from whose top; which the common Translators call Phasgah, Moses before his death saw all the Land of Canaan beyond Iordan. In which storie Iunius doth not take Phasgah or Pisgah, for any proper name: but for an appellatiue, signifying a Hill: and so also Vatablus in some places; as Num. 21. 20. where he noteth that some call Pisgah that top which looketh to Iericho, and Hair as it looketh to , which opinion may be somewhat strengthened by the name of What name they vsed for Nebo it doth not appear: but Baal-meon it seems they na∣med sometime Baijth, as Es. 15. 2. & sometime Beth-meon. a of Reuben mentioned Ios. 13. 20. called Ashdoth-Pisga, which is as much as Pisgae: to wit, where the waters did runne downe from Pisga. In the same place of Iosua there is also named Beth-peor, as belonging to Reuben: so called from the Hill Peor: from whence also Baal the Idoll was called Baal-Peor, which they say was the same as Priapus: the chiefe place of whose worship seemes to haue beene - , of which also Ios. 13. in the Cities of Reuben: for which Num. 22. 41. they reade the high places of Baal (for so the word signifieth) to which place Balaak first brought Balaam to curse the Israelites. Esai. 48. 23. †. III. Of diuers places bordering Reuben belonging to Midian, Moab or Edom. THere were besides these diuers places of note ouer Arnon, which adioyned to Reuben: amongst which they place Gallim, the Citie of Phalti: to whom Saul 1. Sam. 25. v. vlt. gaue his Daughter Michol from Dauid: but thinkes this Towne to be in Ben∣iamin: gathering so much out of Esay 10. vers. 29. where it is named among the Cities of Beniamin. With better reason perhaps out of Numb. 21. v. 19. wee may say that Mathana and Nahaliel were in these confines of Reuben: through which places the Israelites past after they had left the Well called Beer: Then De∣blathaim which the Prophet threatneth with the rest of the Cities of Hierem. 48. Moab. Madian also is found in these parts, the chiefe Citie of the Madianites in Moab: but not that Midian or Madian by the Red Sea; wherein Iethro inhabited. For of the Madianites there were two Nations, of which these of Moab became Idolaters, and receiued an exceeding ouerthrow by a Regiment of twelue thousand Israe∣lites, sent by Moses out of the plaines of Moab: at such time as Israel beganne to accompanie their Daughters: their fiue Kings with Balaam the South-sayer were then slaine: and their Regall Citie with the rest destroyed. The other Madianites ouer whom Iethro was Prince, or Priest, forgate not the God of Abraham their An∣cestor; but relieued and assisted the Israelites in their painefull trauailes, through the Desarts: and were in all that passage their guides. In the South border of Moab adioyning to Edom, and sometime reckoned as the chiefe Citie of Edom, there is Esa. 16. 1. that Petra which in the Scriptures is called Selah, which is as much as rupes or petra. 1. Reg. 14. 7. It was also called Ioctheel, as appeares by the place 2. Reg. 14. It was built (saith Lib. 4. Ant. 7. Iosephus ) by Recem, one of those fiue Kings of the Madianites slaine as before is sayde: after whom it was called Recem: Now they say it is called Crac and Mozera. The Soldans of Aegypt, for the exceeding strength thereof, kept therein all their treasures of Aegypt and Arabia: of which it is the first and strongest Citie: the same perhaps which Pliuie and Strabo call Nabathea, whence also the Prouince adioyning tooke name: which name seemes to haue been taken at first from Nabaioth the sonne of Abraham by Kethura. For Nabathea is no where vnderstood for all Arabia Petraea, (at where it is not misunderstood) but it is that Prouince which neighboureth Iudaea. For Pharan inhabited by Ismael, whose people Ptolomie calleth Pharanites, in stead of Ismaelites, and all those Territories of the Cusites, Madianites, Amalekites, ismae∣lites, Edomites, or Idumaeans, the Lands of Moab, Ammon, Hus, Sin, and of Og King of Ba∣san, were parts of Arabia Petraea: though it be also true, that some part of Arabia the Desart belonged to the Amalekites, and Ismaelites: all which Nations the Scriptures in 1. . 5. v. 19. & 20. the first of Chronicles the fifth calleth Hagarims of Hagar. This Citie Petra, Scaurus besieged with the Roman Armie; and finding the place in shew impregnable, he was content by the perswasion of Antipater, to take a composi∣tion of monie, and to quit it. Yet Amasias king of Iuda (after he had slaughtered 10000. of the Arabians in the valley called Salinarum ) wanne also this Citie. S. Hierome finds Ruth the Moabite to be naturall of this Citie. In the time when the Christians held the Kingdome of Hierusalem, it had a Latine Bishop, hauing before beene vnder the Greeke Gul. Tyr. 20. bell. sacr. 3. Church. It is seated not far from Hor where Aaron died, and on the other side towards Num. 21. the North is the riuer of Zared or Zered, by which Moses incamped in the 38. Station. Deut. 2. 13. Adrichome describeth the waters of Memrim, or rather Nemrim, in his Map of Reuben, not far hence, and betweene Zared and Arnon: and so he doth the Valley of : but the waters of Nimra or Beth-Nimra (for which it seemes Adrichomius writ Nemrim ) Num. 32. 3. refresh the plaines of Moab: and the confluence of those waters of Nimra are in the Ios. 13. 27. Tribe of Gad. Saue also cannot be found in this place, that is, to the South of Arnon, Esa. 15. 21. and vnder Midian. For after Abraham returned from the pursuite of the Assyrian and Persian Princes, the King of Sodom met him in the Valley of Saue, or , which is the Kings Dale, where Absalom set vp his Monument, as it seems, not farre from Hieru∣salem. And at the same time Melchizedec King of Salem also incountred him. But A∣braham comming from the North, and Melchizedec inhabiting, either neere Bethsan Gen. 14. otherwise Scythopolis in the halfe Tribe of Manasse, or in Hierusalem (both places lying to the West of Iordan ) could not incounter each other in Arabia: and therefore Saue which was also called the Kings Dale, could not be in these parts. †. IIII. Of the Dead Sea. NOw because the Sea of Sodom or the Dead Sea, called also the Lake of Asphal∣titis, and the salt Sea (in distinction from the Sea of Tiberias which was fresh water) also the Sea of the Wildernesse, or rather the Sea So lunius reades for the Hebrew Hara∣both euery∣where, and so also the edition of Vatablus, Deuter. 3. 17. though Deuter. 4. 44. it hath mare solitudinis as also 2. Reg. 14 25. the reason of this name seemes to be, because it ioynes to the plaines of Mo∣ab which are called Harboth Moab Deut. 34. 1. as also wee haue Cesuloth in Harbath, that is in the plaines, to wit, of Zabulon. 1. Maccab. 9. 2. whence Adrichomius imagines a City in Zabulon called Araba. of the plaines, is often re∣membred in the Scriptures, and in this storie also, therefore I thinke it not imperti∣nent, to speake somewhat thereof. For it is like vnto the Caspian Sea, which hath no out-let or disburthening. The length of this Lake Iosephus makes 180 furlongs (which make two and twentie miles and a halfe of ours) and about 150. in breadth which make eighteene of our miles and somewhat more. Plinie makes it a great deale lesse. But those that haue of late yeeres seene this Sea, did account it (saith Deser. terr. Sancta. Weissenburg ) eight Dutch miles (which is two and thirtie of ours) in length: and two and a halfe of theirs (which is ten of ours) in breadth. Of this Lake or Sea Ta∣citus maketh this report: Lacus est immenso ambitu, specie maris, sapore corruptior, gra∣uitate odoris accolis pestifer: neque vento impellitur, neque pisces aut suet as aquis volucres patitur, incertum vndè superiecta vt solido feruntur periti imperiti{que} nandi perinde at∣tolluntur, &c. That it is very great, and (as it were) a Sea of a corrupt taste: of smell infe∣ctious, and pestilent to the borderers. It is neither moued nor raised by the winde: nor indu∣reth fish to liue in it, or fowle to swimme in it. Those things that are cast into it, and the vnskilfull of swimming, aswell as the skilfull, are borne vp by this water. At one time of the yeere it casteth vp Bitumen: the Art of gathering which, Experience (the finder of other things) hath also taught. It is vsed in the trimming of ships, and the like businesses. And then of the Land, hee speaketh in this sort: The fields not farre from this Lake, which were sometime fruitfull and adorned with great Cities were burnt with lightning: of which the ruines remaine, the ground looking with a sad face as hauing lost her fruitfulnesse: for whatsoeuer doth either grow or is set thereon, be it fruits or flowers, when they come to ripenesse, haue nothing within them, but moulder into ashes: Thus farre Tacitus. And it is found by experience, that those Pomegranates and other Apples or Oranges, which doe still grow on the bankes of this cursed Lake, do looke faire and are of good colour on the out-side, but being cut haue nothing but dust within. Of the Bitumen which this Lake casteth vp, it was by the Greekes called Asphaltitis. desirous to be satisfied of these reports, went of purpose to see this Lake, and caused certaine Captiues to be cast into it, who were not onely vnskilfull in swimming, but had their handes also bound behind them, and notwithstanding they were carried on the face of the waters, and could not sinke. †. V. Of the Kings of Moab, much of whose Countrie within Arnon REVBEN possest. OF the Kings of Moab, whose Countrie (within Arnon) Reuben possest (though not taken from Moab but from Sehon the Amorite) few are knowne. Iunius in the 21. of Numbers verse 14. nameth Vaheb, which seemeth to bee the Ancestor or Predecessor of Balac, the sonne of Zippor: which Balac sent for Balaam to curse Israel. For fearing to contend with Moses by armes by the examples of Sehon and Og, hee hoped by the helpe of Balaams cursings or inchauntments, to take from them all strength and courage, and to cast on them some pestilent diseases. And though Ba∣laam Num. 21. 22. 23. 24. Ios. 24. at the first moued by the Spirit of God, blest Israel contrarie to the hope and de∣sire of Moab: yet being desirous in some sort to satisfie him, and to doe him seruice, he aduised Moab to send Madianitish Women among the Israelites: hoping by them, as by fit instruments of mischiefe, to draw them to the Idolatrie of the Heathen: but in the end he receiued the reward of his falling from God, and of his euil counsaile, and was slaine among the rest of the Princes of Midian. After these times the Kings of the Moabites are not named: sauing that wee finde in the first of Chron. the fourth, that Iokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Ioash, and Sa∣reph, all being of the issue of Iuda, sometime had the Dominion in Moab: but as it is written in the same Verse, These also are ancient things: to wit, as some expound it, V. 22. the particulars of these mens Gouernments are no where extant or remaining: or as others, haec prius fuere, these Families of Iuda were once thus famous: but now their posteritie chuse rather to abide in Babylon, and bee Clay-workers to the King there. Then we finde Eglon King of Moab, who with the helpe of Ammon, and Amalec, Iudg. 3. mastered Israel and commanded them eighteene yeeres: which Eglon, Ehud slew in his owne house, and afterward 10000. of his Nation. What name the King of Moab had vnto whom Dauid fled fearing Saul, it doth not appeare: or whether it 1. Sam. 22. were the same against whom Saul made Warre, it is not manifest, for neither are na∣med. But in respect that this Moabite was an enemie to Saul, he receiued Dauid, 1. Sam. 14. and relieued him: knowing that Saul sought his life. After this, Dauid himselfe entred the Region of Moab, but not likely in the same 2. Sam. 8. Kings time: for he slaughtered two parts of the people; and made the third part . Chron. 18. : whereupon it was said of DAVID, Moab is my wash-pot, ouer Edom will I Psal. 60. v. 10. cast my shoe: meaning that hee would reduce them to such an abiection, and appoint them for base seruices: And that he would tread downe the Idumaeans. The next King Dauids time, of the Moabites, whose name liueth, was Mesha: who falling from Iuda, (perhaps in remembrance of the seueritie of Dauid ) fastened . Reg. 3. himselfe to the Kings of , and paied tribute to Ahab 100000. Lambes, and 200000. Rammes, with the wooll: who reuolting againe from Israel after the death of Ahab, was inuaded by : with whom ioyned the Kings of Iuda and Idu∣maea: and being by these three Kings prest and broken, he fled to Kir-hareseth, as is elsewhere . There is also mention made of the Moabites without the Kings name: when that Nation, by the Ammonites and Idumaeans, inuaded Ichosha∣phat: and by reason of some priuate quarrells among themselues, the Moabites and Ammonites set vpon the Idumaeans, and slaughtered them: and then one against ano∣ther; so as had a notorious victorie ouer them all, without either bloud . Chron. 20. or wound. Also in the time of Hieremie the Prophet, there was a King of Moab which is not named, which was after Mesha of Moab many descents: for Mesha . 27. with , and this Moabite in Zedekias time, fourteene Kings of comming betweene, who wasted three hundred and odde yeeres. §. V. Of the memorable places of the Gadites, and the bordering places of Ammon. THe Territorie adioyning to Reuben, is that of Gad: whereof all that part which ioyned to the Mountaines, was sometime in the possession of the Ammonites, as farre to the South as Aroer. Of the children of Gad the sonne of Iacob by Zelpha, the hand-maid of Lea, there Gen. 30. parted out of Aegypt, and died in the Desarts 45550. and of their Num. 1. 32. 26. Ios. 13. sonnes there entred the Land promised 45000. bearing armes: from the halfe Tribe of Manasse the Riuer of Iaboc diuided them: from Reuben the Cities of Hesbon, Elhele, and . The chiefe of Gad was Aroer: which they make to be the same with Ar, or . . . . Rabbath Moab, the great or commanding Moab. But the learned , attending diligently to those wordes of Moses, Deut. 2. 36. Ab , quae est in ripa fluminis Arnon, & ipsa quae cst in flumine; Where the Citie in the Riuer is distinguished from the Citie vpon the banke of the Riuer, (as also in like manner Ios. c. 12. v. 2. and c. 13. v. 9.) thinketh that Haroher which doubtlesse belonged to the Gadites (as Num. 32. 34. it is said that they built it) was indeede seated neere Har of the , but diuerse from it. For that Har was neuer possest by Moses, it is plaine Deut. 2. 9. where God forbidding Moses to touch it, saith he hath giuen Har for an inheritance to the sonnes of Lot. Now this , which in diuers places is said to bee within and in the middle of the Riuer of Arnon (and so distinguished from Haroher, which is said in the same places to be on the banke of Arnon ) is Har of the Moabites, the same Iu∣nius proueth out of Num. 21. 15. where Arnon is saide to bee diuided into diuers streames, where or among which Har is seated: And the same is confirmed by the place of Ios. 13. 25. where Haroher is said to be seated before Rabbah: which Rabbah, as it seemes, cannot be the Rabbah of the Ammonites (for they seate not Haroher neere it, nor in sight of it) and therefore by Rabbah heere we must vnderstand Rabbah of Moab, which they make to be or Har: and so wee must needes distinguish it from Haroher. And as for Deut. 2. 9. Out of which place the words, Num. 21. 28. to be expounded not that the of , but the coast ad∣ioyning was wasted by . Har (which also gaue the name to the coast adioyning) it seemes it continued in the possession of the Moabites after they had once expelled the Gi∣ant-like people called Emims, weakened by Chedorlaomer and his Associates: but by the interchange of times suffered many ancient changes, as being wonne from the Moabites by Sehon, and from him by the , from them, as it seemes in the stóry of , by the : and from the by the Israelites vnder the conduct of . In S. time the greatest part of this perished by an earth-quake, as also Zoar, in which Lot saued himselfe, in the destruction of Sodom, seated not farre hence: which they say was therefore cal∣led Gen. 14. 5. Iud. 11. 35. Vitula , because as a wanton , shee was thrice ouer∣throwne with earth-quake: for which cause Hierome seemes to thinke that this Hier in . Paul & in . & loc. . see his vpon 1. . . 2. wher he makes Shalisha a plain Countrie in , and the same with , 2. Reg. 4. where he expounds Bal or be as much as planities. Zoar was called Salissa, or Bal-salissa, as if Bal had been a remainder of the old name , or Belah, (of which Gen. 14. 2.) and which hath a signification of the number, had alluded to the three earth-quakes. Brochard takes Haroher to bee Petra, but erroniously, as before it is noted; seeing that Petra was in the South border of Moab, adioyning to Edom, whereas Haroher is in the North-east border. Haroher and they Dibon, which is attributed to the Gadites, because they are said to built it, Num. 32. 34. though Iosua 13. v. 17. it is said that Moses gaue it to the . Of this Citie among the rest of Moab, both Esay and prophecied, that it should : and the Lakes about it runne with the bloud of the Inhabitants. It was a great Village neere in S. Hieromes time. Keeping the bankes of Arnon, one of the next Cities of fame to Aroer, was Beth∣nimrah, Esa. 15. Hier. 48 of which Esay prophecieth, That the waters thereof should be dried vp: and all Esa. 15. 21. the vale of Moab withered. Not farre from in this Tribe Adrichomius pla∣ceth Iogbeha, and Nobach or Nobe: of both which we reade in the storie of Gedcon: . 8. 11. and that Iogbeha was in Gad, built by the Gadites, it appeares Num. 32. 35. and there∣fore Nobach also must needes be in these parts; but whether in Gad or Manasse it is not certaine: onely that it was anciently called Kenath, Moses witnesseth. NOBACH also (saith hee) went and tooke Kenath with her Townes, and called it Nobach of his owne Num. . 35. name, where because the verses precedent speake of the , and because it is not likely that Moses would seuered this seate of the Gadites from the rest, of which he spake before, v. 34. 35. 36. therefore it may seeme that this Num. 21. 30. It is , and pla∣ced in the bor∣der of the king dome of Schon, towards Basan, and therefore it is not alto∣gether vnpro∣bable that it was in Gad. Nobach was in that part of Manasse, which was in the East of Iordan: though place it in Gad. For whereas he supposeth it to be the same with Nob, which Saul destroy∣ed, of this shall speake Chap. 12. § 1 Iudg. 8. 10. in the tribe of . And as for that Karkor where Zebach and Salmunah rested themselues in their flight from , to which place Gedeon marched through this Nobach and Iogbeha, though some place it in Gad, and make it the same with Kir-chares, of which Esay 15. and 2. Reg. 3. 25. yet there can bee no certaintie that it was in Gad: and if it the same with Kir-chares, it is cer∣taine that it was a principall Citie held still by the Moabites, and not in the Tribe of Gad. In the body of this Tribe of Gad they place Hataroth: of which name the Scrip∣ture witnesseth that two Cities were builded by the Gadites; the former simply cal∣led Num. 32. 34. 35. Hataroth, the later Hatroth-Shophan: for which later the Vulgar makes two Cities, Roth and Shophan: the name Hataroth, is as much as Corona. In the Valley of the Kingdome of , together with , of which wee haue spoken, Iosua c. 13. v. 27. nameth Beth-haram and Succoth: the former, Num. 32. 36. (where it is called Beth-Haram ) together with , is sayd to haue beene built by the Gadites, which (perhaps the rather, because in Iosua it is called Beth-Ha∣ram ) some take to be Betaramptha, (of which . 1. ant. 18. cap. 3. Iosephus ) after by Herod called Iulias. But whether this Betaramptha were corrupted from Beth-Haram, or from Beth-Ara∣matha, (of which Aramatha there is mention in . . . c. 7. Codex Metropolis Iosephus ) or from Beth-Remphan (of which Remphan, an Idoll of those Countries, wee reade, Act. 7. 43. and to which Iunius referres the name of the Citie Rephan, 1. Maccab. 37.) of this question it were hard to resolue. But touching Iulius (according to Iosephus sometimes Bataramptha ) the same Iosephus placeth in the Region of Peraea, beyond Iordan, which Regio , as the Greeke word signifieth, is no more then Regio vlterior, the Countrie beyond the Riuer; and therefore they which labour to set downe the bounds of this Peraea, take more paines than needes. Fourteene Villages this Iulias had belonging vnto it, Ant. 20. 11. according to Iosephus. He makes it to haue been built by Herod Antipas, and named Iulias, in honour of the adoption of Liuia, Augustus his Wife, into the Iulian fami∣lie: by which adoption she was called Iulia. Another Iulias, hee saith, was built by Iosep. Ant. 18. 3. & Bell. Iud. 2. 8. Philip the brother of Herod, in the lower , which, hee saith, is the same as Bethsaida. Vpon the Sea of Galilee neere to Iulias in Peraea, (that is, in the Region ouer Iordan ) they finde Vetezobra, as it is called in Iosephus, for Beth-ezob, which is as much as do∣mus Ioseph. de Bell. Iud. l. 7. c. 8. . Of a noble woman of this Citie, which for safegard in the time of Warre with the Romanes, came with many others into Hierusalem, and was there besieged, Iosephus in the place , reports a lamentable History; how for hunger shee her owne child, with other Tragicall accidents hereupon ensuing. Of Succoth (which we said Ios 13. is placed with Beth-haran, in the Valley of the Kingdome of Sehon ) it is plaine by the story of Gedeon that it is neere vnto Iordan: Iud. 8. 5. where it is said, that as hee was past Iordan with his three hundreth, wearie in the pursuit of and , hee requested reliefe of the men of Succoth: who de∣nying him, and that with contempt Gedeons returne were by him tortured, as it seemes vnder a threshing Carre of Tribulum, betweene which and their flesh he put Thornes to teare their flesh as they were prest and trod vnder the Tribulum, and af∣ter which also Dauid vsed some of the , though not with Thornes, 2. Sam. 12. 31. but with yron teeth of the Tribulum. As for the name of Succoth, which signifieth such Tabernacles as were made in haste, either for Men or Cattel, Moses, Gen. 33. 17. wit∣nesseth that the originall of the name was from such harbours, which Iacob in his re∣turne from built in that place: as also the place beyond the Red Sea, Exod. 12. 37. where the children of Israel, as they came from Rameses in Aegypt, had their first Sta∣tion, was vpon like reason called Succoth: because there they set vp their first Taber∣nacles or Tents: which they vsed after for fortie yeeres in the Wildernesse. In re∣membrance Leuit. 23. 43. of, the Feast of Succoth, or Tabernacles was instituted. Other foure Cities of Gad are named, Ios. 21. 38. Ramoth in Gilehad, Machanaijm, Chesbon, and Iahzer, all of them by the Gadites giuen to the Leuites, of which Iahzer, as Chesbon or Hesbon was a chiefe Citie of Sehon, whence Num. 32. 1. his Countrie is called the Land of Iahzer. It was taken by Moses, hauing first sent spies to view it. Num. 22. 32. 1. . 27. 31. In the first of the Chronicles it is made part of Gilehad. In later times (as it may be gathered by the prophecie of Esay, touching Moab ) it was possessed by the Moabites: Esai. 6. 8. to which place of Esay also Hieremie in a like prophecie alludes. It was at length re∣gained Hierem. 48. 92. (but as it seemes from the Ammonites ) by Iudas : as it is, 1. Mac. 5. 8. where Iunius out of Iosephus reades , though the Greeke hath Gazer. For Ga∣zer or Gezer (as hee gathereth out of 16. 3. & 8. and . 1. 29.) was farre from these Countries of Sehon, seated in the West border of Ephraim, not possessed by the Israelites, vntill Salomons time, for whom the King of Aegypt wan it from the , and gaue it him as a Dowrie with his Daughter. Of Chesbon it may bee maruelled that in the place of Iosua, and 1. Chron. 6. 81. it should be said to haue been giuen to the Leuites by the Gadites, seeing Iosua 13. v. 17. it is reckoned for a principall Citie of the Reubenites: Adrichomius and such as little trouble themselues with such , finding Casbon, 1. . 5. 36. among the Ci∣ties of Gilehad, taken by Iudas , makes two Cities of one: as if this Casbon had been the Chesbon of Gad: and that of Reuben distinct from it: but the better re∣conciliation is, that it being a bordering Citie, betweene Gad and Reuben, was com∣mon to both, and that the Gadites gaue their part to the Leuites: for so also it seemeth that in like reason Dibon is said in one place built by the Gadites, and in another giuen to Reuben, as before is noted. Of Machanaijm, which word signifieth a double Armie, we reade Gen. 32. 2. that it was therefore so called, because the Angels of God in that place met Iacob in manner of another Hoste or company, to ioyne with his for his defence: as also Luke 2. 13. we reade of a multitude of the Hoste of Heauen, which appeared to the sheep- , at the time of our Sauiours birth: and so vnto the Godly King Oswald of Northumberland, when hee was soone after to ioyne bat∣taile with the Pagan Penda of middle- England, reports, that the like comfort appeared: whence the field where the battaile was in the North-parts of England, is called Heauen-field. In this Citie of Machanaijm Dauid abode during the rebellion of Absalom: and the same for the strength thereof Abner chose for the seat of Ishboseth, during the warre betweene Dauid and the house of Saul. Of the fourth Towne which was Ramoth in Gilehad, we reade often in the Scrip∣ture, for the recouering of which King Achab lost his life. Iunius thinkes that Ra∣matha-Mitspae, of which Iosua 13. 26. was this Ramoth in Gilehad. Concerning the place where Laban and Iacob sware one to the other, as it was called Gilehad, which is as much as a witnessing heape, because of the heape of stones which Laban and his sonnes left for a monument; so also that it was called Mitspah, which signifieth o∣uer-looking (because there they called God to ouer-see and be witnesse to their co∣uenant) it is plaine by the place, Gen. 31. 49. that in these parts there was not onely a Towne, but likewise a Region called Mitspa, it appeares, Ios. 11. 3. where we reade of the Chiuuites vnder Hermon, in the Countrie of Mitspa, Of other townes of this name, see in the Tribe of . the Towne of Mitspa, as it seemes both by this place, and in the eighth verse following, beeing not in the Hill Countrie, but in the valley. But seeing that Iephta the Iudge of Israel, who after hee came home from Tob, (whither his brethren had driuen him) dwelt in this Towne of Mitspa, who doubtlesse was of the Tribe of Manasse, and thence at first expelled Iud. 11. 36. by his brethren, it may seeme that they not well which place this Towne of Mitspa rather in Gad, than in Manasse. By this Towne of Mitspa (whether in Gad or in Manasse ) was vtterly spoyled and burnt, and all the males of it 1. Macc. 5. 35. slaine: for it was then possest of the Ammonites. Betweene Succoth (of which we haue spoken) and the Riuer Iaboc was that Peniel or Penuel, which name signifieth Locum faciei Dei; A place where the face of God was Gen. 32. 30. seene: so called for memorie of the Angels appearing to Iacob, and wrestling with him there: the churlishnesse of which Citie, in refusing to relieue Gideon, was the Iudg. 8. 17. cause that in his returne hee ouerthrew their Tower, and slew the chiefe Aldermen thereof. To these places of the Gadites, they adde Rogelim, the Citie of that great and faithfull subiect Barzallai, as it seemes, not farre from , where he su∣stained 2. Sam. 19. 33. King Dauid, during Absaloms rebellion. To these they adde the Townes of Gaddi, Arnon, and Alimis, of which Gaddi, being in Hebrew no more then Gaddita, is ignorantly made a name of a place. Arnon also no where appeares to bee the name of a Towne, but still of a Riuer. Alimis Adrichomius frames of , 1. Macc. 5. 26. so that the name should rather be Alema, but Iunius out of Iosephus reades Mallae, for this in Alimis: and vnderstanding Mallae to bee put for Millo, and to be as much Deut. 3. 14. as Munitio, (as we haue shewed touching the of the ) hee takes this Ios. 12. 5. , to be Mitspa Moabitarum, of which 1. Sam. 22. 3. As for that Mageth which A∣drichomius findes in this Tribe of Gad, it is that , which Moses to be as farre as the furthest of Manasses, out of the bounds of this Tribe. So also Dathema, of which 1. Mac. 5. 10. (which Iunius takes to bee The letters D. and R. in the are like, so that one is mis∣taken for ano∣ther, & some∣time without mistaking one is put for ano∣ther: as for Ro∣danim, 1. . 7. we haue Doda∣nim. Gen. 10. 4. Rithma, of which Num. 33. 18. a place of strength in the Territory of the Ammonites ) and in like maner Minnith, and Abel vinearum, though by some they be attributed to the Gadites, or to their borders, yet they are found farther off. For of the two last we reade in pursuit of the Ammonites: seated as it seemes by that place of the booke of Iudges, the former of them in the South border, and the other in the East border, both farre remoued from the Gadites. But the chiefe Citie of the Ammonites was neerer, and not farre from from the borders of Gad. It is called in the Scriptures sometime Rabbath, as Deut. 3. 11. but more often Rabba. It is supposed to bee that Other names of this Citie according to Stephanus were Ammana and Astarte: but in this later per∣haps he mis∣tooke, which might seem to be the same A∣staroth one of the chiefe Ci∣ties of Og, of which in that which remai∣neth to be spo∣ken of Manas∣ses, , it was also called Vrbs aquarum, be∣cause of the riuer Iabocs winding about it, but in the place 2. Sam. v. 27. whence he gathers this o∣pinion, Iunius reads intercepi ab vrbe aquam, if we must read with others, ce∣pi aqua∣rum, yet it can∣not be taken of Rabba it selfe, but of some Fort adioy∣ning. Philadelphia which Ptolomie findes in Coelosyria. Hierome and in Arabia. It was conquered by Og from the Ammonites: but as it seemes neuer possest by the Israelites, after the ouerthrow of Og, but left to the Ammonites: whereupon at length it became the Regall seate of the Ammonites, but of old it was the possession of the Zamzummims: which is as much to say, as men for all manner of craft and wickednesse infamous. The same were also called Raphaim, of whom was Og, which recouered much of that which the Ammonites had got from his Ancestors: who hauing been first beaten by the Assyrians, and their assistants (as the in Moab, and the Horims in Seir had beene) were afterward the easier conquered by the Ammonites, as the Emims were by Moab, and the Horims by the Idumaeans. Yet did the races of Emoreus, of whom these Giants were descended, contend with the Conquerours for their ancient inhe∣ritance: and as Sehon of Hesbon had dispossest Moab, so had Og of Basan the Ammo∣nites, and betweene them recouered the best part of all the Valley, betweene the Mountaines and Iordan. For this Og was also master of Rabba or Philadelphia: And in the possession of the one or the other of these two, Moses and Israel found all those Cities and Countreys which were giuen to Reuben, Gad, and the halfe Tribe of Manasse. So that though it were 450. yeeres since that these Zamzummims or Raphaims were expelled, yet they did not forget their ancient inheritance: but ha∣uing these two Kings of one kinred, and both valiant and vndertaking men, to wit, Og and Sehon, both Amorites, they recouered againe much of their possessions, and thrust the sonnes of Lot ouer the mountaines, and into the Desarts. And as the Kings or Captaines of Persia and Assyria, (remembred Gen. 14. in the 14. of Genesis ) made way for Ammon, , and Edom, so by that great conquest which Moses had ouer those two Amorites, Og and Sehon, did the Moabites and Ammonites take opportunity to looke backe againe into those plaines, and when the Reubenites, Gadites, and Manassites forsooke the worship of the liuing God, and became slothfull and licen∣tious, they taking the aduantage inuaded them, and cast them out of their possessi∣ons: and were sometime their masters, sometime their tributaries, as they pleased or displeased God: and according to the wisedome and vertue of their Comman∣ders. In this Citie of Rabba, was the yron bed of Og found, nine cubites of length, and Deut. 3. foure of breadth. The Citie was taken in Dauids time, and the inhabitants slaine with great seuerity, and by diuers torments. At the first assault thereof Vrias was shot to death, hauing been by direction from Dauid appointed to bee imployed in the leading of an assault, where he could not escape: wherein also many of the best of the Armie perished: and wherein Dauid so displased God, as his affaires had ill successe afterward, to his dying day. From hence had Dauid the waightie and rich crowne of gold, which the Kings of Ammon ware: or which as some expound it, was vsed to be set on the head of their Idoll, waighing a talent, which is 60. pound 2. Sam. 12. waight after the common talent. In the time of Christians it had a Metropolitan Bi∣shop, . Tyr. Bell. Sacr. 13. cap. 12. and vnder him twelue others. The Mountaines which are described within this , and that of Manasse, with a part of Reuben, are those which Ptolomie calleth the hilles of Hippus, a Citie of . Strab. l. 16. Coelosyria: and Strabo is, locus asper & salebrosus: whence it ap∣peares that Trachonitis regio in these parts was properly the hil country Deut. 3. v. 9. . . Trachones: the same which continue from neere Damascus vnto the Desarts of Moab: and receiue diuers names, as commonly mountaines do, which neighbour and bound diuers Countries: For from the South part, as farre North∣wards as Asteroth, the chiefe Citie of Og, they are called Galaad or Gilead, from thence Northward they are knowne by the name of Hermon, for so Moses calleth them: The Sidonians name them Shirion, but the Amorites Shenir, others Seir: of which name all those Hilles also were called, which part Iudaea and Idumaea: and lastly, they are called Libanus, for so the Prophet Hieremie makes them all one, calling the high mountaines of Galaad, the head of Libanus. These mountaines are vere fruitfull, and full of good pastures, and haue many trees which yeeld Balsamum, and many other Hier. 8. & in medicinable drugs. The Riuers of this Tribe are the waters of Nimrah, and Dibon, and the Riner : Others doe also fancie another Riuer, which rising out of the Rockes of Arnon, falleth into Iordan. §. VI. Of the Ammonites, part of whose Territories the e s wanne from OG the King of Basan. THis Tribe of Gad possest halfe the Countrie of the Ammonites, who together with the Moabites, held that part of Arabia Petraea called Na∣bat , as well within as without the mountaines of Gilead: though at this time when the Gadites wan it, it was in the possession of Sehon and Og, Amorites: and therefore Moses did not expell the Ammonites, but Amorites, who had thrust the issues of Lot ouer the mountaines Tracbones or , as before. After the death of Othoniel the first Iudge of Israel, the Ammonites ioyned with the Moabites against the Hebrewes, and so continued long. Iephta Iudge Iud. 10. of Israel had a great conquest ouer one of the Kings of Ammon, but his name is o∣mitted. In the time of Samuel they were at peace with them againe. Afterward wee find that cruell King of the Ammonites, called : who be∣sieging 1. Sam. 11. Iabes Gilead, gaue them no other conditions but the pulling out of their right eyes. The reason why he tendred so hard a composition, was (besides this desire to bring shame vpon Israel ) because those Gileadites vsing to carrie a Target on their left armes, which could not but shadow their left eyes, should by losing their right, be vtterly disabled to defend themselues: but Saul came to their rescue, and deliue∣red them from that danger. This Nahas, as it may, seeme, became the confederate of Dauid, hauing friended him in Sauls time, though Iosephus thinkes that this Na∣has Iosep. l. 6. Ant. c. 5. &c. was slaine in the battaile, when Saul raised the siege of , who affirmeth that 2. Sam. 10. 4. 18. there were three Kings of the Moabites of that name. , that is the men Thob: Thob is a small Territorie vn∣der Arnon hills. Hanun succeeded Nahas: to whom when Dauid sent to congratulate his establish∣ment, and to confirme the former friendship which he had with his Father, he most contemptuously and proudly cut off the Ambassadours garments to the knees, and is betweene Hazor & Sidon, in the North bound of Ca∣naan, Num. 13. 22. of which see in the tribe of Asser. shaued the halfe of their . But afterward notwithstanding the aydes receiued from the Aramites subiect to Adadezer, and from the Reguli of Rehob, and Maacah, and from Istob, yet all those Arabians, together with the Ammonites, were ouer-tur∣ned: their chiefe Citie of Rabba, after Philadelphia, was taken, the Crowne which weighed a talent of gold was set on Dauids head, all such as were prisoners, Dauid ex∣cuted with strange seueritie; for with Sawes and Harrowes hee tare them in pieces, and cast the rest into Lime-kills. . 40. & 41. Iosaphat gouerning Iuda, they assisted the Moabites their neighbours against him, 2. Chron. 20. and perished together. Osias made them Tributaries, and they were againe by 2. Chron. . inforst to continue that Tribute, and to increase it, to wit, a hundreth talents of 2. Chron. 26. siluer, ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley: which the Am∣monites 2. Chron. v. 27. continued two yeeres. The fift King of the Ammonites, of whose name we reade was Baalis, the confede∣rate of Zedechia: after whose taking by Nabuchodonosor, Baalis Ismael of the bloud of the Kings of Iuda, to slay Gedaliah, who serued Nabuchodonosor. §. VII. Of the other halse of MANASSE. THe rest of the Land of Gilead, and of the Kingdome of Og in Basan, with the Land of Hus, and Argob, or Trachonitis (wherein also were part of the small Territories of Another ter∣ritory adioy∣ning to Manas∣se, whose limits were confoun∣ded with some of these, was that Thishbitis, the country of Elias, as it is the 1. Kin. 16. 1. and of Tobias, Tob. 1 2. it lay on the East to the tribe of Neph. on the right hand of it, as in Tob. 1. 2. and was possest by Colonies of the Israelites in the time of Saul after his victo∣ry ouer the A∣malekites & Is∣maelits in those parts, as it is gathered out of the 1. Chr. 5-10. whence it appears that it was part of , of which chap. 7. §. 4. †. 5. and 6. Batanea, Gaulonitis, Gessuri, Machati, and Au∣ranitis ) was giuen to the halfe Tribe of Manasse ouer Iordan, of which those three later Prouinces defended themselues against them, for ma∣ny ages. But Batanea Ptolomie setteth farther off, and to the North-East, as a skirt of Arabia the Desart: and all these other Prouinces before named with , and Itu∣raea, he nameth but as part of Coelosyria; as farre South as Rabba or Philadelphia: like∣wise all the rest which belonged to Gad, and Reuben, sauing the Land neere the Dead Sea, he makes a part of drabia Petraea: for many of these small Kingdomes take not much more ground then the County of Kent. Basan, or after the Septuagint, Basanitis, stretcheth it selfe from the Riuer of to the So they call them of Maha∣cath, of which Mabacath som∣what hath bin spoken toward the end of the fift Paragraph of this Chapter, see the 1. Mac. 5. 36. and Deut. 3. 14. & Ios. 12. 5 Machati and Gessuri: and from the Mountaines to Iordan, a Region excee∣ding fertile; by reason whereof it abounded in all sorts of Cattell. It had also the goodliest woods of all that part of the world: especially of Oakes, which beare (of which the Prophet Zacharias, Howle, O yce Oakes of Bashan ) and by reason hereof they bred so many Swine, as Mar. 5. 13. 2000. in one Herd were carried head-long into the Sea, by the vncleane spirits which Christ had cast out of one of the Gadarens. It had in it threescore Cities walled and defenced: all which, after Og and his sonnes were slaine, Iair descended of Manasse conquered, and called the Countrie after his owne name, Iair, or the Cities of Iair. The principall cities of this halfe Tribe (for I will omit the rest) are these; Pella sometimes Anciently as it seems it was called Tophel, see aboue in the bounds of Mo ab in this chapter. §. 4. †. 2. But is, otherwise Berenice; by Seleucus King of , it is said to haue been called , after the name of that Pella in Macedon: in which both Philip the Father, and his Sonne Alexander the Great borne. It was taken, and in part demolished by Alexander Iannaeus King of the Iewes: because it refused to obey the Iewes lawes: but it was repaired by , and annexed to the Gouernement of Syria. It is now but a Village, saith Niger. by the Riuer of Iaboc, taken by 1. Macc. 5. Iudas Maccha∣baeus: where he set on fire the Ioseph. 12. Ant. 12. Temple of their Idols: together with all those that fled thereinto for Sanctuary; and it they place the Castle of Carnion, of which 2. Macc. 12. 22. Then the strong Citie of 1. Mac. 5. Ephron neere : which refusing to yeeld passage to 2. Mac. 12. 27 Iudas Macchabeus, was forced by him by assault, and taken and burnt with great slaughter. Iabes Gilead, or Iabesus, was another of the Cities of this halfe Tribe, which being besieged by Nahas 1. Sam. 11. King of the Ammonites,, was deliuered by Saul, as is Ios. 6. ant. 5. elsewhere mentioned. In memorie whereof these Citizens 1. Sam. 31. recouered, embalmed, and bu∣ried the bodies of Saul and his Sonnes: which hung despightfully ouer the walls of Bethsan or Scythopolis. 1. Chron. 10. Gaddara or Gadara, is next to be named, seated by Plinie on a Hill neere the Riuer Hieromiace, which Riuer Ortelius seemes to thinke to bee Ia∣boc. At the foote of the Hill there spring foorth also hot baths, as at Machaerus. A∣lexander Iannaeus after ten siege wanne it, and subuerted it. Pompey restored it: and Gahinius Ioseph. 14. Ant. 13. made it one of the fiue Courts of Iustice in Palaestine. Hierusalem being the first, Gadara the second, Emath or Amathus the third, , and Sephora in Galilee, the fourth and fift. The Citizens impatiently bearing the tyranny of He∣rod, surnamed Ascalonita, accused him to Iulius Caesar of many crimes: but percei∣uing that they could not preuaile, and that Herod was highly fauoured of Caesar, fea∣ring the terrible Ioseph. 15. Ant. 13. of Herod, they slew themselues: some by strangling, o∣thers by leaping ouer high Towers, others by drowning themselues. To the East of they place Sebei, Of Mitspa in Gilehad, the Citie of , see in the Tribe of Gad. in which Iosephus ant. 5. 13. saith, Iephtha was buried: whence others reading with the Vulgar, . 12. 7. Sepultus est in Ciui∣tate sua Gilehad, (for in vna Ciuitatum Gilehad ) imagine Gilehad to be the name of a Citie, and to be the same with Sebei. In like manner following the Vulgar, 1. Macc. 5. 26. where it readeth for Chesbon; the same Adrichomius imagineth it to be ampla & firma Gilehaditarum Ciuitas, so of one Citie Hesbon or Chesbon, which they call Essebon, the chiefe Citie of Sehon, in the Tribe of Reuben, he imagineth two more: this Casphor in Manasses, and a Citie in Gad which he calleth Casbon, of which we haue admonished the Reader heeretofore. Of Gamala (so called, because the Hill on which it stood, was in fashion like the backe of a Cammell) which Iosephus placeth not farre from Gadara, in the lower Gaulanitis ouer against Tarichea, which is on the West side of the Sea or Lake of Tiberias, see this Iosephus in his booke Cap. 1. & 3. of the Iewish warre: where he describes the place by nature to bee almost inuincible: and in the storie of the siege, shewes how Vespasian with much danger of his owne person, entring it, was at first repulsed, with other very memorable accidents: and how at length after the comming of Titus, when it was taken, many leaping downe the rocks with their wiues and children, to the number of fiue thousand, thus pe∣rished: besides foure thousand slaine by the Romans: so that none escaped, saue onely two women that hid themselues. About foure miles West from Gadara, and as much East from (which is on the otherside of the Lake) Iosephus placeth Hippus, or Hippene, whence Ptolomie In vitasua. giues the name to the hills that compasse the plaines in which it standeth: so that it may seeme to haue beene of no small note. It is seated farre from the hill Countrie: on the East of the Lake, as also Plinie noteth lib. 5. cap. 15. It was restored by Pom∣pey: after by Augustus added to Herods Tetrarchte: It was wasted by the Iewes, in the Ioseph. Bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 19. beginning of their rebellion: when by many massacres of their Nation, they were inraged against their borderers. The next Citie of note, but of more ancient fame, is Edrehi or Edrai, wherein Og Of an other in . see Ios. 19. 37. King of Basan chiefly abode, when Moses and Israel inuaded him: and neere vnto this his Regall Citie, it was that he lost the battaile and his life. It stood in S. Hieromes Deut. 3. 1. & 10. time: and had the name of Adar or Adara. Not farre from these Townes neere Ior∣dan, Item. Ios. 13. 31. in this valley stood Gerassa or Gergessa, inhabited by the Gergesites, descended of the fift sonne of Canaan. Of these Gergesites we reade Mat. 8. 28. that Christ comming Matt. 8. 28. from the other side of the Lake of Tiberias, landed in their coasts: where casting the Diuels out of the possessed, hee permitted them to enter into the herd of Hogs: in Mar. 5. which storie for Gergesites or Gergesins, S. Luke and S. Marke haue Gadarens: not as if . 8. these were all one (for Gergessa or Gerassa is a distinct Towne in these parts from Ga∣dera ) but the bounds being confounded, and the Cities neighbours, either might well be named in this storie. This Citie receiued many changes and calamities: of which Iosephus hath often mention. For besides other aduentures, it was taken by L. Annius Lieutenant to Vespasian: and 1000. of the ablest yong men put to the sword, and the Citie burnt. In the yeere 1120. it was rebuilt by Baldwine King of Damas∣cus: and in the same yeere recouered by Baldwine de Burgo King of Hierusalem: and by him vtterly razed. Neere vnto Gerasa is the village of Magedan, or after the Sy∣riake Magedu, or after the Greeke Magdala, where the Pharisees and Sadducees desired Matt. 15. of our Sauiour a signe from heauen: the same place or some adioyning to it, which S. Marke calleth Dalmanutha. By the circumstances of which storie it appeares that Marc. 8. Broch. . 2. this coast lay betweene the Lake of Tiberias and the Countrie of . Brochard Of this see in . makes both these places to be one: and findes it to be Phiale, the fountaine of Iordan according to Iosephus: but this Phiale is too farre from the Sea of Galilee, and from C. 7. §. 4. †. 3. Bethsaida, to be either Magdala or Dalmanutha. For as it appeares by the storie, not far Matt. 14. hence towards the North was the Desart of Bethsaida, where Christ filled 5000. Marc. 6. people with the fiue Barley loaues and two Fishes. Luc. 11. . 6. On the North of this Bethsaida they place Iulias, not that which was built by He∣rod, but the other by Philip, which boundeth the Region Trachonitis towards the South. It was sometime a Village, and not long after the birth of Christ it was com∣passed with a wall by Philip the Tetrarch of and Trachonitis: and after the name Ioseph. 18. aut. 3. & alibi. of , the wife of Tiberius, called , as hath beene farther spoken in the Tribe of Gad: where it was noted that Iosephus makes this Iulias, to be the same as Beth∣saida. Vpon the East side of the same Lake of Tiberias Corozaim, or Corazim, of which Christ in Matthew; Woe be vnto thee Corazim. But the principall Citie of all these in ancient time was Asteroth: sometime peopled with the Giants Raphaim: and therefore the Countrie adioyning called the Land of Giants, of whose race was Og, King of Basan. In Genesis this Citie is called Asteroth Gen. 14. 5. of Carnaim, whence I. Mac. 5. 26 it is called simply Carnaim, as Ios. 13. 21. it is called Asteroth without the addition of Carnaim. The word Carnaim signifieth a paire of Hornes, which agree well with the name of their Idoll Astoreth, which was the I∣mage See chap. 7. §. 3. †. 2. of a sheepe, as it is elsewhere noted, that Astaroth in Deut. signifieth sheepe. O∣thers from the ambiguitie of the Hebrew take Karnaim, to haue beene the name of the people which inhabited this Citie: and expound it heroes Because Horne when it is shi∣neth: hence it is that the verb of this Nowne is sometime Lucere: as it were corneum esse: whereup∣on the Vulgar, Exod. 34. 29. reading , or lucidam fa∣ciem, gaue oc∣casion to the fabulous pain∣ters to paint Moses with Hornes. radiantes. For of old the Raphaei which inhabited this Citie ( Gen. 14. 5.) were Giant-like men, as appeares by comparing the words Deut. 3. 11. Og ex residuo gigantum, with the words Ios. 13. 12. Og ex reliquijs Raphaaeorum: but if the (or Karnaijm) were these Raphaei, the word would not haue beene in the duall number: neither would Moses in the place of Genesis haue said the Raphaei in Asteroth of the , but either the Raphaei in Asteroth of the Raphaei, or some other way fittest for perspicuitie: for this naming of both thus in the same clause, distinguisheth one from the other. Not farre from Asteroth Adrichomius out of Brochard and Breidenbachius placeth Cedar, in the way out of Syria into Galilee, foure miles from Corazin. This Citie (saith hee) is remembred in the Canticles, and in the booke of Iudith, and there are that of this Citie vnderstand Dauid in his 120. Psalme: and heere the Sepulchre of Iob is yet to be seene, saith Breidenbach. Now concerning the Texts which hee citeth, it is so that the Greeke hath Galaad in stead of the word Cedar, which the Vulgar doth vse in that place of Iudith, and ioy∣neth Carmel and . The Canticles and the 120. Psalme doe rather proue that Iudith. 1. 8. Cedar was not heere about, than any way helpe Adrichomius. For that they speake of 1. Cant. 5. Scenitae Cedareni, it is apparent, and as euident by the place in the Canticles that they were decolores, much more than any vnder the Climates of the land of Canaan: whence Iunius out of Lampridius and Plinie placeth them in Arabia Petraea, farre from these parts. Touching the Sepulchre of Iob, it is certaine that the Arabians and (holding those places) faine many things to abuse the Christians, and to get mo∣ney. Rup. . . in Gen. Bell. in Com. lib. 1. de ver. Dei. S. Amb. . Ep. ad Rom. Aug. de ciui. Dei l. 18. c. 4. . 2. De pati∣entia Iob. Greg. com. in Iob. Further, it may well be affirmed that many (if not all) the historicall circum∣stances of Iob are so obscure, that we should rather by finding his Countrie seeke to get some knowledge of him, than by any presumptions founded vpon him, inferre what his Countrie was, and build vnto him a Citie by coniecture. Of Iob himselfe whether he were the same Iobab remembred in the 36. of Gene∣sis, descended from Esau, and King also of Idumaea, though Rupertus, Lyranus, Oleaster, and are of another opinion, yet S. Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostome, and For and are often chan∣ged one into the other: whence they vsed Ausitis for Ousitis, &c. Hence also by and o∣thers it is cal∣led Ausanitis, & so as it seemes they reade it in the Septuagint. Gen. 10. 23. Gregorie, with Athanasius, Hyppolitus, , , Apollinar , & other, cited by S. Hierom in his 126. Epist. to Euagrius, take him for the same. The Land of Huts or Hus wherein Iob dwelt is from the Greeke , which the Septuagint vse for the word Huts, translated by the Vulgar sometime Hus, as Iob 1. v. 1. sometime Ausitis, as Hieromc 25. 20. This Land is placed by Iunius between Palaestina and Caelesyria, besides Chamatha (or Hamath) vnder Palmyrene in the Countrie cal∣led by Ptolomie Trachonitis. or Bathanaea, the bounds of which Countries are confoun∣ded with Basan in this halfe Tribe of Manasses. And that this Land of Hus was thus seated, it may in part bee gathered out of the place of Ieremie the 25. 20. where hee reckons the Hushites among the promiscuous borderers of the Israelites, whom hee therefore calleth promiscuous or miscellaneam turbam, because their bounds were not onely ioyned but confounded, and their Seigniories mingled one with the other, but of this place the wordes of Hieremie, Lamentations 4. 21. speaking of the same prophesie, of which hee speaketh in the fiue and twentieth Chapter, must needes be expounded: as Iunius reades them, distinguishing the Land of Hus from Edom: O filia , ô quae habitas in terra Hutzi; O Daughter of Edom, O thou which dwellest in the Land of Hus. Now because the Vulgar doth not so distinguish, but readeth Filiae Edom quae habitas in terra Hus; Daughter of Edom which dwellest in the Land of Hus: Hence, as it seemes, some of the learned haue thought that Iob was an Edomite, as we haue said, and King of Edom, which if they vnderstand by it Idumaea or Edom, so called in Mo∣ses Deut. 3. 9. time, they are greatly mistaken, making this Land of Hus to be in Edumaea. For it is very probable that Esau when hee first parted from Iacob, did not seate himselfe in Edom, or Seir, which lieth on the South border of Iudaea, but in habited Seir farre to the East of , and held a part of those Mountaines otherwise called Galaad, and Hermon, which by corruption the Sidonians call Shirion, and the Amorites Shenir for Seir, and from this his habitation did Esau incounter Iacob when he returned out of Mesopotamia, who passed by the very border of Esau his abiding. It is true that at such time as Moses wandred in the Desarts, that the posteritie of Esau inhabited Seir to the South of Iudaea: for it is like that the Amorites who had beaten both Am∣mon and Moab, did also driue the Edomites out of those parts, who thence-forward seated themselues to the South of Iudaea, bordering the Desart Paran, and stretched their habitations ouer the Desarts as farre as Hor where Aram died. Now for this Hus which gaue the name to a part of the Land of Trachonitis, whe∣ther it were Hus the sonne of Aram, as Iunius thinkes in his note vpon Gen. 10. 23. or rather Hus the sonne of Nachor, Abrahams brother, the question is doubtfull. For my part I rather incline to thinke, that it was Hus the sonne of Nachor: partly be∣cause these Families of Aram seeme long before to haue beene lost: and partly be∣cause in Iob c. 32. 2. Elihu the fourth of Iobs friends, which seemes to be of Iobs owne Countrie, is called a Buzite, of Buz, the brother of Hus, the sonne of Nachor: as also Whence the Septuagint call him ex regione Ausitide. 25. in the same continuation (though some other Nations named between) where Hus is spoken of, there Buz is also named. Neither doth it hinder our conie∣cture, that in the place of Iob 32. Elihu the Buzite is said to bee of the Familie of Ram: (which Iunius expounds to bee as much as of the Familie of Aram) for that by this Aram we are not to vnderstand Aram the sonne of Sem, Iunius himselfe maketh it plaine, both in his annotation vpon the beginning of his booke, where he saith that one of Iobs friends (which must needes be this Ellihu) was of the posteritie of Nachor (as also in this place he confesseth so much expresly) and in as much as hee readeth not è familiâ Aram, or Ram, but è familia Syra; like as elsewhere Laban who sprung of Nachor is called a Syrian. As for the other three of Iobs friends (of whom by this note of Elihu his being of See Sixtus . the Syrian Familie, or of the Familie of Nachor) it is implied that they were of other kindreds; as also by the Septuagints addition, that this Elihu was of the Land of Hus, or Ausitis, it is implied that they thought onely Elihu to haue beene of Iobs owne Countrie. Franciscus Brochard the Monke, in his description of the holy Land in the iourney from Acon Eastward, findeth Suetha, and Theman on the East of the Sea of : both very neere to the Land of Hus: whereof the one may seeme to haue denomi∣nated Bildad the Shuchit; the other Eliphaz the Themanite: two of the three friends of Iob, of the which Iob 2. 11. But Iunius thinks that the Shuchits were inhabitants of Arabia the Desart, descended of Shuach the sonne of Abraham and Ketura: of whom Gen. 52. 2. perhaps, saith he, the same whom Plinie calls Saccaei. So also he thinketh the Themanites of whom Eliphaz was, to haue beene of Arabia the Desart: and himselfe to haue beene of the posteritie of Theman the sonne of Eliphaz, which was the sonne of Esau. And so also whence Tsophar the third of Iobs friends (which in this place of Iob. c. 2. v. 11. are mentioned) is by the same learned expositor thought either to be named of Thimnath by transposition of letters (which Thimnah Gen. 36. 40. is named among the sonnes of Esau that gaue denomination to the pla∣ces where they were seated) or else to bee the same Nahamah, which Ios. 15. 41. is reckoned for a Citie of in the border, as he thinkes, of Edom. And yet I denie not but that neere to the Land of Hus, in Basan, as it seemes, in the Tribe of Ma∣nasses, there is a Region which at least in latter times was called Suitis, or of some like name. For this is euident by the Historic of Tyrius, which reports of De Bell. Sacr. l. 22. c. 15. & 21. a Fort in this Region of or Suites (as hee calls it diuersly) of exceeding great strength and vse for the retaining of the whole Countrie: which, in the time of Bald∣wine the second King of Hierusalem, was with great digging through rocks recouered by the Christians: hauing not long before been lost to the great disaduantage of the Countrie, while it was in the handes of the Saracens. The situation of this Fort is by Tyrius described to be sixeteene miles from the Citie Tiberias, on the East of Ior∣dan: by Adrichomius foure miles North-ward from the place where Iordan enters the Lake Tiberias at Corazin. Other Cities of this part of Manasses named in the Scripture are these: Golan, Be∣heshthera, of Gilead, and Kenath, which after the comming of the Israelites was called Nobach. Of Nobach or Kenath, and Mitspa of Gilehad, we haue spoken by oc∣casion among the Cities of Gad: The two other were giuen to the Leuites, and Ios. 21. 27. Deut. 4. 43. made one of the Cities of refuge: from which Golan wee haue both Gaulanitis superior and inferior, oft in Iosephus. Beheshthera is accounted the chiefe Citie of Basan by some, but the writers corrupting the name into Bozra, it is confounded with Betser or Bozra of Reuben, and with Bozra of Edom. Argob is oft named for a Region in this Tract, and hence Hierome hath Arga, a name of a Citie placed by some about the waters of Merom (as they are called by Iosua) which make the Lake , as Iosephus calls it. This Lake being as it were in the midst betweene Coesaria Philippi and Tiberias, through which as through the Lake of Tiberias, Iordan runneth, boun∣deth part of this halfe Tribe on the West. When the snow of Libanus melteth, it is very large, saith Brochard: otherwise more contract, leauing the marish ground on both sides, for Lyons and other wild beasts, which harbour in the shrubs that plen∣tifully grow there. Adioyning to this Lake in this Countrie of Manasses, Iosephus names two places of strength fortified by himselfe in the beginning of the Iewes rebellion: Seleucia the one and Sogane the other. In the North side of this halfe Tribe of Manasse, and in the North-east, the Scripture nameth diuers bordering places toward Damascus, as Tsedad, Chauran, and Chatsar-Henan, lying in a line drawne from the West; of which three Cities we reade Ezek. 47. 15. with which also agrees the place Numb. 34. 8. where for Chauram, betweene Tsedad, and Chatsar-Henan, Ziphron is named. From this Chauram is the name of Auranitis regio, in Iosephus and , whose bounds (as also the bounds of Gessur and or Macati, which were like wise borderers to Manasses toward the North-east) are vnknowne: only that Gessur was of might, it appeares in that Dauid mar∣ried Mahaca the Daughter of Tholmay King of Gessur: by whom he had the most beau∣tifull, . 3. 2. but wicked, and vnfortu∣nate Absalon. CHAP. XI. The Historie of the Syrians the chiefe borderers of the Jsraelites that dwelt on the East of Jordan. §. I. Of the Citie of Damascus and the diuers fortunes thereof. DAMASCVS of all other in this border, and of that part of the world, was the most famous, excelling in beau∣tie, antiquitie, and riches, and was therefore called the Citie of or gladnes; and the House of pleasure; and is not onely remembred in many places of Scripture, but by the best Historians and Cosmographers. The Hebrewes, saith Iosephus, thinke it to haue been built by Ioseph. 1. 14. Hus the sonne of Aram: of which opinion S. Hierome vpon Esai seemeth to be: though in his Hebrew questi∣ons In Isai. 17. hee affirmeth that it was founded by Damascus, the sonne of Eliezer Abrahams Steward, a thing very Gen. 15. 2. vnlikelie, seeing the citie was formerly knowne by that name, as appeares by Abra∣hams calling this his Steward Eliezer of Damasco. was the first that subiected it to the Kingdome of Iuda, after the ouerthrow of Adadezer their King, but in Sa∣lomons time, Rezon recouered it againe, though he had no title at all or right to that principalitie: but Dauid hauing ouerthrowne Hadadezer king of Sophena, (otherwise Syria Soba or Zobah) Razon or Rezon with the remainder of that broken armie, in∣uaded , and possest Damoscus it selfe, and became an enemie to Salomon all 1. Reg. 11. v. 40. his life. The next King of Damascus was Adad the Edomite, who flying into Aegypt from 1. Reg. 11. Dauid, and Ioab, when they slew all the males in Edom, was there entertained, and married the King of Aegypts wiues sister: of whom Taphnes in Aegypt was so called. This Adad returning againe, became an enemie to Salomon all his life, and (as some writers affirme) inuaded Damascus, and thrust Rezon thence-out. In the line of Adad that Kingdome continued nine descents (as heereafter may be shewed in the catalogue of those Kings of Syria) to whom the Assyrians & then the succeeded. This citie was exceeding strong, compassed with waters from the riuers of Abanah, and Parphar: whereof one of them prophane writers call Chrysorrhoas the 2. Reg. 5. golden riuer. Iunius takes it for Adonis. The countrey adioyning is very fruitfull of excellent wines and wheats, and all manner of excellent fruits. It had in it a very strong Castle, built as it seemes by the Florentines, after it became Christian: the lillies . 6. . Sacr. being found cut in many marbles in that Citadell. Against this Citie the Prophets Amos, Esai, Hieremy and Zacharias, prophecied that it should be taken, burnt, demo∣lished, 1. 3. 8. 10. & 17. 49. & 9. and made a heape of stones. In the time of the last Rezon and tenth King of the Damascens, Teglatphalassar inuited by Achaz king of Iuda, carried away the na∣turals 2. Reg. 16. of Damascus into the East: leauing of his owne nation to inhabit it. After that it was vtterly ruined by the Babylonians, saith vpon Esai: which thing Esai. 17. was performed by Salmanasar, according to Iunius in his note vpon that place, fiue yeeres after the . In time it was restored by the Macedonians, and the Ptolomies; but long after when Syria fell into the handes of the Romans, it was taken Ioseph. ant. . by Metellus and Lollius. In the time of the it had an Archbishop: S. liuing, as he affirmeth vpon the Actes, it was the Metropolis of the Saraecens: being taken by Haomar their King from the Romanes, in the yeere of our redemption 636. And in the yeere 1147. Conrad the third, Emperour of Rome, Lewes King of in . Fraunce, Baldwine the third King of Hierusalem, Henry Duke of Austrea, brother to Conrad, Frederick Barbarossa afterward Emperour, Theodorick Earle of Flaunders, and Vitri c. 46. . . Bell. Sac. l. 17. c. 1. 23. 4. 5. other Princes assembled at Ptolomais Acon, on the sea coast, determined to recouer Damascus: but being betrayed by the Syrians, they failed of the enterprize. In the yeere 1262. Halon the Tartar incompast it, and hauing formerly taken the King, brought him vnder the walls, and threatned extreme torture vnto him, ex∣cept Herold. Bell. Sac. 4. c. 14. the Citizens rendred the place: but they refusing it, the King was torne asun∣der before them, and in fine the Citie taken, Agab the sonne of Halon was by his fa∣ther made King thereof. In the yeere 1400. Tamberlaine Emperour of the Parthians, inuaded that region, Herold. l. 6. c. 4. and besieged the citie with an armie of 1200000. (if the number be not mistaken) He entred it and put all to the sword, filling the ditch with his prisoners, those that retired into the Castle which seemed a place impregnable, hee ouertopped with another Castle adioyning: he forbare the demolishing of the citie in respect of the beautie of the Church, garnished with 40. gates or sumptuous porches. It had within it 9000. lanternes of gold & siluer: but while he inuaded Aegypt, they againe surprized Damascus. Lastly in his returne after three moneths siege hee forst it: the Mahometans prostrating themselues with their priests, desired mercie: But Tamber∣laine commaunding them to enter the Church, he burnt them, and it, to the num∣ber of 30000 and did so demolish it, as those that came afterwards to see their houses, knew them not by the foundations. And as a Trophey of his victorie he raised three towers with great Arte, builded with the heads of those whom hee had slaughtered. After this it was restored and repossest by the Soldane of Aegypt, with a garrison of Mammalukes: And in the yeere 1517. Selimus Emperour of the Turkes wrested it out of the hands of the Aegyptians: in whose possession it now remaineth inhabited with Mahometans, and Christians, of all neighbouring nations. §. II. Of the first Kings of Damascus, and of the growing vp of their power: NOw bee it that Damascus were founded by Hus the sonne of Aram, or by Damascus the sonne of Eliezer Abrahams steward, we finde no re∣lation of their Kings, or Common wealth till Dauids time. For it stood without the boundes of Canaan: and therefore neglected by Moses, Iosua, and the Iudges, as impertinent to that Storie: But were it so that it had some reguli, or pettie Kings ouer it, as all the Cities of those parts had, yet none of them became famous for ought that is left to writing, till such time as Dauid ouerthrew Adadezer prince of Sophena or Syria Zoba: the same Nation which Plinie calleth , inhabiting betweene Batanea and Euphrates. Now the better to . l. 6. c. 28. vnderstand the storie of those Syrian Princes, whom soone after the Kings of made their vassals, the reader may informe himselfe, That on the North-east parts of the holy land there were three chiefe principalities whereof the Kings or Commaunders greatly vexed or disturbed the State or Commonwealth of Israel, namely Damascus or Aram, Sophena or Syria Zoba, and Chamath, or Chamath-Zoba, of which these were the Princes in Dauids and Salomons times: Razon or Rezon of Da∣mascus, Adadezer of Syria Zoba, and Tohu of Chamath. But it seemeth that Damascus 1. Sam. 14. 47. was one of the cities subiect to Adadezer when Dauid inuaded him, though when Saul made warre against Zoba, Damascus was not named. And as Iosephus affirmeth, the leader of those succours, which were leuied and sent to Hadad-Hezer from Da∣mascus, 2. Sam. 8. had the name of : who was in that battaile slaine with 22000. Aramites of Damascus: whereof, as of the ouerthrow of Adadezer, Rezon, the Comander of his armie, taking aduantage, made himselfe King of Damascus: Adadezer and Adad of Damascus being both slaine. About the same time King of Chamath or , 1. Reg. 11. hearing that his neighbour and enemie Adadezer was vtterly ouerthrowne, sendeth for peace to Dauid, and presenteth him with rich gifts, but in dolo saith S. Hierome; it was craftily done of him. Now to the North of the Holy Land, and to the West of Damascus, the Tyrians and Zidonians inhabited: but they for the most part were in league and peace with the Iudaeans and Israelites. But to returne to the kings of Syria, I mean of Syria, as it is taken in the Scriptures, containing Damascena, or Zoba, and Chamath, or , to which I may adde Geshur, because it is so accounted in the 2. of Sam. 15. as ioyning in the Territorie to Damascus (for Syria at large is farre greater, of which Palestina it selfe is but a Prouince, as I haue noted in the beginning of this Tract.) It is not agreed among the Historians of former times, nor of our later wri∣ters, who was the first of those Adads of Syria Zoba, and Damascus. Someacount Rezon, other Adad of Idumaea: of whome it is written in the first of Kings, that Dauid hauing inuaded that Region, and left Ioab therein to destroy all the male childreen thereof: Adad of the Kings seed, fled into Aegypt; and was there married to Taphnes the Queenes sister, as before, who hearing of Dauids death, and of the death of his Captaine Ioab (whom indeed all the bordering Nations feared) he turned againe, and as Bunting thinketh, this Adad did expell Rezon out of ; and was the first of the Syrian Kings. To mee it seemeth otherwise. For as 2. Sam. 8. 3. and 12. I take it, Adadezer the sonne of Rehob, whom Saul inuaded, was the founder of that 1. Sam. 14. 47. Principalitie: and the first of Adads, who forsaking his Fathers name, as hee grew powerfull, tooke vpon him the style of Adad, the great God of the Assyrians, saith Macrobius, which signified onenesse or Vnitie. I also finde a Citie called Adada in the same part of Syria: of which, whether these Princes tooke the name, or gaue it, I am ignorant. For Adad-ezer, Ben-adad, Eli-adad were the same in name, with the diffe∣rences of Ezer, Ben, and Eli, adioyned. And that Adadezer was of greatest power, it appeareth first, because it is against him, that Dauid vndertooke the warre: second∣ly, because he leuied 22000. Aramites out of the Territory of Damascus: as out of his proper Dominions: for had the Damascens had a King apart, it is probable that the Scriptures would haue giuen vs his name; thirdly, because Syria Zoba, of the most of Plin. l. 6. c. 18. which Adadezer was King, was an exceeding large Territory, and contained of Arabia the Desart as farre as to Euphrates, according to Plinie: and the greatest part of Arabia Petraea according to Niger. Whosoeuer was the first, whether , or Adad of I∣dumaea, 1. Reg. 11. Rezon was the second: Who was an enemie to Israel all the dayes of SALOMON. the euil that Adad did, the euil that Hadad did, seemeth to be referred to Hadad of Idumaea, lately returned out of Aegypt: to wit, 23. yeeres after he was carried thither. The third king of Damascus, and of Zobah both, was Hezion, to Hezion succeeded Tabrimmon, or Tabremmon, to him Benhadad, as is proued in the first of Kings. For 1. King. 15. 18. Asa King of Iuda the sonne of Abiam, the sonne of Roboam, the sonne of Salomon, being vexed and inuaded by Baasha, the successour of Nadab, the sonne of Ieroboam, sent to Benhadad the sonne of Tabrimmon the sonne of Hezion, King of Aram, that dwelt at Damascus, to inuade Israel (while Baasha sought to fortifie Rama against Asa: thereby to blocke him vp, that he should not enter into any of the of Is∣rael ) who according to the desire of Asa, hauing receiued his presents, willingly in∣uaded the Countrie of Nepthalim, and tooke diuers Cities, and spoiles thence: Asa in the meane while carrying away all the Materials, which had brought to for∣tifie 1. Reg. 15. v. 18. Rama withall, and conuerted them to his owne vse. This Benhadads Father Tabremmon was in league with Asa: and so was his Father Hezion; for Asa requireth the continuance of that friendship from Benhadad, his sonne: though it seemeth that the gold and siluer sent him out of the Temple, was the most forcible argument. And that this Tabremmon inuaded Israel, before the en∣terprize of his sonne Benhadad, it is coniectured. For Benhadad when he was prisoner with Achab, spake as followeth. The Cities which my Father tooke from thy Father, I will 1. Reg. 20. v. 34. restore: and shalt make streetes or keepers of the borders, for thee in Damascus: as my father did in Santaria. And herein there ariseth a great doubt (if the argument it selfe were of much importance) because Tabremmon was Father indeede to Benhadad which inuaded Baasha, at the request of Asa; But this Benhadad that twice entred vpon Achab, and was the second time taken prisoner, was rather the sonne of Benha∣did, 1. Reg. . the first of that name, the confederate of Asa and Abiam, as before, than the sonne of Tabremmon. For betweene the inuasion of Benhadad the first, in time, and the siege of Samaria, and the ouerthrow of Benhadad by Achab, there past 49. yeeres, as may be gathered out of the raignes of the Kings of Israel. So that if we allow 30. yeeres of age to Benhadad, when hee inuaded Baasha, and after that 49. yeeres, ere he was taken by , which make eighty lacking one, it is vnlikely that Benhadad at such an age would make warre. Besides all this, the first Benhadad came with no such pompe; but the second Benhadad vaunteth, that hee was followed with 32. Kings: and therefore I resolue, that Benhadad the sonne of Tabremmon inuaded Baasha and Omri, and Benhadad the second inuaded Achab, at whose hands this Ben∣hadād receiued two notorious ouerthrowes: the first at Samaria, by a sally of 700. Is∣raelites: the second at Aphec, where, with the like number in effect the Israelites slaugh∣tered 100000. of the Aramites; besides 27000. which were crusht by the fall of the 1. Reg. 20. wall of Aphec. And this Benhadad, Achab againe setteth at liberty: to whom hee rendreth those townes, that his father had taken from the Predecessour of Achab, but being returned, he refuseth to render Ramoth Gilead, a frontier towne, and of great importance. Now three yeeres after (for so long the league lasted) Ramoth not be∣ing 1. Reg. 22. deliuered, Achab inuadeth Gilead, and assiegeth the Citie, being assisted by Iosa∣phat. The Aramites came to succour and fight: in which Achab is wounded, and dy∣eth that night. After this, Benhadad sendeth the commaunder of his forces called Naaman, to Ioram the sonne of Achab to be healed of the leprosie, and though Elizeus 2. Reg. 5. had healed him, yet hee picketh quarrell against Ioram: and when Ioram by Elizeus 2. Reg. 6. his intelligence, had escaped his plot, he sent men, and Chariots to take the , as is aforesaid. After Benhadad besiegeth Samaria againe, and being terrified thence 2. Reg. 6. from heauen, he departeth home, and sickeneth, and sendeth Azael with great gifts 2. Reg. 7. to Elizeus, to know his estate, if he might liue. Azael returning, smoothereth him. Zonaras and Cedrenus call this Benhadad Adar, and the sonne of Adar: Amos and mention the towres of Benhadad. Iosephus writeth that Benhadad and his succes∣sour Amo. 1. Hier. 49. were worshipped for Gods by the Syrians to his time, for the sumptuous Temples which they built in Damascus. The Syrians also boasted much of their Ant. l. 8. c. 8. antiquity, ignorant, saith hee, that scarce yet 1100 yeeres are compleate since their warres with the . Hazael or Azael, the first King of the race of the Adads of Damascus, was anointed by Elisha, or Elizeus, when he was sent by Benhadad to the Prophet, to know whether Benhadad should recouer his present sicknesse: Hee waged warre with Ioram; who receiued diuers wounds at the encounter at Ramoth in Gilead: from whence retur∣ning to be cured at Iesrael, he and the King of Iuda, Ahaziah, or Ochozias, are slaine by Iehu, as before is said. After the death of Ioram, Azael continued the warre a∣gainst Iehu, and wasted Gilead, and all those portions of Gad, Reuben, and Manasse, o∣uer Iordan. Hee then inuaded Iuda, and tooke Gath, but by gifts from Ioas hee was 2. Reg. 12. 17. auerted from attempting Hierusalem: for presented him all the hallowed things which IEHOSAPHAT, IEHORAM, and AHAZIAH his fathers, Kings of 2. Reg. 12. dedicated; and which hee himselfe had dedicated: and all the gold which was found in the treasuries of the Lord, and in the Kings house. This was the second time that the Temple was spoyled to please the Adads of Damascus. For Asa did present Benhadad 1. Reg. 15. with those treasures, when he inuited him to warre vpon Baasha King of Israel. And notwithstanding this composition betweene Ioas and Azael, yet a part of his Armie spoyled the other Prouinces of Iudaea, and slaughtered many principall persons. Lastly, Azael vexed Ioahas the sonne of Iehu, and brought him to that 2. King. 13. v. 7. extremitie, as he left him but fifty horsemen, tenne Chariots, and tenne thousand footemen of all his people. §. III. Of the later Kings, and decay and ouerthrow of their power. AFter Hazael, Benhadad the second, or rather the third of that name, the sonne of Hazael, reigned in Damascus: who fought against Israel, with ill successe: for Ioas King of Israel, the sonne of the vnhappy Io∣achaz, 2. Reg. 13. as he was foretold by Elisha the Prophet, beat Benhadad in three Ioseph. ant. c. seuerall battels: and he lost all those Cities to Israel, which his Father Hazael had taken violently from Ioachaz. After this Benhadad the sonne of Hazael, there succeeded three others of the Ioseph. Ant. l. 7. c. 6. same name, of whom the Stories are lost, onely Nicholaus Damascenus cited by Iose∣phus, makes mention of them: and in one of these Kings times it was that Ieroboam the second, the sonne of Ioas recouered Damascus it selfe, to Iudah saith the Geneua, 2. King. 14. 28. but better in IVNIVS, vt{que} recuperabat Damascum, & Chamatham Iehudae pro Israele; that is, And how be recouered for Israel, Damascus and Chamatha of Iudea; for these Ci∣ties sometimes conquered by Dauid, did of right belong to the Tribe of Iuda. And it is likely that this conquest vpon the Adads was performed: the first of these three Adads then liuing, of whom there is no Story. For when as Iehoas the King of the ten Tribes had thrice ouercome the Syrians in the time of Benhadad the sonne of Hazael, and had recouered the Cities which Hazael had wonne from Israel; and so left his Kingdome to his sonne Ieroboam the second, it seemeth that this without delay, and hauing nothing else left for him to enterprize, instantly followed his fathers good fortune, and inuaded Damascus. , or Rezin, after Iosephus Rases, after Zonar as Raason, the 10. Adad, maketh league with Pekah, or Phacas King of Israel, against Achaz King of Iuda; both carrie away a great number of prisoners. After this they both besiege Achaz in Hierusalem: but in vaine. Then Adad alone inuadeth Elath, and beating out the Iewes, maketh 2. King. 16. 5. it a Colonie of Syrians. Wherefore Achaz brought against Razin, who . 7. tooke him, and beheaded him, and wonne Damascus: with whom ended the line of Ioseph. Ant. l. . c. . the Adads and the Kingdome of Damascus: the Assyrians becomming masters both of that and Israel. These Adads as they reigned in order are thus reckoned. 1 Adadezer the sonne of Rehob. 2 Rezin the sonne of Eliadad, or Razin. 3 Hezion. 4 Tabremmon. 5 Benhadad, who inuaded Baasha. 6 Benhadad the second, taken prisoner by Achab. 7 Hazael, whom Elisha foretold, with teares, of his aduancement; the same who o∣uerthrew Ioram King of Israel, at Ramoth Gilead. And that there was a second Ha∣zael which preceded Benhadad the third, it is not improbable, because that Hazael which tooke Geth, and compounded the warre with , made the Expedition thirty , and perchance more, after the first Hazael which stifled his master , and had slaine Ioram the sonne of Achab King of Israel. For Ioas began to reigne in the 7. yeere of Iehu King of Israel; and after he had reigned 23. yeeres, the Temple was not yet repaired, after which (and how long wee know not) it is said that Ha∣zael tooke Geth, and turned his face towards Ierusalem. It is also some proofe that Hazael which tooke Geth, was not the same with Hazael that murdered Benhadad, be∣cause he could not at that time but be of good yeeres, being as it seemeth the second person in the kingdome, and Commander of Benhadads men of warre. To Ha∣zael, be he the first or second, succeeded 8 Benhadad the third, whom Ioash King of Israel thrise ouerthrew. 9 Resin or Rezin the last, who ioyned with Pekah King of Israel, against , at which time Achaz King of Iuda waged for his defence Teglatphalassar. Now betweene Benhadad the third, and Rezin the last, Nicholaus Damascenus findes three other Kings of the Adads, which make twelue in all. For the rest of the Princes of , which were but reguli, as those of Emath, and Gessur, we finde that Tohu was King of Emath or Chamath in Dauids time, to whom he 2. Sam. 8. 9. sent his sonne Ioram with presents, after Dauids victory against Adadezer. Also Esai 37. speaketh of a King of Emath, but names him not. §. IIII. Of other lesser Kingdomes of the Syrians, which being brought vnder the Assyrians, neuer recouered themselues againe. OF Gessur wee finde two Kings named; to wit, Talmai, and his Father Ammihur. To Talmai, whose daughter Dauid married, it was that Ab∣salon fled, who was his maternall grandfather. Of the Kings of So∣phena or Syria, Soba or Coelosyria, there are two named, Rehob or the Father of Adadezer, and Adadezer himselfe, and it is plaine that af∣ter his death the seat of the Kings of Soba was transferred to Damascus, a Citie better fitting their greatnesse. After Rezin became Lord of both Principalities. And the race of these Kings of Syria, (which became so potent, and ioyned Soba, Da∣mascus, Emath, and the Desart of Arabia with other Prouinces into one, vnder Rezin the second of the Adads ) as it began with Dauid, so it ended at once with the King∣dome of Israel. For Ahaz King of Iuda waged the Assyrian Teglatphalassar against Pekah King of Israel, and against Rezin the last King of Damascus: which Teglath first inuaded Damascena, and the region of Soba, and tooke Damascus it selfe, and did put to death Rezin the last, carrying the inhabitants captiue. This was the second time that the Assyrians attempted Israel. For first, Phul Belochus entred the borders there∣of ( Menahem gouerning Israel ) who stopt the enterprize of Phul with a thousand talents of siluer: for this Phul Belochus, whose pedigree wee will examine hereafter, being scarce warme as yet in his seate at Babylon, which , with the helpe of his companion Arbaces, had wrested from Sardanapalus: hauing besides this King of Sy∣ria in his way, who seemed to be a great and strong Prince, was content to take the composition of a thousand talents of the King of Israel for that present time. But his sonne Teglath following the purpose of his Father Belochus, and finding so excel∣lent an occasion, as the warre begun betweene Israel and Iuda, Pekah commaun∣ding in the one, and Achaz in the other, his neighbour Rezin being also wrapt in that warre, and wasted in strength thereby, did willingly accept the offer of Achaz King of Iuda, his imprest and entertainement. So, first attempting Damascus, which lay in his path towards Israel, hee carried it (as is before remembred) and then with great ease possest himselfe of the Cities of Nephthalim; leading with him a great part of the people captiue. And his sonne Salmanassar, whom Ptolomie calleth , after the reuolt of Hosea, forced Samaria: and rent that Kingdome asunder. So as the line and race of Ninus in Sardanapalus, whom Belochus supplanted; the race and Monarchie of the Syrian in Rezin: whom Teglath slaughtered; the Kingdome of Israel in Hosea, whom Salmanassar ouerturned; happened about a time: that of Ninus in the dayes of Belochus, and the other two in the dayes of Teglatphalassar, and Salmanassar his sonne. For Sardanapalus perished, Osia ruling Iuda; and the other two Kingdomes were dissolued, Achaz yet liuing. Lastly, the Kingdome of Iuda itselfe, being attempted by , the sonne of Salmanassar in vaine, and preserued for the time by God miraculously, was at length vtterly ouerturned. Hierusalem and the Temple burnt 132. yeeres after the captiuitie of Israel, and Samaria: the destruction of Israel being in the ninth yeere of Hosea: that of Iuda in the of Zedechia. Now the Emperours of Assyria and Babylon held also the Kingdome of Syria, from the eight yeere of Salmanassar, to the last of Baltassar, whom calleth Labynitus: in all about 200. yeeres. After these the Persians from Cyrus to Darius their last King, held Syria about 200. yeeres. Then Alexander Maccdon tooke this among other Prouinces of the Persian Em∣pire, and his successours the Seleucidae reigned therein, till it became subiect vnto the power of the Romanes, from whom it was wrested long after by the Saracens, and re∣maineth now in possession of the Turke, as shall bee shewed in due place. Thus much of the nations bordering vpon the Israelites, with whom they had most to doe both in warre and peace, being the only people, whose History in those ancient times carried an assured face of trueth. CHAP. XII. Of the Tribe of BENIAMIN, and of Hierusalem. §. I. Of diuers memorable places in the Tribe of Beniamin, whereof , Gilgal, Mitspa, Bethel, Rama, Gobah and Gibha. OF the Tribe of Beniamin, the twelfth and yongest sonne of Iacob, whom hee had by Rachel, there were mustred at Mount Sinai 35000. able bodies: all which perishing in the Desarts, there entred the ho∣ly Land of their Issues 45600. fit to Armes: and these had their Territory on this side Iordan, be∣tweene Iuda and Ephraim: The Cities within this Tribe Iordan, are Lod, , and Ono: of which Lod and Ono were built by Shemed a Beniamite: 1. . 8. 12. they were all three reinhabited with Beniamites, after the returne out of Captiuitie, as is mentioned, Nehem. 11. 35. and Esd. 2. 35. where Adrichomius reading Lod, Hadid, Ono, makes besides Ha∣did in Nehemia, a Citie called Lodhadid: This Hadid or Chadid was rebuilt by Simon Macc. 12. 38. Macchabaeus. Samarim or Tsemaraim, named of Tsemary one of the sonnes of Canaan, was ano∣ther of their Cities; and further into the Land standeth lericho, one of the Topar∣chies, and the last of Iuda; seated in a most fruitfull valley, adorned with many palme 1. Reg. 17. 36. trees: and therefore elsewhere called the citie of Palmes. From the time of IOSVA, Ios. 6. 29. who vtterly destroyed it, it lay waste vntill the time of Achab: in whose dayes Chel of Bethel laid the new foundation of it, in the losse of Abiram his eldest sonne, and built the gates of it in the losse of his youngest sonne Segub: according to the curse of IOSVA: in which and other respects, Hos. 12. 14. calleth IOSVA a Prophet. In after-times it was destroyed by , and rebuilt by Adrian. To the Southeast of Iericho stood 1. Chron. 6. 60. This Halmon is called , whence make a new Citie , as if this Tribe had gi∣uen fiue Cities to the . Halmon of the Leuites, of which Ios. 21. 18. To the South Betharaba, of which Ios. c. 15. and c. 18. Then that Gilgal of which there is so much mention in the Scripture, where Iosua first ate of the fruits of the land, cir∣cumcised all those borne in the Desarts, and celebrated the Passeouer. The reason of the name, or rather a memorable application of the Etymologie of this name (for it seemes by the place, Deut. 11. 30. that the name was knowne be∣fore the comming of the Israclites into Canaan ) is noted Ios. 5. 9. Ob probri Aegyptiaci, because their fore-skinnes (the people beeing there circumcised) were tumbled downe the Hill: which from thence was called Collis praeputiorum. This Gilgal was also called Geliloth, as appeares by comparing the places, Ios. 15. 7. and 18. 17. for it was in the borders of Iordan, of which Ios. 22. 13. and Geliloth signifieth borders. . 11. 30. It stood (though in some distance) directly Eastward, ouer against the two Hills Garizim and Hebal: vpon the one of which the blessings, and on the other the cursings were to be read to the people, both beeing the of Ephraim. Further, for the situation of this Gilgal, it is to be noted, that both it, and Mitspa of Beniamin (of which also wee reade in the Scripture) were seated about the midst of the length of the land of Canaan: for which reason 1. Sam. 7. 15. Samuel chose these two places, to either of which hee came yeerely to giue iudgement to the Israelites; of which two, Gilgal (as is said) was neere Iordan on the side of this Tribe; and Mitspa neere the West Sea, towards the land of the Philistims. The third place, which is named with these two, whither also Samuel vsed yeerely to come, is Iunius in this place, for Be∣thel reads Do∣mum Dei fortis, and interprets it, Kiriath-icha∣rim where the Arke abode. For (saith he) by the Law, Exod. 23. 17. the greatest mee∣tings in their annuall feasts were to be, where the Arke was, but this place doth not speake of , but of iu∣diclall mee∣tings: and be∣sids the Priests did vse to bring the Arke to their great meetings wheresoeuer they were, as appeares 1. Sam. 12. v. 11. & c. 14. v. 18. nei∣ther is it easie to expound Bethel other∣wise then for the Citie Be∣thel: though Iunius also take it for the place where the Arke was, 1. Sam. 10. 3. Bethel: which also was seated in this Tribe of Beniamin. But to re∣turne to Gilgal which was the first place, where the Arke resided, after they past ouer Iordan (from whence it was carried to Silo, and thence to Kiriath-ieharim, & at length to Hierusalem ) here in Gilgal it was that Iosua pitched vp the twelue stones, which were taken out of the channell of Iordan, when it was drie, that the Israelites might passe ouer it: by which Storie, as it is set downe Ios. 4. it appeares, that the same day that they passed ouer Iordan; they lodged at Gilgal. At the same Gilgal, to omit ma∣ny other memorable things, it was that Samuel hewed Agag the King of the Amale∣kites in pieces. And as for Mitspa, whither also Samuel came yeerely to giue Iudge∣ment, there also were often the greatest meetings held: as that for the reuenge of the Leuites wife against Gibha, and the Beniamites, Iud. 20. 1. and another against the Phili∣stims, 1. Sam. 7. 12. Thither also Iudas Maccabaeus gathered the Iewes, (when was possest by the Heathen ) as it is 1. Macc. 3. 47. in which place this reason of their meeting is added; Quia locus Orationifuerat Mitspaeanteà Israeli. Touching this Mitspa, to auoid confusion, it is to bee remembred, that the Scriptures mention foure places of this name: Mitspa of Iuda, of which Ios. 15. 38. It was no o∣ther than this of , of which Ios. 11. 8. as ap∣peares by that which is added Versus orietem, for Iosua notes the three quar∣ters North, West, and East, to which hee followed the Canaanites, thogh Adricho∣mius & others out of this place imagine a Mitspa or Maspba (as write it) in the Tribe of . Mitspa of Gilead, of which we haue spoken already in the Tribe of Gad: Mitspa of the Moabites, where Dauid for a while held himselfe, commending his parents to the King of Moab, 1. Sam. 22. 3. and lastly, this chiefe Mitspa of the Beniamites. And as in this place the chiefe meetings were held both before Hierusalem was recouered from the Iebusites, and also in the time of the Macchabees (as we haue said) when Hierusalem was held by the wicked vnder Antiochus, so also in the time of Hieremie, after the destruction of the Temple by the Chaldeys, whom Nabuchodonosor left in Iewry, as Gouer∣nour ouer those that were left in the land, held his abiding in this place: vntill (to the great hurt of the Iewes ) he was slaine by the treason of Ismael, one of the royall bloud of Iuda, as it is Hierem 14. Neere vnto this Mitspa, the 1. Sam. 7. 11. Ios. 16. 1. Scripture mentioneth Beth-car, after called , that is, the Stone of helpe: where Samuel pitched vp the pillar or Stone, for a Trophy against the Philistims. Touching Bethel which (as it seemes) was the third place where Samuel held his chiefe meetings for the ministring of Iustice, that it was anciently called Luz, and how it was taken by the issue of Ioseph (though it belonged to the portion of Ben∣iamin, as it is Nehem. 11. 31. and Ios. 18. 22.) and how another Citie called Luz * neere adioyning to it, was built by the man of the Citie which shewed the entrance to the Spies, as it is Iudg. 1. and of the occasion of the name from Iacobs vision: and how Ieroboam, by erecting one of his calues heere, of Bethel (which signifieth the house of God) made it Borrowing the name a neighbour towne in the confines of the Kingdomes of Iuda and Israel betweene Hai and Bethel. Ios. 7. 2. and 18. 12. Beth-auen, that is, the house of Vanitie, Hos. 4. 15. and 10. 5. as also o∣ther memorable things of this place, they are so well knowne, out of the Histories of the Scripture, that we may well passe them ouer. The territorie of Bethel, which at the first belonged to the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes, from the time of the great victorie of Abia against Ieroboam (of which 2. Chr. 13.) was taken from them, and adioyned to the Kingdome of Iuda: and so it con∣tinued, as appeares by the Storie of : which performed the Prophecies against the altar of Bethel, 2. Reg. 23. whence those coastes 1. Macc. 11. 34. are called Aphae∣rema, which Greeke word signifieth as much as, A thing taken away, to wit, from the tenne Tribes. It was one of the three Seigniories or Praesectures which in his Epistle mentioneth, as added by him to the Dition of the Iewes, out of the Sa∣maritan Country. A part of it, as appeares 2. Chron. 13. 19. was Hephrauin, which Ios. 18. 23. is called Hophram, belonging to this Tribe of . Not farre from this Bethel, in this Tribe, we finde three other Cities often men∣tioned in the Scriptures, Rama, Gibha, and Gebah. Of the name Rama, See c. 9. §. 1. it is noted alreadie, in the description of Ephraim, that there were many townes so called, because of their high situation. But whereas they finde out Rama in the Tribe of Iuda (as it seemes because Mat. 2. it appeares that it bordered Bethlehem ) and also out of Brochard and Breidenbach make Silo to haue beene called Rama, and finde yet another Rama in Zabulon; these three haue no warrant in the Scripture. Of Rama in the Tribe of Asser, as it seemes, wee haue testimonie Ios. 19. 29. and of another in Nephthalim, Ios. 19. 36. of a third Rama, where Samuel dwelt in Mount Ephraim 1. Sam. 25. 1. which more often is called Of this Ra∣matha I vnder∣stand the place 1. Macc. 11. 34. where it is na∣med for one of the three Praefectures which Demetri∣us yeelds to the Iewes out of the country of Samaria, this lying toward the East to : and Lyd∣da toward the West: and (of which euen now we spake) lying in the midst between the two other. A sixt Rama it seemes there was in the Tribe of Sime∣on toward the South, which Ios. 19. 8. is cal∣led Rama of the South, and otherwise Ba∣halath-beer. Ramatha, and 1. Sam. 1. 1. Ramathaim Tsophim: for which the Septuagint haue Aramathaim-sophim, taking the Article affixed in the be∣ginning, for a part of the word, whence they thinke Ioseph of Matt. 27. 57. was denominated. Of a fourth Rama we reade 2. Reg. 8. 29. which is Ramoth in Gilehad. The first, which is most often mentioned, is Rama of , seated as wee said, neere Bethel the vttermost South-border of the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes: for which cause Baasha in the time of Asa King of Iuda, fortified it, to hinder those that did flie from him to Asa. Of this Rama or Ramatha I should rather thinke Ioseph was, that buried Christ: because it was neerer to Hierusalem, and after the captiuitie belonged to , as it appeares Esd. 2. 26. where in that it is ioyned with Gebah, it is plaine that he speaketh of that Rama with whose stones (after Baasha had ceased to build it) Asa (as it is 1. Reg. 25. 22.) built Gebah adioyning to it: both being in Beniamin. And as Rama was the South-border of the tenne Tribes, so was Gebah the North-border of the Kingdome of Iuda: whence 2. Reg. 23. 8. wee reade that Iosiah through all his King∣dome, euen from , which was the North-border, to Beer-sheba which was the South-border, destroyed the places of Idolatry. The third Citie Gibha which was the Citie of Saul (the wickednesse of which Citie in the time of the Iudges had almost vtterly rooted out this Tribe) Adricho∣mius confounds with Gebah, making one of two (as they are euidently distinguished Esai. 10. 27. of which word Gibha in con∣struction, that is, Gouerning a genitiue case is : whence the Vulgar out of the Septuaginst Ios. 24. 33 Phi∣nees. for which Iunius hath Col∣lis Phincasi (for this word is oft times an Ap pellatiue signi∣fying a Hill) but taking notice of this, builds his Citie Gaba∣ath vpon this Text & placeth it in Beniamin, when as the words adioy∣ned, note that this Hill was in the Mountains of Ephraim. Gibba, in another forme Gibbath, he imagineth Gabaath an∣other Citie in this Tribe, making two of one. The vicinitie of this citie also to Rama of Beniamin, appears Iud. 19. 13. where the Leuite with his wife not able to reach to Ra∣ma, tooke vp his lodging at Gibha. By that place of 1. Sa. 22. 6. it seemes that there was in this Gibha some towre or Citadell called Rama: where Iunius reades in excelso, for in Rama: but it may be that the name of the Kings place in this citie, was Rama: as it seemes that in Rama of Samuel, the name of the chiefe place where Samuel with the Colledge of Prophets abode, was Naioth. The great Citie of Hai ouerthrowne by Ios. which Ios. 7. 2. is placed neere Beth-auen vpon the East of Bethel, was in this Tribe, as is proued Nehe. 7. 10. 30. though it be not named by . 18. for it was burned by him and laid desolate, as it is Ios. 8. 28. In solitudinem in ; Another Citie of chiefe note reckoned Ios. 18. 25. in this Tribe was Gibhon, the chiefe Citie of the : whose cunning to bind the Israelites by oath to saue their liues, is set downe Ios. 9. whence they were reckoned among the The word or Nethinaei, is as much as dati (as it were a Deo dati ) as Iunius ex∣pounds it , it is vsed, 1. chr. 9. 2. and in Esdras and Nebemias of∣ten. Nethinaei or Proselites: and were bound to certaine publique seruices in the house of God: which oath of sa∣uing these Gibeonites broken in part after by Saul, was by God punished by a famine 2. Sam. 21. 1. This Gibeon or Gibhon with Almon and Iebah (of both which wee haue spoken) and with Hanothoth the natall place of Hieremie the Prophet, were said Ios. 21. 28. to be giuen to the Leuites by the Beniamites. Neere to this Hanothoth was Nob, as appeares. 1. Reg. 2 26. where the Priest, which was of Nob before it was de∣stroyed by Saul, is sent to his grounds at Hanothoth: It is reckoned in the Tribe of Beniamin, Nehem. 9. 31. and though in the time of Saul the residing place of the Arke was at Kiriath-icarim: yet by the lamentable tragedie of bloudshed, which Saul raised in this place (as it is set downe 1. Sam. 21. and 22.) in the iudgement of Iu∣nius, it is proued that the Tabernacle was there for a time. Micmas also in this Tribe Nehem. 9. 31. was a place of fame, of which Esai. 10. 28. where also he nameth Gallim, and Migrom in this Tribe. In Micmas Saul had his Campe 1. Sam. 13. 2. (when he left Gibha to Ionathan ) and there also was Ionathan Macchabaeus his aboad. 1. Macc 9. 73. Of Giscala in Galilee Iosephus makes often men∣tion, but of any heere in Beniamin, which they make the natall place of S. Paul, whence (they say) when it was taken by the Romans, hee sailed with his parents to Tharsis, of this I finde no good warrant. Other places of lesse importance , and come to the Citie of Hierusalem, and the Princes and Gouernours of this Citie: A great part whereof was in the Tribe of Beniamin, whence Ios. 18. 28. it is named among the Cities of Beniamin. §. II. Of diuers memorable things concerning Hierusalem. AT what time Hierusalem was built (which afterward became the Prin∣cesse of all Cities) it doth not appeare. Some there are who imagine that Melchisedec was the founder thereof in Abrahams time. But See in the hither halfe of Manasse. ac∣cording to others, that Citie out of which Melchisedec incountred Abraham (in his returne from the ouerthrow of the and Per∣sian Kings or Captaines, when Lot was made prisoner) standeth by the riuer of Ior∣dan, in the halfe Tribe of Manasse bordering Zabulon, which was also called Salem, and by the Greekes Solima. Hierusalem (whensoeuer or by whomsoeuer built) was a principall Citie in Iosua his time: yet not so renowned as Hazor the Metropolis (in those dayes and before) of all the Canaanites. (whom Iosua slew) was then King of Hierusalem. That it was belonging to the Iebusites it is manifest: for how long soeuer they held it before Moses time, they were Masters and Lords thereof almost 400. yeeres after him: till Dauid wanne it: and therefore in all likelihood, it was by the (the children of Icbusaeus the sonne of Canaan ) built; after whom it was called Iebus. And so much did that Nation relie on the strength of the place, as when Dauid at∣tempted 2. Sam. 5. v. 6. it, they bragged that their lame, and blinde, and impotent people should defend it. Dauid, after he had by Gods assistance possest it, and turned out the Iebusites, gaue it an exceeding great increase of circuit: strengthened it with a or Castle: and beautified it with many Palaces, and other buildings: changing the name from Iebussalem, the Citie of the Iebusites, to Hierusalem, which the Greekes call Hierosolima. After Dauids time Salomon amplified, beautified and strengthened it exceedingly. For besides the worke of the Temple, which was no lesse admirable than renowned cont. App. l. 1 Strag. geog. l. 16. among all Nations, the Palaces, gates, and walles, could not any where in the world bee exampled: and besides that it had 150000. inhabitants, the women and chil∣dren not accounted. The ditch had 60. foote of depth, cut out of the very rocke: and 250. foote of breadth: whereof the like hath seldome beene heard of, either since or before. After the death of Salomon, and that the Kingdome of the Iewes was cut asunder, Shishac King of Aegypt, and his , hauing bred vp for that purpose, Adad 2. Chron. 12. the , and Ieroboam, Salomons seruant; and both married to Aegyptians: the 2. King. 14. State by the one disturbed, by the other broken: Sishac first inuaded the Territorie of Iuda, entred Hierusalem, and sack it, and became Master not onely of the riches of Salomon, but of all those spoiles which Dauid had gotten from Adadezer, Tohu, the Ammonites, and other Nations. It was againe sackt and a part of the wall throwne downe by Ioas King of Israel; while Amasia the King thereof go∣uerned 2. King. 16. Iuda. Not long after Achaz the fifteenth King of Iuda impouerished the Temple, and presented Teglatphalassar with the treasures thereof. And Manasse the sonne of 1. Chron. 5. 26. Ezekiah, the sonne of Achaz, by the vaunts made by Ezekiah, to the Embassadors 2. King. 25. of Merodach, lost the remaine, and the very bottome of their treasures. It was againe spoiled by the Babylonians, then reigning. But this vngratefull, Idolatrous, and rebellious Nation, taking no warning by these Gods gentle corrections and afflicti∣ons, but persisting in all kinde of impietie, filling the Citie euen to the mouth with 2. King. . innocent bloud, God raised vp that great Babylonian King Nabuchodonosor, as his 2. Par. 18. scourge and reuenger, who making this glorious Citie and Temple with all the Pa∣laces therein, and the walles and towers which imbraced them, euen and with the dust, carried away the spoiles with the Princes and people, and crusht them with the heauie yoake of bondage and seruitude full 70. yeeres, insomuch as Sion Mich. 3. Hicr. 25. 26. 29. was not onely become as a torne and plowed-vp field, Hierusalem a heape of stone, and rubble, the mountaine of the Temple as a groue, or wood of thornes and bri∣ers, but (as Hierome speaketh) Euen the birds of the ayre scorned to flie ouer it, or the beasts to tread on that defiled soile. Then 70. yeeres being expired, according to the Prophecie of Daniel, and the Iewes Hier. to 3. trad. . by the grace of Cyrus returned: the Temple was againe built, though with inter∣ruption and difficultie enough: and the Citie meanely inhabited, and without walls or other defences, for some 60. and odde yeeres, till by the fauour of Ar∣taxerxes rebuilt them. Then againe was the Temple and Citie spoiled by Bagoses, Nehem. 12. 34. &c. or Vagoses, the Lieutenant of Artaxerxes: after by The first of the Egyptian Kings after A∣lexander Mace∣don, who dis∣sembling his Religion, came vp to Hierusa∣lem to offer . Ios. 12. ant. 1. Ptolomaeus the first; then by Antiochus Epiphanes: and againe by Apollonius his Lieutenant. By Pompey it was taken long after, but not destroyed, nor robbed, though Crassus in his Parthian expe∣dition tooke as much as he could of that which Pompey spared. But the damages which it sustained by the violence of Tyrants, were commonly recompensed by the industrie or of good Princes, the voluntary contribution of the people, and the liberalitie of strangers. Before the captiuitie, the people of the land through the exhortation of godly Kings, made many and large offerings to repaire the Temple of Salomon. The wrong done by Ptolomaeus Lagi to the second Temple, was required by the bountie of his sonne Ptolomaeus Philadel∣phus. The mischiefe wrought by Antiochus Epiphanes and his followers, was amen∣ded partly by the great Offerings which were sent to Hierusalem out of other Nati∣ons. Finally all the losses, which either the Citie or Temple had endured, might well M. T. C. pro Cylla. seeme forgotten in the reigne of Herod that vsurping and wicked, but magnificent King, who amplified the Citie, new built the Temple, and with many sumptuous workes did so adorne them, that hee left them farre more stately and glorious than they had beene in the dayes of Salomon. §. III. Of the destruction of Ierusalem by the Romans. IN this flourishing estate, it was at the comming of our Christ Ie∣sus: and after his death and ascension, it so continued about 40. yeeres. But then did Titus the Roman, being stirred vp, by God, to be the re∣uenger of Christ his death; and to punish the Iewes sinfull ingratitude, incompasse it with the Roman armie, and became Lord thereof. Hee began the siege at such time as the Iewes, from all parts, were come vp to the cele∣bration of the Passeouer: so as the Citie was then filled with many hundreds of thou∣sands of all sorts; and no manner of prouision or store for any such multitudes. An extreme famine, with the ciuill dissension, opprest them within the walles; a for∣cible enemie assailed them without. The Idumaeans also, who lay in wait for the de∣struction of the Iewes Kingdome, thrust themselues into the Citie, of purpose to be∣tray it: who also burnt the Temple, when tooke it. And to be short, there perished of all sorts, from the first besieging to the consummation of the vi∣ctoric, eleuen hundred thousand soules: and the Citie was so beaten downe, and de∣molished, Esd. 1. c. 4. v. 45. as those which came afterward to see the desolation thereof, could hard∣ly beleeue that there had beene any such place or habitation. Onely the three He∣rodian towres (workes most magnificent, and ouertopping the rest) were spared, as∣well for lodgings for the Roman garrisons, as that thereby their victorie might bee the more notorious and famous: for by those buildings of strength and State re∣maining, after-ages might iudge what the rest were; and their honour be the greater and more shining that thereouer became victorious. After this; such Iewes as were scattered heere and there in Iudaea, and other Prouin∣ces, beganne againe to inhabite some part of the Citie; and by degrees to rebuild it, and strengthen it as they could, being then at pcace, and tributaries to the Roman State: but after 65. yeeres, when they againe offered to reuolt, and rebell, Aelius Adrianus the Emperour slaughtered many thousands of them, and ouerturned those three Herodian Towres, with all the rest, making it good which Christ himselfe had foretold; That there should not stand one stone vpon another, of that vngratefull Citie. Afterward, when his furie was appeased, and the Prophecie accomplished, he tooke one part without the wall, wherein stood Mount , and the Sepulchre of Christ, and exciuding of the rest the greatest portion, hee againe made it a Citie of great ca∣pacitie, and called it after his owne name, Aelia Capitolia. In the gate toward , he caused a Sowe to be cut in marble, and set in the front thereof, which he did in despight of the Iewes Nation: making an Edict, that they should not from euer enter into the Citie, neither should they dare so much as to behold it from any other high place ouertopping it. But the Christian Religion flourishing in Palaestina, it was inhabited at length, by all Gul. Tir. Bel. Sa. l. 14. c. 12. Nations, and especially by Christians; and so it continued 500. yeeres. It was afterward in the 636. yeere after Christ, taken by the Aegyptian Saracens, Onuphrius Cbro. who held it 400 and odde yeeres. In the yeere 1099 it was regained by Godfrey of Buillon, by assault, with an ex∣ceeding slaughter of the Saracens, which Godfrey, when hee was elected King there∣of, refused to be crowned with a Crowne of gold, because Christ, for whom hee G. Tir. l. 8. c. 5. 18. 19. &c. fought, was therein crowned with thornes. After this recouery, it remained vnder the successours of Godfrey 88. yeeres: till in the yeere 1197. it was regained by Sa∣ladine of Aegypt: and lastly, in the yeere 1517. in the time of , the Turkes cast out the Aegyptians, who now hold it, and call it Cuzumbarec, or the Holy Citie. Neither was it Ierusalem alone that hath so oftentimes beene beaten downe and made desolate, but all the great Cities of the world haue with their inhabitants, in seuerall times and ages, suffered the same shipwracke. And it hath beene Gods iust will, to the end others might take warning, if they would, not onely to punish the impietie of men, by famine, by the sword, by fire, and by slauerie; but hee hath re∣uenged himselfe of the very places they possest; of the walls and buildings, yea of the soyle and the beasts that fedde thereon. For, euen that land, sometime called holy, hath in effect, lost all her fertilitie, and fruitfulnesse; witnesse the many hundreds of thousands which it fedde in the dayes of the Kings of Iuda and Israel; it being at this time all ouer, in effect, exceeding stony and barraine. It also pleased God, not onely to consume with fire from heauen, the Cities of the Sodomites; but the very soilc it selfe hath felt, and doth feele the hand of God to this day. God would not spare the beast that belonged to Amalek, no not any small number of them to be sacrificed to himselfe, neither was it enough that Achan himselfe was stoned, but that his moueables were also consumed and brought to ashes. §. IIII. Of the vaine and malicious reports of Heathen writers, touching the ancient Iewes. OF the originall of the Iewes, prophane writers haue concciued diuers∣ly and iniuriously. Quintilian speakes infamously of them; and of their leader; who (saith he) gathered together a pernitious Nation. Diodore and make them Aegyptians. Others affirme that while Isis gouerned Aegypt, the people were so increased, as Ierosolymus, and Iudas ledde thence a great multitude of that Nation, with whom they planted the neighbour Regions; which might be meant by Moses and Aaron: for the name of Moses was accidentall, because hee was taken vp and saued out of the waters. But Iustine, of all other most malicious, doth deriue the Iewes from the Syrian Kings; of Justin. l. 36. whom, Damascus, saith hee, was the first: and to him succeeded Abraham, Moses, and Israel. He againe supposeth (somewhat contrary to himselfe) that Israel had tenne sonnes, among whom hee diuided the land of Iuda; so called of Iudas his el∣dest, who had the greatest portion. The yongest of the sonnes of Israel hee calleth Ioseph: who being brought vp in Aegypt, became learned in magicall Arts, and in the interpretations of Dreames, and signes prodigious, and this Ioseph (saith hee) was father to Moses: who with the rest, by reason of their foule diseases, and lest they should infect others, were banished Aegypt. Further, hee telleth how these men thus banished, when in the Desarts they suffered extreme thirst and famine, and therein found reliefe the seuenth day, for this cause euer after obserued the se∣uenth day, and kept it Holy; making it a Law among themselues, which afterward became a branch of their Religion. Hee addeth also that they might not marrie out of their owne Tribes, left discouering their vncleannesse, they might also bee expelled by other Nations, as they were by the Aegyptians. These and like fables hath Iustine. Cornelius Tacitus doth as belie them, in affirming, That in the inmost Ora∣torie of their Temple, they had the golden head of an Asse, which they adored. But herein Tacitus forgetteth himselfe, hauing in the fift booke of his owne Histo∣rie truely confessed of the Iewes, that they worshipped one onely God: and thought it most prophane to represent the Deitic by any materiall figure, by the shape of a man, or any other creature; and they had therefore in their Temples, no Image or representation, no not so much as in any Citie by them inhabited. Somewhat like this hath Alexander Polyhistor, in Stephanus; who also makes Iudas with , the first parents of the Iewes. Iolaus drawes them from , whose parents were Sparton and Thebis; Cited by in . whence it came that the Spartans or kindred of the He∣brewes: but they did it as descended of Abraham, saith Iosephus. Some of these re∣ports seeme to haue been gathered out of diuine letters; though wrested and , according to the custome of the Heathen. For so haue they and altred the Storie of the Creation, of Paradise, of the Floud; and giuen new names to the children of Adam in the first age: to Noah and his sonnes, in the : and so to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, Moses, and the rest of the fathers, and leaders of the He∣brewes: all which fainings, as touching the Iewes and their originals, Iosephus against Tert. in . Appion, and Tertullian haue sufficiently answered. For that the Hebrewes were the Children of Arphaxad and Heber, no man doubteth: and so originally, taking name either of Heber, the sonne of Sale, or else (saith Montanus ) of wandring, as is before remembred. And therefore doth Stephanus, the Grammarian, deriue the Hebrewes or , from Abrabon; hauing mistaken the name of Abra∣ham, . f. 63. who was the sonne of Heber, in the sixt descent. Their ancient names were first changed by the two grand-children of Abram: for after Iacob, otherwise Isra∣el, the chiefe part were called Israel, another part after Esau or Edom, Edomites; at length the remnant of Iacob, being most of the Tribe of Iuda, honoured the name of Iudas, the sonne of Iacob, and became or Iewes: as also for a time in the name of Ephraim the sonne of Ioseph, the chiefe of the Patriarches of the ten Tribes; the rest of the tenne Tribes were comprehended: but were first rooted out when the Kingdome of Israel fell. The Iudaeans continued their names, though they suf∣fered the same seruitnde not long after, vnder . The gouernement which this Nation vnder-went, was first paternall: which continued till they serued the . They were secondly ruled by their Captaines and leaders, Moses and Iosua, by a policie Diuine. Thirdly, they subiected themselues to Iudges. Fourthly, they desired a King, and had Saul for the first: Of whom and his successours, before wee intreate, wee are first to speake of their Gouern∣ment vnder Iudges, after the death of Iosua: with somewhat of the things of Fame in other Nations about these times. CHAP. XIII. Of the memorable things that happened in the world, from the death of IOSVA to the Warre of Troy: which was about the time of IEPHTHA. §. I. Of the inter-regnum after IOSVA'S death: and of OTHONIEL. WHEN Iosua was now dead, who with the ad∣uice of the 70. Elders, and the high Priest, held authoritie ouer the people, and ordered that Common-weale: It pleased God to direct the Tribe of Iuda (in whom the Kingdome was afterward established) to vndertake the Warre against the Canaanites, ouer whom (with Gods fauour, and the assistance of Simeon ) they be∣came victorious. In the first attempt which they made, they not only slew ten thousand, but made Adoni∣bezek prisoner: the greatest and cruellest Com∣mander, both of the and Perizites. This tyrants crueltie as else-where hath been signified, they returned in the same kinde vpon his owne head: and so by the torments which hee now in his person (before no otherwise knowne vnto him but by his malicious imagination) made him confesse and acknowledge Gods iudgement against himselfe. The tribes of Iuda and Simeon did also master and possesse during this inter∣regnum (or as some thinke, before the death of Iosua ) the Cities of Azotus, Askalon, Ekron and Hierusalem, which they burnt, and the Iebusites afterward recdified. They tooke also the Cities of Hebron, Debir, or Kiriathsepher, and Zephath, after∣wards Horma. And although it bee not set downe in expresse words that any one person commanded in chiefe ouer the people, as Moses and Iosua did: yet it seemeth that Caleb was of greatest authoritie among them: and that hee with the aduice of Phinees directed and ordered their warres. For if any thinke that they proceeded without a chiefe, the good successe which followed their vndertakings witnesseth the contrarie. And it was Caleb while Iosua , as appeares Ios. 10. 39. that propounded the attempt of Debir, to the rest of the Captaines: for the perfor∣mance of which enterprise, he promised his Daughter Achsah: which hee performed to his yonger brother after the conquest: whose behauiour in that seruice was such, as (next vnto the ordinance of God) it gaue him the greatest reputation among them, and may be esteemed the second cause of his preferment and election for their first Iudge soone after. But while those of Iuda made warre with their bor∣derers, from whom they onely the mountainous Countries (for they could not driue out the inhabitants of the Valleys, because they had Chariots of yron ) . 1. 19. The rest of the Tribes sought also to enlarge and establish their owne Territories: in which warre they laboured with variable successe: for as the house of Ioseph re∣couered Bethel, or Luz, from the Hittites, so did the Amorites recouer from Dan all . 1. 25. the plaine Countries, and forst them to saue themselues in the Mountaines. And . 1. 32. now the vnmindfull of Gods benefits, and how often he had miraculously a-fore-time defended them, and made them victorious ouer their enemies (the El∣ders being also consumed, who better aduised them in the Inter-regnum ) did not on∣ly ioyne themselues in marriage with the Heathen Nations: but (that which was more detestable) they serued the Idols of Baal, and , with other the dead gods of the and Amorites. And therefore did the Lord God whom they had prouoked with their Idolatrie, deliuer them into the handes of the of Mesopotamia: whom Chushan Rishathaim at that time commanded. But after they had felt the smart of Gods displeasure against them eight yeeres, it pleased him to haue compassion on his people, and to raise vp Othoniel to bee their Iudge and Iud. 3. 10. Leader: who by God assisted, deliuered his brethren from oppression: and inforst the Aramites to returne into their owne Desarts, and into Mesopotamia adioyning, af∣ter which the Israelites had peace fourtie yeeres, during all the time of go∣uernment. 2608. This Othoniel is thought by Tostatus to haue been the yonger brother 2648. of Caleb, for as much as in the booke of Iudges he is twice called Othoniel the Sonne of Cenaz, Calebs yonger brother. Others doe rather interpret those wordes ( yonger brother) as if they signified the of his kinred. Indeed it is not like∣ly, that Calebs Daughter should marrie with her owne Vncle; yet it followes not therefore that Othoniel should haue beene the meanest of the kinred. Wherefore we may better thinke that he was the Nephew of Caleb, (as some learned men ex∣pound it) and as the very words of Scripture seeme to enforce. For Caleb was the sonne of Iephunneth, and Othoniel the sonne of Cenas, Calebs yonger brother; that is, he was not brother to Caleb, but his yonger brothers sonne; to whom it was not one∣ly lawfull, but commendable to marrie with his Cousin German Calebs daughter. How long it was from the death of Iosuah to the gouernment of Othoniel, it can∣not be found: but it seemes to haue been no short time. For many Warres were made in that space against the people of the Land. was then taken (as is thought) by the Danites; and the best writers are of opinion, that betweene the times of Iosua and that ciuill warre brake out betweene the and the rest of Israel, for the forcing to death of the Leuites wife. For it is written that in Iud. 17. & 18. & 19. those dayes there was no King in Israel, but euery man did that which was good in his owne eyes. And as Iuda led the people against the Canaanites during the Inter∣regnum, so was hee commanded to doe against Beniamin, euen by the Lord God, whose direction they craued, as wanting a Iudge to appoint what should bee done, which sheweth it to haue been when Iosuah was dead, and before the gouernment of Otheniel, especially considering, that all other times wherein they wanted Gouer∣nours, were spent vnder such oppression of strangers, as would haue giuen them no leaue to haue attended such a ciuill Warre, if their power had been as great, as it was in the menaging of this action, wherein they so weakned the body of their e∣state, by effusion of bloud, that in many ages they could not bring into the field such numbers as formerly they had mustered against their bordering enemies. §. II. Of the memorable things of this Age in other Nations: and of the difficultie in the computation of times. THere liued in this Age of Othoniel, Pandion or Pandareus, according to Homer, the King of Athens: who beganne to rule in the twentieth yeere of Othoniel, and gouerned fortie yeeres. Hee was Father to Eri∣ctheus: his Daughters were and , so greatly men∣tioned in fables. Cadmus also about this time obtained Thebes: of whose Daughter Semele was borne Dionysius, or Liber vnder whome Linus the Musician liued. In his time also the Cities of , Paphus, and Tharsus, were built. Ida and Dactylus flourished in this age, who are said to haue found out the vse of iron: but Genesis hath taught vs the contrary, and that long before Gen. 4. 22. wrought cunningly both in iron and brasse. Not long after this time, Amphton and Whence came the name of Vulcan by of the two first let∣ters. Zethus gouerned Thebes: whom diuers Chronologers finde in Ehuds time. But S. Au∣gustine making a repetition of those fables, which were among the Graecians and other Nations, during the gouernment of the Iudges, begins with Triptolemus, of whose parentage there is a little agreement. Viues vpon the thirteenth Chapter Aug. de . , l. 18. c. 13. of S. Augustine de Dei, and the eighteenth booke, hath gathered all the opi∣nions of this mans progenie, where he that desires his pedigree may finde it. and make him natiue of Attica: and the sonne of King of Eleusina: which Eleusius by carefull industrie had fed the people of that T erritorie in the time of a great famine. This, when vpon the like occasion Triptolemus could not performe, fearing the furie of the people, he fled thence by Sca in a kinde of Galley or long Boat, which carried in her Prowe a grauen or carued Serpent; who because he made exceeding great speed to returne and to relicue his people with , from some neighbour Nation: it was fained by the Poets, that his Coach was carried by Serpents through the ayre. Whether the times of these Kings which liued together with Othoniel, and after him with the rest of the Iudges and Kings of Israel and Iuda, be precisely set downe, I cannot auow; for the Chronologers, both of the former and latter times, differ in many particulars, to examine all which would require the whole time of a long life: and therefore I desire to be excused, if in these comparisons I erre with others of bet∣ter iudgement. For whether Eusebius and all that follow him, or his opposites (who make themselues so conuersant with these ancient Kings, and with the very yeere when they beganne to rule) haue hit the marke of time of all other the farthest off and most defaced, I cannot but greatly doubt. First, because the Authors them∣selues, from whom the ancientest Chronologers haue borrowed light, had nothing for the warrant of their owne workes, but coniecture: Secondly, because their owne disagreement and contention in those elder dayes, with that of our owne age among the labourers in times, is such, as no man among them hath yet so edified any mans vnderstanding, saue his owne, but that he is greatly distracted, after what patterne to erect his buildings. This disagreement is found not onely in the raignes of Heathen Kings and Prin∣ces; but in computation of those times which the indisputable authoritie of holy Scripture hath summed vp, as in that of Abrahams birth; and after in the times of the Iudges and the oppressions of Israel, in the times from the egression to the building of Salomons Temple, in the Persian Empire, the seuentie Weekes, and in what not? Wheresoeuer the account of times may suffer examination, the arguments are opposite, and contentions are such, as for ought that I see, men haue sought by so many wayes to vncouer the Sunne, that the dayes thereby are made more darke, and the clouds more condenst than before: I can therefore giue no other warrant, than other men haue done in these computations: and therefore that such and such Kings and Kingdomes tooke beginning in this or that yeere, I auow it no otherwise than as a borrowed knowledge, or at least as a priuate opinion: which I submit to better iudgements. in priscis rebus veritas non ad vnguem ; In ancient things we are not to require an exact narration of the truth, sayes Diodore. §. III. Of EHVDS time, and of , ORITHYA, TEREVS, TANTALVS, TITYVS, ADMETVS, and others that liued about those times. AFter the death of Othoniel, when Israel fell backe to their former Idola∣trie, God incouraged Moab to inuade and suppresse them: to performe which he ioyned the forces of Ammon, and Amalec vnto his owne, and so (as all kinde of miseric readily findeth out those whom God hath abandoned, or for a time with-drawne his helpe from, thereby to make them feele the difference betweene his grace and his displeasure) these Hea∣then neighbouring Nations had an easie conquest ouer Israel: whom God himselfe exposed to those perils: within which they were so speedily folded vp. In this mi∣serable estate they continued full eighteene yeeres vnder Eglon King of the Moabites, and his confederates. Yet as the mercies of God are infinite, he turned not his eares from their crying repentance: but raised vp Ehud the sonne of to deliuer them: by which weake man, though maimed in his right hand, yet confident in the iust∣nesse of his quarrell, and fearing that the Israelites were too few in numbers to con∣tend with the Head of those valiant Nations, hee resolued to attempt vpon the per∣son of , whom if he could but extinguish, he assured himselfe of the following victorie: especially giuing his Nation no time to reestablish their gouernment, or to choose a King to command, and direct them in the Warres. According to which resolution, Ebud went on as an Embassadour to Eglon, loaden with presents from the Israelites, as to appease him, and obtaining priuate accesse vpon the pretence of some secret to be reuealed, he pierst his body with a Poniard, made of purpose with a double edge: and shutting the doores of his closet vpon him, escaped. It may seeme that being confident of his good successe, hee had prepared the strength of Israel in readinesse. For suddenly after his returne, he did repasse Iordan; and inuading the Territorie of Moab, ouerthrew their Armie consisting of 10000. able and strong men: whereof not any one escaped. After which victory, and that Samgar his Successour had miraculously slaine 600. Philistims with an Oxe goade: the Land and People of Israel liued in peace vnto the end of fourescore yeeres from the death of Othoniel, which terme expired in the Worlds yeere 2691. In the dayes of Ehud, Naomi with Elimelech her husband, and with her two sonnes, trauailed into Moab, and so the storie of Ruth is to be referred to this time. About the beginning of the fourscore yeeres which are giuen to Ehud, it was that Orcus King of the Molossians: otherwise Pluto, Proserpina, as shee walked to gather flowers in Paus. in Att. the fields of Hipponium in Sicilia: or (according to Pausanias ) by the Riuer Cephisus, which elsewhere he calleth Chemer, if he meane not two distinct Riuers. This stealth being made knowne to Pyrithous, with whom Hercules and Theseus ioyned them∣selues, they agreed together to recouer her: but Pluto or Orcus (whom others call Aidonius ) had (as they say) a very huge Dogge, which fastened on Pyrithous; and tare him in pieces, and had also worried Theseus, but that Hercules speedily rescued him: and by strength tooke and mastered the Dogge Cerberus: whereof grew the fable of Hercules his deliuering of Thescus out of Hell. But Zezes; as I take it, hath written this storie somewhat more according to the truth. For Thescus and Pyrithous, saith he, attempted to Proserpina Daughter to Aidonius, King of the Molossians, who had Ceres to Wife, the mother of Proserpina. Proserpina being a generall name also for all faire women. This purpose of theirs being knowne to Aidonius, Thescus and Pyrithous were both taken; and because Pyrithous was the principall in this con∣spiracie, and Theseus drawne on by a kinde of affection or inforcement, the one was giuen for foode to Aidonius his great Dog Cerberus, the other held prisoner, till Her∣cules by the instigation of Euristheus deliuered him by strong hand. The Molossi which Stephanus writes with a single ( S ) were a people of Epirus inhabititing neere the Mountaines of Pindus: of which Mountaines Oeta is one of the most famous, where Hercules burnt himselfe. The Riuer of Acheron (which the Poets describe to be in Hell) riseth out of the same Hills. There is another Nation of the Molossi in Thessali: but these are neighbours to the Cassiopaei, saith Plutarch in his Greeke que∣stions. The rape of Orithya the Daughter of Erictheus, King of Athens, taken away by Boreas of Thrace, is referred to the time of Ehud. The Poets ascribe this rape to the North winde, because Thrace is situate North from Athens. In his time also Tereus rauished Philomela, of which the fable was deuised of her conuersion into a Nightin∣gale. For Tereus hauing married her sister Progne, conducting Philomela from Athens to see her sister, forst her in the passage, and withall cut out her tongue, that shee might not complaine; perswading Progne his Wife, that Philomela died in the mid-way: all which her brother in law's mercilesse behauiour towards her, Philomela expressed by her needle vpon cloth, and sent it Progne. In reuenge whereof Progne caused her onely sonne Itys to be cut in pieces, and set before Tereus her husband, so drest as it appeared to be some other ordinary foode: of which when he had eaten his fill, shee caused his head, hands, and feete, to bee presented vnto him: and then fled away with such speede towards Athens where her Father Pandion yet liued, as the Poets fained, that shee was turned into a Swallow. The place where it was performed, Strabo findes to bee Daulis in Phocis: and the Tombe of Tercus, Pausanias L. 9. Pau. in Att. hath built neere the Rockes Mergi, in the Territory of Athens. By which, as also by the name Daulis, where these things are supposed to haue beene done (whence also Thue. l. 2. Philomela is called Daulias ales) it appeares that it is true, which Thucydides notes by way of digression in his Peloponnesian Warre, That this Tereus was not King in that which is now called Thracia, or in Odrysae, (as the Poets call him Odrysius ) but that Phocis a Countrie in Greece not farre from a Citie whereof is called Daulia, was in Pandions time inhabited by Thracians: of which this Tereus was King: whence Pandion, to haue amitie with his neighbours, made him his sonne in law: as it is good to beleeue, faith Thucydides, that Pandion King of Athens made that alliance with a neighbour King, from whom hee might haue succour, rather than with any Tereus, that should haue held the Kingdome of Odrysae, which was greatly distant from thence. The occasion that the Poets chose a Swallow for Progne to be turned into, may seeme to haue beene partly because, as Pausanias sayes; Daulide nec nidificant, nec habitant in tota circum regione Hirundines; As if a Swallow, remembring the wrong that was there done to her, and to her sister, did for euer hate that place. Neere this time Melampus (who is said to haue vnderstood the voyces of Birds and Beasts) flourished, being also esteemed for an excellent Physician. Hee restored to their former health the Daughters of Praetus King of the , who (as the Paus. l. 1. Poets please) were made mad by Iuno: and thinking themselues to be Kine, fled into . Odiss 11 the Woods, fearing to be constrained to the Plough: for in those Countries, where the ground was light, they did vse often to plough with Kine. In the 47. yeere of Ehud, Tros began to raigne in Dardania, and gaue it his owne Paus. name; about which time Phemone the chiefe Priest of Apollo in Delphos, deuised the Heroical Verse. Of the same date was Tantalus, King of Lydia: whom Eusebius makes King of : and also of that part of which the people were anciently Maeones. Of Tan∣talus was deuised the fable that some Poets haue applied to the passion of loue: and Euseb. praep. E∣uang. l. 2. Zezes . 10. Chil. 5. some to the couetous that dare not inioy his riches. Eusebius calls this Tantalus the sonne of Iupiter, by the Nymph Pleta: Diaconus and Didymus in , giue him an∣other Mother. He was said to be the sonne of Iupiter: as some will haue it; because he had that Planet in his ascendent, betokening wisedome and riches. It is said that when he made a feast to the Gods, hauing nothing more precious: he caused his own Sonne to be slaine and drest for the banquet: of whom Ceres ate part of one of the shoulders: whereby was signified that those men which seeke after Diuine know∣ledge, preferre nothing on earth before it: no not the care of their owne children, of all else the most dearest. And where it was deuised, that hee had alwayes Water and Fruit offered to his lips, and yet suffered the torment of hunger and thirst, it was meant thereby, that though he abounded (by reason of his riches) in all delica∣cie of the world, yet his minde being otherwise and to higher desires transported, he enioyed no pleasure at all by the rest. Of whom Ouid: Quaerit aquas in aquis, & poma fugacia captat TANTALVS, hoc illi garrula lingua dedit. Here TANTALVS in water seekes for water, and doth misse The fleeting fruit hee catcheth at: His long tongue brought him this. This punishment, they say, was inflicted vpon him, for that hee discouered the secrets of the Gods: that is, because he taught wisedome and vertue to mortall men: which storie Cornelius Gallus hath elegantly exprest in Verse. Others expound this fable otherwise and say, That Tantalus, though he excelled in riches, yet being thir∣stie of more abundance, was neuer satisfied. Of whom Horace against couetous∣nesse: TANTALVS à labijs sitiens fugientia captat Flumina quidrides? mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur. The thirsting TANTALVS doth catch at streames that from him flee. Why laughest thou? the name but chang'd, the tale is told of thee. Others conceiue where it is fained of Tantalus, that he gaue the Nectar and Am∣brosia of the Gods to vaine and vnworthy men, that he was therfore by them in that sort punished. Of which Natalis out of Pindarus: Immortalitatem quòd furatus, Coëtanijs conuiuis Nectar dedit. Because that stealing immortalitie, He did both Nectar and Ambrosia giue To guests of his owne age to make them liue. Whereby it was meant, that the secrets of Diuinitie ought not to bee imparted to the vnpure Vulgar. For as the cleanest meates in a foule , are therein cor∣rupted, so the most high and reserued mysteries are often peruerted by an vncleane and minde. To you it is giuen (saith Christ in MARKE) to know the mysterie of the Kingdome of Mark. 4. 11. God, but vnto them that are without, all things bee done in parables. So is it said of him, that he expounded all things to his Disciples apart. And therefore doth Gregorie Na∣zianzene Mark. 4. 34. inferre vpon a place of S. PAVL: Quod si PAVLO licuisset effari ea, quorum Greg. in Orat. de recta ratione dis. de . . Cor. 12. ipsi cognitionem coelum tertium & vsque ad illud progressio suppeditauit, fortasse de Deo, no∣bis aliquid amplius constaret; If PAVL might haue vttered the things, the knowledge whereof the third heauens, and his going thither did bring vnto him, peraduenture we might know somewhat more of God. Pythagor as, saith Reuclin, thought it not the part of a wise man, Asino lyram expo∣nere, aut mysteria, quae it a reciperet, vt Sus tubam, & fidem graculus, & vnguenta Scara∣baeus: quare silentium indixit discipulis, ne vulgo diuinorum arcana patefacerent, , quàm loquendo apprehendantur; To set an Asse to a harpe, or to learne mysteries: which he would handle as a Swine doth a trumpet, or a Iay a viall, or Scarabies and vncleane flies soueraigne ointment. Wherefore he commanded silence to his disciples, that they should not disclose diuine mysteries to the common sort, which are easier learnt by meditation than by babbling. And therefore did the Aegyptians communicate their mysteries among their Priests in certaine Hieroglyphick letters, to the end that their secrets might bee hidden from the Vulgar: and that they might bestow the more time in the contemplation of their couered meanings. But to proceede with the contemporaries of , or Ehud, with him it is also said, that Tityus liued whom Apollo slew, because he sought to force his Mother Latona. Euphorion hath it thus, that Tityus was the Sonne of Elara, the Daughter of Orcho∣menus; which Elara being beloued of Iupiter, to auoid Iuno's reuenge, he hid Elara in the earth, where shee was deliuered of Tityus: whose Mother dying, and himselfe therein nourished, he was therefore called the sonne of the earth. Pausanias spea∣king of the graue of this Gyant, affirmes that his body occupied the third part of a furlong. But Tibullus hath a louder lie of his stature out of Homer. nouem TITYVS per iugera terrae, . Od. 11. atro viscere pascit aues. Nine furlongs stretcht lies TITYVS, who for his wicked deeds, The hungrie birds with his renewing liuer daily feeds. This Strabo doth thus expound; that Apollo killing this cruell and wicked Tyrant of , a Citie in Phocis, it was fained by the Poets to the terrour of others, that he was still eaten in Hell by birds, and yet still liued, and had his flesh renewed. Admetus King of Thessalie liued also in this Age, whom it is said that Apollo first serued as a Herd-man, and afterward for his excellent wit was by him aduanced; but hauing slaine Hyacinthus, he crost the , and fled into Phrygia: where to∣gether with Neptune, hee was entertained by Laomedon, and got his bread by working in bricke, for building of the walls of Troy, not by making the bricks leape into their places by playing on his Harpe: according to him in Ouid, which saith: Ilion , turribus altis Moenia, APOLLINEAE, structa canore lyrae. Strong Ilion thou shalt see with walls and towers high Built with the harpe of wise APOLLO'S Harmonie. Thus the Poets: but others, that hee laboured with his hands, as hired in this worke. And that he also laboured at the building of the Labyrinth in Greece, all the Megariens witnesse, saith Pausanias. In these daies also of Ehud, or (as some finde it) in the daies of Deborah, liued Per∣seus, the sonne of Iupiter and Danae, by whose Souldiers (as they sailed out of Peloponnesus, to seeke their aduenture on Africa side) Medusa, the Daughter and Successor of Phorcus, being weakely accompanied as shee hunted, neare the Lake Triton, was surprised and slaine: whose beautie, when Perseus beheld, he caused her Triton a Lake of Africa, which calleth Pallantias. head to be imbalmed, and carried into Greece: the beautie whereof was such and so much admired, and the beholders so astonished which beheld it, as thereof grew the fiction, that all that looked on Medusa's head, were turned into . in pereg∣Hist. stones. , the second of that name and 7. King of Athens, and Acrisius the 13. or after Eusebius, the 14. King of the , began also their raignes, as it is said, in . in Chron. the time of this Iudge: of which the first ruled 40. yeares, and the second 31 yeares. Also Bellerophon liued in this age, being the sonne of , the sonne of : who inticed by Antea or Sthenobia, the wife of of the Argiues, to accompanie her, but refuling it, shce accused him to her husband that he offered to force her: wherupon Praetus sent Bellerophon into Lycia, about some affaires of weight, between him and his Sonne in law Iobates: giuing secret order to Iobates to dispatch him: but Iobates thinking it dishonorable to lay violent hands on him, imployed him against Chimaera, a Monster, vomiting or breathing fire. Now the Gods (as the report is) pittying his innocencie, sent him the winged Horse Pegasus, sprung vp of the bloud of Medusa, formerly slaine by the Souldiers of in , to transport him, a horse that none other could master or bridle but Minerua: vpon which beast Belle∣rophon ouer-came Chimaera: and performed the other seruices giuen him in charge: which done, as he returned toward Lycia, the Lycians lay in ambush to haue slaine him: but being victorious also ouer all those, he arriued to Iobates in safetie: whom Iobates for his eminent vertues honoured, first with one of his Daughters: and after∣ward with his Kingdome: after which he grew so insolent, as he attempted to flie vp to heauen vpon his Pegasus: whose pride Iupiter disdaining, caused one of his sting∣ing flies so to vexe Pegasus, as he cast off from his back, into the Valley of Cilicia, where he died blinde: of which burthen Pegasus being discharged (as the fa∣ble goeth) flew back to heauen: and being fed in owne stable, Aurora beg'd him of Iupiter to ride on before the Sunne. This tale is diuersly expounded, as first by some, That it pleaseth God to relieue men in their innocent and vndeserued ad∣uersitie, and to cast downe those which are too high minded: according to that which is said of Bellerophon: that when he was exposed to extreme hazard, or ra∣ther certaine death, he found both deliuerance and honor: but waxing ouer-proud and presumptuous in his glorious fortunes, he was againe throwne downe into the extremitie of sorrow, and euer-during miserie. Secondly by others, That vnder the name of Chimaera, was meant a cruell Pyrate of the Lycians, whose ship had in her prow, a Lyon, a Goate in the mid- , and a Dragon in the stearne, of which three . in claris . beasts this Monster Chimaera was said to be compounded, whom Bellerophon pursued with a kinde of Galley of such swiftnesse, that it was called the flying Horse: to whom the inuention of sailes (the wings of a ship) are also attributed. Many other expositions are made of this tale by other Authors: but it is not vnlikely, that Chi∣maera was the name of a ship, for so Virgil calleth one of the greatest ships of L. 5. Aeneid. Aeneas. Ion also, from whom the Athenians (being ignorant of the antiquitie of their pa∣rent Iauan ) deriue their name of Iones, is said to haue beene about Ehuds time: Ho∣mer Homer. in bymno ad Apoll. calls them Iaones, which hath a neere resemblance to the word Iauan. Perhaps Lib 18. c. 12. de Ci. Dei, l. 18. c. 15 it might be so that Ion himselfe tooke name from Iauan: it being a custome obserua∣ble in the Histories of all times, to reuiue the ancient name of a fore-father, in some the principall of his issue. The inuasion of India by Liber Pater, is by some reported as done in this age: but S. Augustme makes him farre more ancient: placing him betweene the comming out of Aegypt, and the death of Iosua. About the end of the 80. yeares, ascribed to Ehud, and Samgar, Pelops flourished: who gaue name to Peloponnesus in Greece, now called Morea. §. IIII. Of DEBORA and her Contemporaries. AFter Israel had liued in peace and plentie to the end of these 80. yeares, they againe began to forget the giuer of all goodnesse, and many of those being worne out, which were witnesses of the former miserie, and of Gods deliuerance by Ehud, and after him by Samgar, the rest began to returne to their former neglect of Gods commandements. For as Plentie and Peace are the parents of idle securitie; so is securitie as fruitfull in begetting and bringing forth both danger and subuersion: of which all estates in the world haue tasted by interchange of times. Therefore when their sinnes were a∣gaine ripe for punishment, Iabin King of Hazor, after the death of Ehud, inuaded the Territorie of Israel, and hauing in his seruice . yron Chariots, besides the rest of his forces, he held them in subiection twentie yeares, till it pleased God to raise vp Deborah, the Prophetesse, who incouraged Barac to leuie a force out of Nepthalim, and Zabulon, to incounter the Canaanites. That the men of Nepthalim were more forward than the rest in this action, it may seeme to haue proceeded partly from the authoritie that Barac had among them, being of the same Tribe; and partly from their feeling of the common grieuance, which in them was more sensible, than in o∣thers, because Hazor and Haroseth the chiefe holds of Iahin, were in Nepthalim. So in the daies of Ieptha the Gileadites tooke the greatest care, because the Ammonites with whom the Warre was, pressed most vpon them, as being their borderers. Now as it pleased God by the left hand of Ehud to deliuer Israel from the Moabite: and by the counsaile and courage of a woman, to free them from the yoke of Canaan, and to kill the valiant Sisera by Iael the Kenites wife: so was it his will at other times, to worke the like great things by the weakest meanes. For the mightie Assyrian Na∣buchodonosor, who was a King of Kings, and resiftlesse, he ouerthrew by his owne imaginations, the causers of his brutish melancholy: and changed his matchlesse pride into the base humilitie of a Beast. And to approue that he is the Lord of all power, he sometime punisheth by inuisible strength, as when he slaughtered the Armie of Senacherib by his Angell: or as he did the Aegyptians in Moses time: some∣time by dead bodies, as when he drowned Pharao by the waues of the Sea: and the Canaanites by haile-stones in the time of Iosua: sometimes by the ministerie of men, as when he ouerthrew the foure Kings of the East, Chedorlaomer, and his compani∣ons, by the houshold seruants of Abraham. He caused the Moabites and Ammonites to set vpon their owne confederate the Armie of the Edomites; and hauing slaine them to kill one another in the sight of Iehosaphat: and of the like to these a volume Chron. 2. 20. of examples may be gathered. And to this effect did Deborah the Prophetesse speake vnto Barac in these wordes: But this iourney that thou takest, shall not be for thine honour, Jud. 4. 9. for the Lord shall sell SISERA into the handes of a Woman. In which victorie all the strength of the Canaanite Iabin fell to the ground, euen to the last man: in the end of which Warre it seemeth that Iabin himselfe also perished, as appeareth by the last Verse of the fourth of Iudges. After all which Deborah giueth thankes to God, and after the acknowledgment of all his powerfulnesse, and great mercies, shee sheweth the weake estate whereinto Israel was brought for their Idolatrie by the Canaanites, and other bordering Nati∣ons, in these wordes: Was there a shield or speare seene among fortie thousand of Israel? Iud. 5. v. . she also sheweth how the Israelites were seuered and amased, some of them confined ouer Iordan, and durst not ioyne themselues to the rest; as those of Reuben in Gtlead: V. 17. that the Asherites kept the Sea-coast, and forsooke their habitations towards the Land, and the children of Dan who neighboured the Sea, crept into their ships for safetie, shewing thereby that all were dispersed, and all in effect lost. Shee then cur∣seth the inhabitants of Meroz, who dwelling neare the place of the battaile (be∣like fearing the successe) came not out to assist Israel, and then blesseth Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite, who nailed Sisera in her Tent: shewing the ancient affe∣ction of that race to the Israelites. For though the Familie of Heber were inforced in that miserable time of subiection, to hold correspondencie with Iabin the Ca∣naanite, yet when occasion offered them meanes, they witnessed their loue and faith to their ancient friends. Lastly, shee derideth the Mother of Sisera who promised her sonne the victorie in her owne hopes: and fancied to her selfe, and described the spoiles both of Garments and Maidens by him gotten. For conclusion, shee dire∣cteth her praises and thankes to God only victorious. From the beginning of Iabins oppression to the end of that peace, which Deborath and Barac purchased vnto Israel, there passed 40. yeares. In which time the King∣dome of Argos which had continued 544. yeares was translated to Mycaenae: The translation of this Kingdome Viues out of Pausanias writeth to this effect: After , Lynceus succeeded in Argos, after whom the children of Abas the sonne of Lyn∣ceus diuide the Kingdome: of which Acrisius being eldest held Argos it selfe: Prae∣tus his brother possest Epbyra or Corinth, and Tirynthos, and other Cities with all the Territorie towards the Sea, there being many monuments in Tirynthos, which wit∣nesse Pau. in Corin∣thiacis. Praetus possession, saith Pausanias. Now Acrisius was foretold by an Oracle, that hee should be slaine by the sonne of his Daughter Danae: whereupon he caused her to be inclosed in a Tower, to the end that no man might accompanie her. But the Ladie being exceeding faire, it is fained that Iupiter turned himselfe into a golden shower: which falling into her lap, begat her with child: the meaning whereof was, that some Kings sonne, or other Worthie man, corrupted her keepers with gold: and enioyed her, of whom Perseus was borne; who when he grew to mans estate, either by chance (saith Ctesias ) or in shewing his grand-father the inuention of the discus, or leaden ball, slew him vnwil∣lingly. After this Perseus, to auoide the infamie of Patricide in Argos, changed King∣domes with his Vncle Praetus: and built Mycoenae. This imprisonment of Danae, So∣phoeles reporteth otherwise: and that shee was inclosed in a brasen vault, vnder the Kings Hall with her Nurse and Keepers. Vpon this close custodie Horace hath this wittie obseruation. Inclusam DANAEN, turris , fores, & vigilum Canum Tristes excubiae, munierant satis Nocturnis ab adulteris: Si non ACRISIVM Virginis abditae Custodem pauidum, IVPITER & VENVS Risissent, fore enim tutum iter & patens, Conuer so in pretium Deo. Aurum per medios ire satellites, Et perrumpere amat saxa, potentius Ictu fulmineo. — The brasen Tower with dores close bar'd, And watchfull bandogs frightfull guard, Kept safe the Maidenhead Of DANAE from secret loue: Till smiling VENVS, and wise IOVE Beguild her Fathers dread. For chang'd into a golden showre, The God into her lap did powre Himselfe, and tooke his pleasure. Through gardes, and stonie walls to breake, The thunder-bolt is farre more weake, Then is a golden treasure. The first Kings of the Argiues were these. the first King, who beganne to in the first yeare of Jacob, and the 61 of : from which to the end of , misreckoneth 400. yeares. This Kingdome before the translation, Eusebius accounteth to haue stood 544 yeares, others but at 417. was the Daughter of this Inachus: whom the Aegyptians called . , , Argus, , , Triopas, Crotopus, Sthenelus, Danaus, Lynceus, Abas, Acrisius, Pelops. After the translation to Mycenae, Mar. finds these Kings. Perseus, Sthenelus, Eurystheus, The sonnes of Pelops by Hippodamia: by Europe had Agamemnon and Menelaus. Atreus and Thyestes Agamemnon, Aegysthus, Orestes, Tisamenus, Penthilus and Cometes. Of these Kings Mercator and Bunting leaue out the two first, and the last: begin∣ning with Eurystheus: and ending with Penthilus. In Tisamenus time the Heraclidae re∣turned into Peloponnesus: of which hereafter. The Contemporaries of Barac and , were Midas who raigned in Phrygia: and Ilus who built Ilium: with others mentioned in our Chronologicall table, as con∣temporaries with Debora. §. V. Of GIDEON, and of DAEDALVS, SPHINX, MINOS, and others that liued in this Age. DEBORA and Barac being dead: the Midianites assisted by the Amalekites . For when vnder a Iudge who had held them in the feare of the Lord, they had inioyed any quiet or prosperitie: the Iudge was no sooner dead, than they turned to their former impious Idolatrie. Therefore now the neighbouring Nations did so master them in a short time (the hand of God being with-held from their defence) as to saue them∣selues, they crept into caues of the mountaines, and other the like places of hardest accesse: their enemies possessing the plaines and fruitfull vallies: and in haruest Jud. 6. time by themselues, and the multitude of their cattle, destroying al that grew vp: co∣uering the as thiek as : which seruitude lasted seuen yeares. Then the Lord by his Angell stirred vp the sonne of Ioash, afterward cal∣led 6. v. 5. Ierubbaal: whose feare and vnwillingnesse, and how it pleased God to hearten him in his enterprize, it is both largely and precisely down in the holy Scriptures: Iud. c. 6. & 7. as also now it pleased God by a few select persons, namely 300. out of 32000. men, to make them know that he only was the Lord of Hosts; Each of these 300. by Gi∣deons appointment carried a trumpet, and light in a pitcher, instruments of more ter∣rour than force, with which he gaue the great Armie of their enemies an alarum: who hearing so loud a noise, and seeing (at the crack of so many pitchers broken) so many lights about them, esteemed the Armie of Israel to be infinite, and strucken with a sodaine feare, they all fled without a stroke stricken: and were slaughtered in great numbers: two of their Princes being made prisoners and slaine. In his returne the Ephramites began to quarrell with Gideon, because he made warre without their assistance, being then greedie of glorie, the victorie being gotten: who (if Gideon had failed and fallen in the enterprise) would no doubt haue held themselues hap∣pie by being neglected. But Gideon appeasing them with a mild answere, followed after the enemie, in which pursuit being tired with trauaile, and wearie euen with the slaughtering of his enemies, he desired reliefe from the inhabitants of Succoth, to the end, that (his men being refreshed) he might ouer-take the other two Kings of the Midianites: which had saued themselues by flight. For they were foure Princes of the Nations, which had inuaded and wasted Israel: to wit, Oreb and Seeb, which were taken already, and Zebah and Salmunna which fled. Gideon being denied by them of Succoth, sought the like reliefe from the inhabi∣tants of Penuel, who in like sort refused to succour him. To both of these places he threatned therefore the reuenge, which in his returne from the prosequution of the other two Princes, he performed: to wit, that hee would teare the flesh of those of Succoth with Thornes and Briars, and destroy the Inhabitants and Citie of : Now why the people of these two Cities should refuse reliefe to their bretheren the , especially after so great a victorie: if I may presume to make coniecture; it seemes likely, first that those Cities set ouer Iordan, and in the way of all inuasions, to be made by the Moabites, and Ammonites, and Midianites, into Israel, had either made their owne peace with those Nations, and were not spoiled by them: or else they knowing that Zeba and Salmunna were escaped with a great part of their armie, might feare their reuenge in the future. Secondly, it may be laid to the condition and dispositions of these men: as it is not rare to finde of the like humour in all ages. For there are multitudes of men, especially of those which follow the warre, that both enuie and maligne others, if they performe any praise-worthy actions, for the honour and safetie of their owne Countrie, though themselues may bee assured to beare a part of the smart of contrarie successe. And such malitious hearts can rather be contented that their Prince and Countrie should suffer hazzard, and want, than that such men as they mislike, should be the authors or actors of any glorie or good to either. Now Gideon, how or wheresoeuer it were that hee refreshed himselfe and his wearie and hungrie Souldiers, yet he followed the opportunitie, and pursued his former victorie to the vttermost: and finding Zebah and Salmunna in Karkor (suspe∣cting A place in , as it is thought. no farther attempt vpon them) he againe surprised them, & slaughtered those 15000. remaining: hauing put to the sword in the former attempt 120000. and Iud. 8. 10. withall he tooke Zebah and Salmunna prisoners: whom because themselues had ex∣equuted Gideons bretheren before at Tabor, he caused them both to be slaine: or (as it is written) at their owne request slew them with his owne hands: his Son whom he first commanded to doe it, refusing it; and in his returne from the consummation of this meruailous victorie, he tooke reuenge of the Elders of Succoth, and of the Ci∣tizens of Penuel: forgiuing no offence committed against him: either by strangers or his bretheren the Israelites. But such mercy as he shewed to others, his owne chil∣dren soon after his death, according to that which hath been said before. The debts of crueltie and mercie are neuer left vnsatisfied: for as he slew the 70. Elders of Succoth, with great and vnusuall torments, so were his owne 70. sonnes al, but one, murthered by his owne bastard Abimilec. The like Analogie is obserued by the Rab∣bines, in the greatest of the plagues which God brought vpon the Aegyptians, who hauing caused the male children of the Hebrewes to bee slaine, others of them to bee cast into the riuer and drowned: God rewarded them euen with the like measure, destroying their owne first borne by his Angell, and drowning Pharaoh and his armie in the red sea. And hereof a world of examples might bee giuen, both out of the Scriptures and other Histories. In the end so much did the people reuerence Gideon in the present for this victo∣rie, and their owne deliuerance, as they offered him the Soueraignetie ouer them, Iud. 8. 23. and to establish him in the Gouernment; which hee refused, answering; I will not reigne ouer you, neither shall my childe reigne ouer you, but the Lord shall, &c. But he de∣sired the people that they would bestow on him the golden eare-rings, which euery man had gotten. For the Ismaelites, neighbours, and mixt with the Midianites, vsed to weare them: the waight of all which was a thousand and seuen hundred Shekels of gold, which makes of ours 2380. . if we follow the account of the Shekle vulgar. Exod. 28. And because he conuerted that gold into an Ephod, a garment of gold, blue silke, pur∣ple, Iudg. 8. 28. scarlet, and fine linnen, belonging to the High Priest only, and set vp the same in his owne Citie of Ophra or Ephra, which drew Israel to Idolatrie, the same was the destruction of Gideon and his house. There was another kinde of Ephod besides this of the High Priests, which the Le∣uites vsed, and so did Dauid when he daunced before the Arke: and Samuel, while he was yet young, which was made of linnen onely. Now if any man demaund how it was possible for Gideon with 300. men to de∣stroy 120000. of their enemies, and afterward 15000. which remained, wee may remember that although Gideon with 300. gaue the first alarme, and put the Midianites in rout and disorder: yet all the rest of the armie came into the slaugh∣ter, and pursuite, for it is written; That the men of Israel being gathered together out Iud. c. 7. v. . of Nephtalie, and out of Asher, and out of Manasse, pursued after the Midianites: for this armie Gideon left in tents behinde him, when hee went downe to view the armie of his enemies, who with the noyse of his 300. trumpets came after him to the execution. There liued with Gideon, Aegeus, the sonne of Pandion, who reigned in Athens: King of Mycenae: Atreus and Thyestes the sonnes of Pelops, who bare domi∣nion ouer a great part of Peloponnesus, and after the death of Euristheus, the King∣dome of Mycenae fell into the hand of Atreus. This is that Atreus, who holding his brother in iealousie, as an attempter, both of his wife and crowne, slew the children of Thyestes, and causing their flesh to be drest, did therewith feast their fa∣ther. But this crueltie was not vnreuenged. For both Atreus and his sonne were slaine by a base sonne of Thyestes, yea the grand-children, and all the linage of Atreus died by the same sword. In Gideons time also those things were supposed to haue beene done, which are written of Daedalus and Icarus. Daedalus, they say, hauing slaine his Nephew Attalus, fled to Minos, King of Crete, for succour, where for his excellent workemanship he was greatly esteemed, hauing made for Minos a Labyrinth, like vnto that of Ae∣gypt. Afterward he was said to haue framed an artificiall Cowe for Pasiphae the Queene, that she, being in loue with a faire Bull, might by putting her selfe into the Cow, satisfie her lust, a thing no lesse vnnaturall than incredible, had not that shame∣lesse Emperour Domitian exhibited the like beastly spectacle, openly before the peo∣ple of Rome, in his Amphitheater; of purpose, as may seeme, to verifie the old fable. For so it appeares by those verses of Martial, wherein the flattering Poet magnifieth the abominable shew, as a goodly Pageant, in those vitious times. Iunctam Pasiphaen Dicteo Tauro Vidimus, accepit fabula prisca fidem. Nec se miratur Caesar longeua vetustas Quicquid , donat arena tibi. But concerning that which is reported of Pasiphae, Seruius makes a lesse vnhonest construction of it, thinking that Daedalus was of her counsell, and her Pandar for the of a of Minos called Taurus, which signifieth a Bull, who begat her with child, and that she being deliuered of two sonnes, the one resembling Tau∣rus, the other her husband Minos, it was fained that she was deliuered of the , halfe a Man and halfe a Bull. But this practise being discouered, and appointed to be slaine, he fled of Crete to Cocalus King of Sicil: in which passage he made such expedition, as it was fained that he fashioned wings for him∣selfe and his to transport them. For whereas Minos pursued him with boats which had oares onely, Daedalus framed sailes both for his owne boate, and for his , by which he outwent those that had him in chase. Vpon which new inuen∣tion, bearing himselfe ouerbold, was ouerborne and drowned. It is also written of Daedilus, that he made Images that could moue themselues, and goe, because he carued them with legs, armes and hands, whereas those that preceded him, could onely present the bodie and head of those men, whom they cared to counterfait, and yet the workemanship was esteemed very rare. But Plu∣tarke, who had seene some of those that were called the Images of Daedalus, found them . With also flourished the Theban, the sonne of Apollo, and Terpsichore, Herind. Plat. Paus. lib. 9. who instructed , Orpheus, and . Hee wrote of the Creation, of the and , and of the generation of liuing Creatures, but in the end he by his scholler with his owne harpe. Againe, in this age those things spoken of Sphinx and Oedipus, are thought to haue beene performed. This Sphinx being a great robber by sea and land, was by the . l. 9. Armie, led by Oedipus, ouercome. But that which was written of her propounding of riddles, to those whom shee mastered, was meant by the rockie and , which she defended, and by Oedipus dissoluing her probleme his victorie ouer her. She was painted with wings, because exceeding swift, and the bodie of a Lyon for her crueltie. But that which re∣ports of , were more probable, did not the time disproue it, for he calls her an , and the wife of : who when by her help he had cast Draco out of ( her) he married the sister of Draco, which Sphinx taking in part, with her owne troope shee held the mountaine by Thebes, from whence she continued a sharpe warre vpon the Thebans, till by Oedipus ouerthrown. About this time did Minos thrust his brother out of Crete, and held sharpe warre with the and , because his sonne Androgeus was slaine by them. He possest himselfe of Megara, by the treason of Scylla, daughter of Nisus the King. He was long Master of the , and brought the Athenians to the tribute of him euery seuen of their sonnes: which tribute Theseus released, as shall bee shewed, when I come to the time of the next Iudge . In the end hee was slaine at or in Sicilia by Cocalus the King, while he pursued Daeda∣lus: . pol. l. 1. and was esteemed by some to be the first law giuer to those Ilands. To this time are referred many deeds of Hercules, as the killing of Antaeus the gy∣ant, who was said to haue 60. and odde cubites of length, which though Plutarke doth confirme, reporting that there was such a bodie found by Sertorius the Roman, in Lybia, where Hercules slew Antaeus: yet for my selfe, I thinke it but a lowd lie. That Antaeus was of great strength, and a cunning wrestler, Ensebius affirmeth: and be∣cause . in Cbr. hee cast so many men to the ground, hee was fained to bee the sonne of the Earth. Plinie saith, that he inhabited neere the gardens Hesperides in Mauritania. S. Augustine affirmes that this Hercules was not of Greece, but of Lybia: and the Hydra Aug. de ci. dei, l. 18. c. 12. also which he ouercame, Plato expoundeth to be a subtle Sophister. . in . §. VI. Of the expedition of the Argonauts. ABout the eleuenth yeere of Gideon, was that famous expedition of the Argonauts: of which many fabulous discourses haue beene written, the summe of which is this. Pelias the sonne of , brother by the mothers side to Aeson, who was Iasons father, reigning in Iolcus a towne of Thessalie, was war∣ned by the Oracle of Apollo to take heede of him that ware but one shoe. This afterward sacrificing to Neptune, inuited Iason to him, who comming hastily, lost one shoe in passing ouer a brooke: whereupon Pelias demaunded of him what course he would take (supposing he were able) against one of whom an Oracle should ad∣uise him to take heede: to which question when Iason had briefly answered, that he would send him to Colchos, to fetch the golden fleece, Pelias immediatly commaun∣ded him to vndertake that seruice. Therefore Iason prepared for the voyage, hauing a shippe built by Argus, the sonne of Phryxus, by the Counsell of Pallas: wherein hee procured all the brauest men of Greece to saile with him: as Typhis the Master of the shippe, Orpheus the famous Poet, Castor and Pollux the sonnes of Tyndarus, Tela∣mon and Peleus, sonnes of Aeacus, and fathers of Aiax and Achilles, Hercules, Theseus, Zetes and Calais the two winged sonnes of Boreas, Amphiaraus the great Southsayer, Meleager of Calidon that slew the great wilde boare: Ascalaphus and Ialmenus or Al∣menus the sonnes of Mars, who were afterwards at the last warre of Troy, Laërtes the father of Vlysses, Atalanta a warlike virgine, Idas and Lynceus the sonnes of , who afterwards in fight with Castor and Pollux slew Castor, and woun∣ded Pollux, but were slaine themselues: Lynceus by Pollux, Idas by Iupiter with lightning. These and many other went with Iason in the ship : in whose prowe was a table of the beech of Dodona, which could speake. They arriued first at Lemnos; the women of which Iland, hauing slaine all the males, purposing to lead an Ama∣zonian life, were neuerthelesse contented to take their pleasure of the Argonauts. Hence they came to the Country about Cyzicus: where dwelt a people called Do∣liones: ouer whom then reigned one Cyzicus: who entertained them friendly: but it so fell out, that loosing thence by night they were by contrary winds back into his port, neither knowing that it was the same Hauen, nor being knowne by the Doliones, to be the same men: but rather taken for some of their bordering ene∣mies: by which meanes they fell to blowes, insomuch that the Argonautes slew the most part of the Doliones together with their King Cyzicus: which when by day light they perceiued, with many teares they solemnized his funerall. Then departed they againe and arriued shortly in Mysia, where they left Hercules and Polyphemus the sonne of Elates, who went to seeke Hylas the darling of Hercules, that was raui∣shed by the Nymphes. Poliphemus built a towne in Mysia, called Cios, wherein he reigned. Hercules retur∣ned to Argos. From Mysia the Argonautes sailed into Bythinia, which then was peo∣pled by the Bebryces, the auncient inhabitants of the Country, ouer whom Amycus the sonne of Neptune was then King. He beeing a strong man, compelled all stran∣gers to fight with him, at whorlebattes, in which kinde of fight hee had slaine ma∣ny, and was now himselfe slaine by Pollux. The Bebryces in reuenge of his death flew all vpon Pollux, but his companions rescued him, with great slaughter of the people. They sailed from hence to Salmydessus, a towne in Thrace (somewhat out of their way) wherein Phineus a Soothsayer dwelt, who was blinde vexed with the Harpyes. The Harpyes were said to be a kinde of birds, which had the faces of women and foule long clawes, very filthy creatures, which when the table was fur∣nished for Phineus, came flying in, and deuouring or carrying away the greater part of the victuals, did so defile the rest, that they could not be endured. When there∣fore the Argonautes craued his aduise, and direction for their voyage: you shall doe well (quoth he) first of all to deliuer me from the Harpyes, and then afterwards to aske my Counsaile. Whereupon they caused the table to be couered, and meat set on; which was no sooner set downe, then that presently in came the Harpyes, and played their accustomed prancks: when Zetes and Calais the winged young men saw this, they drew their swords, and pursued them through the ayre; some say that both the Harpyes and the young men died of wearinesse in the flight, and pur∣suit. But Apollonius saith that the Harpyes did couenant with the youthes, to doe no more harme to Phineus, and were thereupon dismissed. For this good turne Phineus gaue them informations of the way, and aduertised them withal of the daungerous rockes, called Symplegades, which by force of windes running together, did shut vp the passage: wherefore he willed them to put a pigeon before them into the pas∣sage: and if that passed safe, then to aduenture after her: if not, then by no meanes to hazard themselues in vaine. They did so, and perceiuing that the pigeon had on∣ly lost a piece of her taile, they obserued the next opening of the rockes, and then rowing with all their might, passed through safe, onely the end of the poope was bruised. From thence forward, (as the tale goeth) the Symplegades haue stood still: for the Gods, say they, had decreed that after the passage of a shippe, they should be fixed. Thence the Argonautes came to the Mariandyni, a people inhabiting about the mouth of the riuer Parthenius, where Lycus the King entertained them courteously. Here Idmon a Soothsayer of their company was slaine by a wild boare; also heere Typhis died: and Ancaeus vndertooke to steare the ship. So they passed by the ri∣uer Thermodon, and mount Caucasus, and came to the riuer Phasis, which tunnes through the land of Colchos. When they were entred the hauen, Iason went to Aee∣tes the King of Colchos, and told him the Commaundement of Pelias, and cause of his comming, desiring him to deliuer the golden Fleece, which Aeetes, as the Fable goeth, promised to doe, if he alone would yoake together two brazen hoost bulls, and plowing the ground with them, sowe dragons teeth, which Minerua had giuen to him, being part of those which Cadmus did sowe at Thebes. These bulls were great and fierce, and breathed out fire: Vulcan had giuen them to Aeetes. Whilest Iason was in a great perplexitie about this taske, Medaea the daughter of Aeetes, fell into a most vehement loue of him, so farre foorth, that being excellent in Magique, she came priuily to him, promising her helpe, if he would assure her of his marriage. To this Iason agreed, and confirmed his promise by oath. Then gaue she to him a medicine wherewith she bad him to anoint both his bodie and his ar∣mour, which would preserue him from their violence: further she told him, that armed men would arise out from the ground, from the teeth which hee should sowe, and set vpon him. To remedie which inconuenience, shee bad him throw stones amongst them as soone as they came vp thicke, whereupon they would fall together to blowes, in such wise that he might easily slay them. Iason follow∣ed her counsaile; whereto when the euent had answered, hee againe demaunded the Fleece. But Aeetes was so farre from approuing such his desire, that hee deuised how to destroy the Argonautes, and burne their ship, which Medaea perceiuing, went to Iason, and brought him by night to the Fleece, which hung vp∣on an Oke in the groue of Mars, where they say it was kept by a Dragon, that ne∣uer slept. This Dragon was by the Magique of Medaea cast into a sleepe: so taking away the golden Fleece, she went with Iason into the ship Argo; hauing with her, her brother Absyrtus. Aeetes vnderstanding the practises of Medaea, prouided to pursue the ship, whom when Medaea perceiued to be at hand, she slew her brother, & cutting him in pieces, she scattered his limbs in diuers places, of which Aeetes finding some, was to seeke out the rest, and suffer his daughter to passe: the parts of his sonne hee in a place, which thereupon he called Tomi; the Greeke word . Af∣terwards he sent many of his subiects to seeke the ship Argo, threatning that if they brought not back c Medaea, they should suffer in her stead. In the meane while the Argonauts were driuen about the Seas, and were come to the Riuer Eridanus, which is Po in Italie. Iupiter, offended with the slaughter of Absyrtus, vexed them with a great tem∣pest, and carried them they knew not whither; when they came to the Ilands Ab∣syrtides, there the ship Argo (that there might want no incredible thing in this Fable) spake to them, and said, that the anger of Iupiter should not cease, till they came to Ausonia, and were clensed by Circe, from the murther of Absyrtus. Now, they thereupon sayling betweene the coasts of Lybia, and , and passing through the sea of Sardinia and along the coast of , came to the Ile of Aeea, wherein Circe dwelt, who clensed them. Thence they sayled by the coast of the Syrens, who sang to allure them into danger: but Orpheus on the other side sang so well that he stayed them. Only Butes swamme out vnto them, whom rauished, and car∣ried to Lylibaeum in Sicilie to dwell. past the Syrens, they came betweene Scylla and Charybdis, and the strag∣ling rocks which seemed to cast out great store of flames and smoke. But Thetis and the Nereides, conucyed them safe through at the appointment of Iuno. So they coasted Sicilie where the beeues of the Sunne were, and touched at , the Iland of the Phaeaces, where King Alcinous reigned. Meane while, the men of Colchos, that had beene sent by Aeetes in quest of the ship Argo, hearing no newes of it, and fearing his anger, if they fulfilled not his will, betooke themselues to new habitati∣ons: some of them dwelt in the mountaines of Corcyra, others in the Ilands Ab∣syrtides, and some comming to the Phaeaces, there found the ship Argo, and deman∣ded Medaea of Alcinous: whereto Alcinous made answere, that if shee were not Iasons wife, they should haue her, but if shee were alreadie married, he would not take her from her husband. Arete, the wife of Alcinous, hearing this, married them: where∣fore they of Colthos not daring to returne home, stayed with the Phaeaces; so the Argonautes departed thence, and after a while came to Crete. In this Iland, Minos reigned, who had a man of brasse giuen to him (as some of the Fablers say) by Vul∣can. This man had one veine in his bodie reaching from the necke to the heele, the end whereof was closed vp with a brazen naile, his name was Talus: his custome was to runne thrice a day about the Iland for the defence of it. When hee saw the ship Argo passe by, hee threw stones at it, but Medaea with her Magique destroyed him. Some say that shee slew him by potions, which made him mad; others, that promising to make him immortall, shee drew out the naile that stopt his veine, by which meanes all his bloud ranne out, and he died; others there are that say he was slaine by Paean, who wounded him with an arrow in the heele. From hence the Argonautes sayled to Aegina, where they were faine to fight for fresh water. And lastly, from Aegina they sailed by Eubaea and home to Iolcos, where they arri∣ued, hauing spent foure whole moneths in the expedition. Some there are that by this iourney of Iason vnderstand the mysterie of the Phi∣losophers stone, called the golden Fleece, to which also, other super-fine Chymists draw the twelue labours of Hercules. Suidas thinkes that by the golden Fleece, was meant a booke of Parchment, which is of sheepe-skin, and therefore called golden, because it was taught therein how other metalls might bee transmuted. Others would signifie by Iason, wisdome, and moderation, which ouer-commeth all perils: but that which is most probable is the opinion of Dercilus, that the storie of such a passage was true, and that Iason with the rest went indeed to rob Colchos, to which they might arriue by boate. For not farre from there are certaine steepe falling torrents which wash downe many graines of gold, as in many other parts of the world, and the people there inhabiting vse to set many fleeces of wooll in those descents of waters, in which the graines of gold remaine, and the water passeth through, which Strabo witnesseth to be true. The many rocks, straits, sands, and Currents, in the passage betweene Greece and the bottome of Pontus, are Poetically conuerted into those fierie bulls, the armed men rising out of the ground, the Dra∣gon cast asleepe, and the like. The man of brasse, the Syrens, Scylla and Charybdis, were other hazards and aduentures which they fell into in the Mediterran sea, dis∣guised, as the rest, by Orpheus, vnder poeticall moralls: all which Homer afterward vsed (the man of brasse excepted) in the description of Vlysses his trauailes, on the same Inland-seas. §. VII. Of ABIMELECH, THOLAH, and IAIR, and of the Lapythae, and of THESEVS, HYPPOLYTVS, &c. AFter the death of Gideon, Abimelech his base sonne begotten on a Concubine of the Sechemites, remembring what offers had been made to his father by the people, who desired to make him and his their perpetuall Princes; and as it seemeth, supposing (notwithstanding his fathers religious modestie) that some of his brethren might take on them the Soueraigntie, practised with the inhabitants of Sechem (of which his mo∣ther was natiue) to make election of himselfe, who being easily moued with the glorie, to haue a King of their owne, readily condescended and the better to enable Abimelech, they borrowed 70. pieces of siluer of their Idoll Baalberith, with which . 9. 4. treasure he hyred a company of loose and desperate vagabonds, to assist his first de∣testable enterprise, to wit, the slaughter of his 70. brethren, the sonnes of Gideon, be∣gotten on his wiues, of which he had many, of all which none escaped but Iotham the youngest, who hid himselfe from his present furie: all which hee executed on Vers. 5. one stone, a crueltie exceeding all that hath beene written of in any age. Such is hu∣mane ambition, a monster that neither feareth God (though all-powerfull, and whose reuenges are without date and for euerlasting) neither hath it respect to na∣ture, which laboureth the preseruation of euery being: but it rageth also against her, though garnished with beautie which neuer dieth, and with loue that hath no end. All other passions and affections, by which the soules of men are tormented, are by their contraries oftentimes resisted or qualified. But ambition, which beget∣teth euery vice, and is it selfe the childe and darling of Satan, looketh only towards the ends by it selfe set downe, forgetting nothing (how fearefull and inhumane so∣euer) which may serue it: remembring nothing, whatsoeuer iustice, pietie, right or religion can offer and alleadge on the contrary. It ascribeth the lamentable effects of like attempts, to the errour or weakenesse of the vndertakers, and rather praiseth the aduenture than feareth the like successe. It was the first sinne that the world had, and began in Angels: for which they were cast into hell, without hope of redemption. It was more auncient than man, and therefore no part of his natu∣rall corruption. The punishment also preceeded his creation, yet hath the Deuill which felt the smart thereof, taught him to forget the one as out of date, and to practise the other, as befitting euery age, and mans condition. Iotham, the youngest of Gideons sonnes, hauing escaped the present perill, sought by his best perswasions to alienate the Sechemites, from the assisting of this mercilesse tyrant, letting them know, that those which were vertuous, and whom reason and religion had taught the safe and happie estate of moderate subiection, had refu∣sed to receiue as vnlawfull, what others had not power to giue, without direction from the King of Kings: who from the beginning (as to his owne peculiar people) had appointed them by whom and how to bee gouerned. This hee taught them by the Oliue, which contented it selfe with it's fatnesse, the Figge tree with sweet∣nesse, and the Vine with the good iuyce it had: the Bramble onely, who was most base, cut downe all the rest, and accepted the Soueraigntic. He also foretold them by a Propheticall spirit; what should befall them in the end, and how a fire should come out of the Bramble, and consume the Cedars of Libanon. Now (as it is an casie matter to call those men backe whom rage without right led on) the sonne of Ebed withdrew the Citizens of Sechem, from the seruice of Abimelech: who therefore after some assaults entred the place, and mastered it; and in conclusion fired the towne, wherein their Idoll Baalberith was worshipped, and put all the people of all sorts to the slaughter. Lastly, in the assault of the Castle or Tower of Teber, himselfe was wounded in the head with a stone throwne ouer the wall by a woman, and finding himselfe mortally brused, hee commaunded his owne page to pierce his bodie, thereby to auoid the dishonour of being slaine by so feeble a hand. While Abimelech vsurped the Gouernment, the and Centaures made warre against the Thebanes. These Nations were descended of Apollo, and were the first in those parts that to mannage horses, to bridle and to sit them: in somuch as when they first came downe from the mountaines of Pindus, into the plaines, those which had neuer scene horsemen before, thought them creatures compounded of men and horses; so did the Mexicans when Ferdinando Cortes the first inua∣ded l. 1. de incredib. that Empire. After the death of Abimelech, Thola of Issachar gouerned Israel 23. yeeres, and after him Iair the Gileadite 22. yeeres, who to bee descended of Iair the sonne of Manasse, who in Moses time conquered a great part of Gilead, and called the same after Deut. 3. 14. his owne name, Haboth Iair. For to this Iair there remained thirtie of those Cities, Num. 12. 41. which his ancester had recouered from the Amorites. Of these Iudges, because there is nothing else written, it is an argument that during all their times, Israel liued with∣out Iudg. 10. disturbance and in peace. When Iair iudged Israel, Priamus beganne to reigne in Troy, who at such time as 2901. Hercules sacked , was carried away captiue with his sister Hesione into Greece, and being afterward redeemed for ransome, hee rebuilt and greatly , and adorned Troy; and so sarre inlarged his Dominions, as hee became the supreme Lord in effect of all Asia the lesse. He married Hecuba the daughter of Cisseus King In Tusc. of Thrace, and had in all (saith Cicero ) fiftie sonnes, whereof seuenteene by Hecuba, of whom Paris was one; who attempting to recouer his aunt Hesione, tooke Helena the wife of Menelaus the cause of the warre which followed. Theseus the tenth King of Athens began likewise to reigne in the beginning of Iair: some writers call him the sonne of and Neptune and Aethra: but Plutark in the Storie of his life findes him begotten by Aegeus, of whom the sea betweene it and Asia the lesse tooke name. For when Minos had mastered the Athenians, so farre as he forst them to pay him seuen of their sonnes euery yeere for tribute, whom hee inclosed within a Labyrinth, to bee deuoured by the monster Minotaur: because be like the sonnes of Taurus, which be begat on Pasiphae the Queene, had the charge of them: Among these seuen Theseus thrust himselfe, not doubting by his valour to deliuer the rest, and to free his Countrie of that slauerie occasioned for the death of Androgeus, Minos his sonne. And hauing possest himselfe of Ariadnes affection, who was Minos daughter, hee receiued from her a bottome of thred, by which hee conducted himselfe through all the crooked and inextricable turnings of the Labyrinth, made in all like that of the Citie of Crocodiles in Aegypt; by meane whereof hauing staine Mino∣taur, hee found a readie way to returne. But whereas his father Aegeus had giuen order, that if hee came backe with victorie and in safetie, hee should vse a white saile in signe thereof, and not that mournefull blacke saile, vnder which they left the port of Athens. This instruction beeing either forgotten or neglected, Aegeus descrying the shippe of Theseus with a blacke saile, cast himselfe ouer the rockes into the Sea, afterward called of his name . One of the first famous actes of Theseus, was the killing of Scyron, who kept a pas∣sage betweene Megara and the Peloponnesian Isthmos, and threw all whom hee ma∣stered into the Sea, from the high rockes. Afterward hee did the like to Cercyon, by wrestling, who vsed by that Arte to kill others. Hee also ridde the Country of Procrustes, who vsed to bend downe the strong limbes of two trees, and fastened by cordes such as hee tooke, part of them to one and part to the other bough, and by their springing backe tare them asunder. So did hee roote out Periphetes and o∣ther mischieuous theeues and murtherers. Hee ouerthrew the armie of the Ama∣zons, who after many victories and vastations, entred the Territorie of Athens. Theseus hauing taken their Queene Hyppolita prisoner, begat on her Hippolytus; with whom afterward his mother in law Phaedra, falling in loue, and hee refusing to abuse his fathers bed, Phaedra perswaded Theseus that his sonne offered to force her: af∣ter which it is fained, that Theseus besought Neptune to reuenge this wrong of his sonnes, by some violent death. Neptune taking a time of aduantage, sent out his Sea-Calues, as Hippolytus passed by the sea shore, and so affrighted his horses, as ca∣sting the Coach ouer, hee was (by being intangled therein) torne in pieces. Which miserable and vndeserued destinie, when Phaedra had heard of, shee strangled herselfe. After which it is fained, that Diana entreated Aesculapius to set Hip∣polytus his pieces together, and to restore him to life: which done, because hee was chaste, shee led him with her into Italie, to accompanie her in her hunting, and field sports. It is probable that Hippolytus, when his father sought his life, thinking to escape by Sea, was affronted thereat, and receiued many wounds in forcing his passage and escape; which wounds Aesculapius, to wit, some skilfull Phisician, or Chirurgion hea∣led againe, after which hee past into Italy, where he liued with Diana, that is, the life of a hunter, in which hee most delighted. But of these ancient prophane Stories, Plutarch saith well, that as Cosmographers in their descriptions of the world, where they finde many vast places whereof they know nothing, fill the same with strange beastes, birdes, and fishes, and with Mathematicall lines, so doe the Graecian Historians and Poets imbroder and intermixe the tales of ancient times, with a world of ficti∣ons and fabulous discourses. True it is, that Theseus did many great things in imi∣tation of Hercules, whom hee made his patterne, and was the first that gathered the Athenians, from being disperst in thinne and ragged villages: in recompence whereof, and for deuising them lawes to liue vnder, and in order, hee was by the beggerly, mutable, and vngratefull multitude, in the end banished. Some say per Ostracismum, by the Lawe of Lottes, or names written on shelles, which was a de∣uice of his owne. Hee stole Helen (as they say) when she was 50. yeeres olde, from Aphidna, which Citie Castor and Pollux ouerturned, when they followed after Theseus to recouer their sister. Erasistratus and Pausanias write that Theseus begat her with child at Ar∣gos, Strab. lib. 9. where shee erected a Temple to Lucina: but her age makes that tale vnlikely to Paus. in Con. bee true, and so doth Ouid, Nòn tamen ex facto fructum tulit ille petitum, &c. The In Epist. Helen. rape Eusebius findes in the first of Iair, who gouerned Israel 22. yeeres, to whom succeeded Iephta or Iepte sixe yeeres, to whom Ibzan who ruled seuen yeeres, and Iud. 10. 3. then eight yeere: in whose time was the fall of Troy. So as, if Thescus had a childe by her in the first of , (at which time we must count her no lesse than fifteene yeere olde, for the women did not commonly beginne so young as they doe now) shee was then at least two and fiftie yeere olde at the de∣struction of Troy: and when shee was stollen by Paris eight and thirtie: but here∣in the Chronologers doe not agree. Yet Eusebius and Bunting with Halicarnasseus doe in effect consent, that the Citie was entred, and burnt in the first yeere of De∣mophoon King of Athens, the successour of Mnestheus, the successour of Theseus, seuenteene dayes before the Summer Tropique, and that about the eleuenth of Sep∣tember following, the Troians the Hellespont into Thrace, & wintred there, and in Bunt. Chron. the next spring that they nauigated into Sicilia, where wintring the second yeere, the Euseb. Chron. next summer they arriued at Laurentum, and builded Lauinium. But S. Augustine hath Hal. l. 1. otherwise, that when Polyphides gouerned Sicyon, Mnestheus Athens, Tautanes Assyria, Habdon Israel, then Aeneas arriued in Italie, transporting with him in twen∣tie Aug. de. Ciu. Dei li. 18. c. 19. shippes the remainder of the Troians: but the difference is not great: and hereof more at large in the storie of Troy at hand. In Sicyonia Phaestus the two and twentieth King, reigned eight yeeres, beginning by the common account in the time of Thola. His successours, Adrastus, who reig∣ned foure yeeres, and Polyphides who reigned thirteene, are accounted to the time of Iair, so is also Mnestheus King of Athens, and Atreus, who held a great part of Pelo∣ponnesus. In Assyria, during the gouernment of these two peaceable Iudges, and after him Tautanes reigned. In Aegypt Amenophis, the sonne of Ramses, and af∣terwards Annemenes. §. VII. Of the warre of Thebes which was in this age. IN this age was the warre of Thebes, the most ancient that euer Greeke Poet or Historian wrote of: Wherefore the Roman Poet Lucretius, af∣firming (as the Epicures in this point held truely against the Peripa∣teticks ) that the world had a beginning, vrgeth them with this obiection. — Si nulla fuit genitalis origo & mundi, semperque , Cur suprà bellum Thebanum, & funera , Nòn alias aly quoqueres cecinere poetae? If all this world had no originall, But things haue euer beene as now they are: Before the siege of Thebes or Troyes last fall, Why did no Poet sing some elder warre? It is true that in these times Greece was very saluage, the inhabitants being often chaced from place to place, by the captaines of greater Tribes: and no man thin∣king the ground whereon hee dwelt his owne longer than hee could hold it by strong hand. Wherefore merchandize and other intercourse they vsed little, nei∣ther did they plant many trees, or sow more corne than was necessarie for their sus∣tenance. Money they had little or none, for it is thought that the name of money was not heard in Greece, when Homer did write, who measures the valew of gold and brasse by the worth in cattell; saying that the golden armour of Glaucus, was worth 100. beeues, and the copper armour of Diomedes worth nine. Robberies by land and sea were common and without shame, and to steale horses or kine was the vsuall exercise of their great men. Their townes were not many, whereof those that were walled were very few, and not great. For Mycenae the principall Citie in Peloponnesus was a very little thing, and it may well be thought that the rest were proportionable: briefly, Greece was then in her infancie, and though in some small townes of that halfe Ile of Peloponnesus, the inhabitants might haue enioyed quietnesse within their narrow bounds; as likewise did the Athenians because their Country was so barren, that none did care to take it from them: yet that the land in generall was very rude, it will easily appeare to such as consider, what Thucydides the greatest of their Historians hath written to this ef∣fect, in the praeface to his Historie. Wherefore, as in these latter times, idle Chro∣niclers vse when they want good matter, to fill whole bookes with reports of great frosts, or dry summers, and other such things which no man cares to reade, so did they who spake of Greece in her beginnings, remember onely the great flouds which were in the times of Ogyges, and Deucalion: or else rehearse fables of men changed into birds, of strange monsters, of adulterie committed by their Gods, and the mightie men which they begat, without writing ought that sauou∣red of humanitie before the time of the warre of Thebes: the briefe whereof is this. OEdipus the sonne of Laius King of Thebes, hauing beene cast foorth when hee was an infant, because an Oracle foretolde what euill should come to passe by him, did afterwards in a narrow passage contending for the way, slay his owne father, not knowing either then or long after, who hee was. Afterward hee became King of Thebes, by marriage of the Queene , called by Homer Epicaste: on whom, Hom. Odyss. 11. not knowing her to bee his mother, hee begat two sonnes, Eteocles and Polynices. But when in processe of time, finding out by good circumstances, who were his parents, hee vnderstood the gricuous murther and incest hee had committed, he tore out his owne eyes for griefe, and left the Citie. His wife and mother did hang her selfe. Some say, that OEdipus hauing his eyes pulled out, was expelled Thebes, bitterly cursing his sonnes, because they their father to bee cast out of the Towne, and ayded him not. Howsoeuer it were, his two made this agreement, that the one of them should reigne one yeere, and the o∣ther another yeere; and so by course rule interchangeably. But this appointment was ill obserued. For when Polynices had after a yeeres Gouernment resigned the Kingdome to his brother: or (according to others) when Eteocles had reigned the first yeere, hee refused to giue ouer the rule to Polynices. Hereupon Polynices fled vnto Argos, where Adrastus the sonne of Talaus then reigned, vnto whose pa∣lace comming by night, hee was driuen to seeke lodging in an out-house, on the backeside. There hee met with Tydeus the sonne of OEneus, who was fled from Calydon: with whom striuing about their lodging, hee fell to blowes. Adrastus hearing the noyse, came foorth and tooke vp the quarrell. At which time perceiuing in the shield of Tydeus a Bore, in that of Polynices a Lyon, hee remembred an olde Oracle, by which hee was aduised to giue his two daughters in marriage, to a Lyon and a Bore: and accordingly hee did bestow his daughter Argia vpon Tydeus, and Dei∣pyle vpon Polynices, promising to restore them both to their Countries. To this pur∣pose leuying an armie, and assembling as many valiant Captaines as hee could draw to follow him, hee was desirous among others to carrie Amphiaraus the sonne of Oicleus a great Soothsayer, and a valiant man, along with him. But Amphiaraus, who is said to haue foreseene all things, knowing well that none of the Captaines should escape, saue onely Adrastus, did both vtterly refuse to bee one in that ex∣pedition, and perswaded others to stay at home. Polynices therefore dealt with E∣riphyle the wife of , offering vnto her a very faire bracelet, vpon conditi∣on that shee should cause her husband to assist him. The Soothsayer knowing what should worke his destinie, forbad his wife to take any gift of Polynices. But the bracelet was in her eye so precious a iewell, that she could not refuse it. There∣fore whereas a great controuersie, betweene Amphiaraus and Adrastus, was by way of compromise put vnto the decision of Eryphile, either of them being bound by solemne oath to stand to her appointment: shee ordered the matter so, as a wo∣man should, that loued a bracelet better than her husband. Hee now fin∣ding that it was more easie to foresee than auoide destinie, sought such com∣fort as reuenge might affoord, giuing in charge to his sonnes, that when they came to full age, they should kill their mother and make strong warre vpon the Thebanes. Now had Adrastus assembled all his forces, of which, the seuen chiefe leaders were, himselfe, Amphiaraus, , and Hippomedon (in steade of whom some name ) all Argiues, with Polynices the Theban, the Aetolian, and the Arcadian sonne of Meleager and Atalanta. When the armie came to the Nemaean wood, they met a woman whom they desired to helpe them to some water, she hauing a child in her armes, laid it downe, and led the to a spring: but ere shee returned, a Serpent had staine the childe. This woman was Hypsipyle the daughter of Thoas the Lemnian, whom shee would haue saued when the women of the Ile slew all the males by conspiracie, intending to lead an Amazo∣man life. For such her , the Lemnian wiues did sell her to Pyrates, and the Py∣rates to Lycurgus Lord of the Country about Nemaea, whose yong sonnes Opheltes or Archemorus, she did nurse, and lost as is shewed before. When vpon the childs death shee hid herselfe for feare of her master, Amphiaraus told her sonnes where they should finde her: and the Argiues did both kill the Serpent which had slaine the childe, and in memorie of the chaunce, did institute solemne games cal∣led , wherein Adrastus wanne the prize with his swift horse Arion, Tydeus with whorlebats, at running and quoiting, Poly nies at wrestling, Par∣thenopaeus at shooting, and one Laodocus in darting. This was the first institution of the Nemaean games, which continued after famous in Greece for very many ages. There are, who thinke that they were ordained in honour of one Opheltus, . Some say by Hercules, when slaine the Nemaean Lyon: but the common opinion agrees with that which is here set downe. From the Argiues marching onwards, arriued at Citheron, whence Tydeus was by them sent Embassadour to Thebes, to require of Eteocles the performance of betweene him and Polynices. This message was nothing agreeable to Eteocles, who was throughly resolued to holde what he had, as long could: which Tydaeus perceiuing and intending partly to get honour, partly to trie what mettle was in the , hee made many challenges, and obtained victorie in all of them, not without much and malice of the people, who laide men in ambush to intercept him at his returne to the armie, of which fiftie hee all but one, whom sent backe to the Citie as a reporter and witnesse of his valour. When the Argiues vnderstood how resolued Eteocles was, they presented themselues before the Citie, and incamped round about it. Thebes is said to haue had at that time seuen gates, which belike stoode not farre asunder, seeing that the (who afterward when they were very farre stronger, could vp more thousands then Thebes had gates) did compasse the towne. Adrastus quartered before the gate Homoloides, Capaneus before the Ogygian, Tydeus before Crenis, Amphiaraus at Proëtis, at Anchsis, Parthenopaeus at Electra, and Polynices at Hypsista. In the meane season, Eteocles hauing armed his men, and ap∣pointed Commaunders vnto them, tooke aduice of esias the Soothsayer, who promised victorie to the Thebans, if the sonne of Creon a principall man of the Citie, would vowe himselfe to bee slaine in honour of Mars the God of warre. So full of malice and pride is the Diuell, and so enuious at his Creators glorie, that hee not onely challengeth honours due to God alone, as oblations and sacrifice with all Diuine worship, but commaundeth vs to offer our selues, and our children vnto him, when hee hath sufficiently clowded mens vnderstanding, and bewitched their wils with ignorance and blinde . And such abomi∣nable sacrifice of men, maides, and children hath hee exacted of the Syrians, Car∣thaginians, Galles, Germanes, Cyprians, Aegyptians, and of many other, if not of all Na∣tions, when through ignorance or feare they were most filled with superstition. But as they more wise, so did hee waxe lesse impudent in cunning, though not lesse malicious in desiring the continuance of such barbarous inhumanitie. For King Diphilus in Cypres without aduice of any Oracle, made the Idoll of that Country contented with an Oxe in stead of a man. Tiberius for bad humane sacrifices in Africk, and crucified the Priests in the groues where they had practised them. Hercules taught the Italians to drowne men of hay in stead of the liuing: yet among the sal∣uages in the West Indies these cruell offerings haue been practised of late ages: which as it is a sufficient argument that Satans malice is onely couered and hidden by this subtiltie among ciuill people: so may it serue as a probable Coniecture of the barba∣rismes then reigning in Greece. For Menaecius, as soone as he vnderstood that his death might purchase victorie to his people, himselfe (as he thought) vpon Mars, killing himselfe before the gates of the Citie. Then was a battaile fought, wherein the Argiues preuailed so farre at the first, that Capaneus aduancing ladders to the walls, got vp vpon the rampart: whence, when he fell or was cast downe, or (as writers haue it) was stricken downe by Iupiter with a thunder-bolt, the Argiues fled. Many on each part were slaine in this battell, which caused both sides to desire that Eteocles and Po∣lynices might trie out the quarrell in single fight: whereto the two brethren according, slew other. Another battel was fought after their death, wherein the sonnes of Astacus behaued themselues very valiantly: one of the sonnes slewe which was one of the seuen Princes: Parthenopaeus being another of the seuen (who was saide to haue beene so faire that none would hurt him when his face was bare) was slaine by Amphidicus, or as some say, by Periclymenus the sonne of Neptune: and the valiant Tydeus by : yet ere Tydeus died, the head of Menalippus was brought vnto him by Amphiaraus, which hee cruely tore open and swallowed vp the braines. Vpon which fact, it is said, that Pallas, who had brought from Iupiter such remedie for his wound, as should haue made him immortall, refused to be∣stow it vpon him: whereby perhaps was meant that his honour which might haue continued immortall, did perish through the beastly rage that hee shewed at his death. The hoast of the Argiues being wholly discomfited, Adrastus and fledde: of whom Amphiaraus is said to haue been swallowed quicke into the earth, neere to the riuer Ismenus, together with his Chariot, and so lost out of mens sight, being peraduenture ouerwhelmed with dead carkasses or drowned in the riuer: and his bodie neuer found nor greatly sought for. Adrastus escaped on his good horse Arion, and came to Athens; where sitting at an Altar called the Altar of Mercie, hee made supplication for their aide to recouer their bodies. For Creon hauing obtained the Gouernment of Thebes, after the death of , would not suffer the bodies of the Argiues to be buried: but caused Antigone, the only daugh∣ter then liuing of OEdipus, to bee buried quicke, because shee had sought out and the bodie of her brother Polynices, contrary to Creons Edict. The Athenians condescending to the request of Adrastus, did send foorth an armie vnder the Con∣duct of Theseus, which tooke Thebes, and restored the bodies of the Argiues to Se∣pulture: at which time Euadne the wife of Capaneus, threw herselfe into the funerall fire, and was burnt willingly with her husband. But it little contented the sonnes of those Captaines which were slaine at Thebes, that any lesse reuenge should bee ta∣ken of their fathers death, than the of the Citie: wherefore tenne yeeres after hauing leuied forces, Aegialeus the sonne of Adrastus, Diomedes of Tydeus, Promachus of Parthenopaeus, Sthenelus of Capaneus, Thersander of Polynices, and Euripylus of Me∣cisteus, marched thither vnder the conduct of Alcmaeon the sonne of Amphiaraus: with whom also went his brother Amphiloctus. Apollo promised victorie if Alcmae∣on were their Captaine, whom afterward by another Oracle he commaunded to kill his owne mother. When they came to the citie, they were inconntred by Laodamas the son of Eteocles then King of the Thebanes, (for Creon was only Tutor to Laodamas ) who though hee did valiantly in the battaile, and slue Aegialeus, yet was he put to the worst, and to flie, or (according to Apollodorus ) by Alcmaeon. After this disaster the citi∣zens began to desire composition; but in the meane time they conuayed themselues with their wiues and children away from thence by night, and so began to wander vp and downe, till at length they built the Towne called Estiaea. The , when they perceiued that their enemies had quitted the Towne, entring into it, sacked it, threw downe the walls, and layd it waste; howbeit it is reported by some that the Towne was saued by Thirsander, the sonne of Polynices, who causing the Citizens to returne, did there raigne ouer them. That hee saued the Citie from vtter destru∣ction, it is very likely, for hee reigned there, and led the Thebanes to the Warre of Troy, which very shortly after ensued. §. VIII. Of IEPHTA, and how the three hundred yeeres which hee speaketh of, IVD. 11. v. 28. are to bee reconciled with the places, ACT. 13. 20. 1. REG. 6. 1. together with some other things touching Chronologie about these times. AFter the death of Iair (neere about whose times these things happe∣ned in Greece, and during whose gouernment, and that of Thola, Israel liued in peace and in order) they reuolted againe from the law, and ser∣uice of God, and became more wicked and Idolatrous than euer. For whereas in the former times they worshipped Baal and Asteroth, they now became followers of all the Heathen Nations adioyning, and imbraced the I∣dolls of the Aramites, of the Zidonians, Moabites and Ammonites: with those of the Iud. 10. . And as before it pleased God to correct them by the Aramites, by the A∣malekites, and Midianites: so now he scourged them by the Ammonites, and after∣ward The persecuti∣on of the Am∣monites lasted 18. yeeres, and ended in the yeere of the World 2820. in which yeere began. Iud. 11. by the Philistims. Now among the Israelites, those of Gilead being most opprest, because they bor∣dered vpon the Ammonites, they were inforst to seeke , whom they had for∣merly despised and cast from them, because he was base borne; but hee (not with∣standing those former iniuries) participating more of godly compassion, than of de∣uilish hatred and reuenge, was content to leade the Gileadites to the Warre, vpon condition that they should establish him their Gouernour after victorie. And when he had disputed with Ammon for the Land, disproued Ammons right, and fortified the title of Israel by many arguments, the same preuailing nothing, he beganne the warre; and being strengthened by God, ouerthrew them: and did not onely beate them out of the plaines, but forst them ouer the mountaines of Arabia, euen to Min∣nith, Iud. 11. 33. and Abel of the vineyards, Cities exprest heretofore in the description of the holy Land. After which victory it is said, that he performed the vaine vow, which hee made, to sacrifice the first liuing creature hee incountred, comming out of his house to meete him; which happened to be his owne daughter, and only child, who with all patience submitted her , and onely desired two Moneths time to bewaile her Virginitie on the mountaines of Gilead; because in her the issues of her Father ended: but the other opinion that shee was not offered, is more probable, which Bor. in Iud. Borrhaeus and others proue sufficiently. After these things the children of Israel, of the Tribe of Ephraim, either enuious of Iephta's victorie, or otherwise making way to their future calamitie, and to the most grieuous slauery that euer Israel suffered, quarrelled with Iephta, that they were not called to the Warre, as before time they had contested with Gideon. Iephta hereupon enforst to defend himselfe against their fury, in the incounter slew of them two and fortie thousand, which so weakened the bodie of the Land, as the Philistims Iud. 12. had an easie conquest of them all not long : Iephta, after he had iudged Israel six yeeres, died: to whom succeeded , who ruled seuen yeeres: after him Elon was 2925. their Iudge ten yeeres: in all which time Israel had peace. Eusebius finds not Elon, 2942. whom he calleth Adon, for in the Septuagint, approued in his time, this Iudge was o∣mitted. Now before I goe on with the rest, it shall bee necessary vpon the occasion of Iephta's account of the times Iud. 11. 28. (where he sayes that Israel had then possest the East side of Iordan 300. yeeres) to speake somewhat of the of the Iudges, and of the differing opinions among the Diuines and Chronologers: there being found three places of Scriptures touching this point seeming repugnant, or disagree∣ing: Iud. 11. 28. the first is in this dispute betweene Iephta and Ammon, for the right and posses∣sion of : the second is that of S. Paul, Act. 13. the third that which is in the Act. 13. 20. first of Kings. Iephta here challengeth the possession of Gilead for 300. yeeres: Saint 1. King. 6. 1. Paul giueth to the Iudges, as it seemes, from the end of Iosua, to the last of Heli, 450. yeeres. In the first of Kings it is taught, that from the departing of Israel out of Ae∣gypt, to the foundation of Salomons Temple, there were consumed 480. yeeres. To the first Beroaldus findeth Iephta's 300. yeeres to bee but 266. yeeres, to wit, 18. of Iosua, 40. of Othoniel, 80. of Aod and Samgar, 40. of Debora, 40. of Gideon, 3. of Abime∣lech, 23. of Thola, and 22. of Iair: But Iephta (saith Beroaldus ) putteth or proposeth Idfacit numero pro , proposito. a certaine number, for an vncertaine: Sic vt dicat annum agi propè trecentesimum, ex quo nullus litem ea de re mouerit Israeli; So hee speaketh (saith he) as meaning, that then it was about or wel-nigh the three hundreth yeere, since Israel possessed those Countries, no man making question of their right. Codoman on the contrary findes more yeeres than Ieph∣ta named by 65. to wit, 365. whereof 71. were spent in Israels captiuity, at seuerall times, of which (as Codoman thinketh) Iephta forbare to repeate the whole summe or any great part, the Ammonite should haue iustly obiected, that 71. of those yeeres, the Israelites were in captiuitie and vassals to their neighbour Princes, and therefore knowing that to name 300. yeeres it was enough for prescription, hee o∣mitted the rest. To iustifie this account of 365. yeeres, besides the 71. yeeres of captiuity or af∣fliction, to be added to his 266. he addeth also 28. yeeres more, and so ma∣keth vp the summe of 365. These 28. yeeres hee findeth out thus: 20. yeeres hee giues to the Seniors betweene Iosua and Othoniel: and where Beroaldus alloweth but 18. yeeres to Iosua his gouernment, Codoman accounts that his rule lasted 26. ac∣cording to Iosephus; whereas S. Augustine and Eusebius giue him 27. Melanchton 32. The trueth is, that this addition of 28. yeeres is farre more doubtfull than the other of 71. But though wee admit not of this addition, yet by accounting of some part of the yeeres of affliction (to wit, 34. yeeres of the 71.) if wee adde them to the 266. yeeres of Beroaldus, which reckoneth none of these, we haue the iust number of 300. yeeres. Neither is it strange that Iephta should leaue out more than halfe of these yeeres of affliction: seeing as it is already said, the Ammonites might except a∣gainst these 71. yeeres, and say, that during these yeeres, or at least a good part of them, the Israelites had no quiet possession of the Countries in question. Martin Lu∣ther is the Authour of a third opinion, making those 300. yeeres remembred by Iephta, to be 306. which odde yeeres, saith hee, Iephta omitteth. But because the yeeres of euery Iudge as they reigned, cannot make vp this number of 306. but doe onely compound 266. therefore doth Luther adde to this number, the whole time which Moses spent in the Desarts of Arabia ; which sortie yeeres of Moses ad∣ded to the number which Beroaldus findeth of 266. make indeede 306. But I see nothing in the Text to warrant Luthers iudgement herein: for in the di∣spute betweene Iephta and Ammon for the Land of Gilead, it is written in the person of Ammon in these words: Because Israel tooke my Land, when they came up from Ae∣gypt Iud. 11. 28. from Arnon Iaboc, &c. now therefore restore those Lands quietly or in peace. So by this place it is plaine that the time is not to bee accounted from Moses departure out of Aegypt: but from the time that the Land was possest. For it is said, Quià Israel terram meam; Because Israel tooke my Land: and therefore the beginning of this account is to bee referred to the time of the taking: which Iephtas answere also confirmeth in these words: When Israel dwelt in Heshbon, and in her Townes, and in Aroer and in her Townes, and in all the Cities that are by the coast of Arnon 300. yeeres: why did yee not then recouer them in that space? so as this place speakes it directly, that Israel had inhabited and dwelt in the Cities of Gilead 300. yeeres: and therefore to account the times from the hopes or intents, that Israel had to possesse it, it seemeth somewhat strained to me; for we doe not vse to reckon the time of our conquests in France, from our Princes intents or purposes, but from their victories and pos∣sessions. Iunius neuert helesse likes the opinion of Luther, and sayes, that this time of 300. yeeres hath reference, and is to take beginning from the first of lephtas narration: when he makes a briefe repetition of Moses whole iourney: to wit, at the sixteenth Verse of the eleuenth Chapter of Iudges, in our translation in these words: But when Israel came up from Aegypt, &c. and therefore Moses his forty yeeres (as he thinkes) Iunius in the 11 of Iud. not. are to be accounted, which make the number of 305. yeeres: and not only the time in which Israel possest Gilead, according to the Text and Iephtas owne words: of which I leaue the iudgement to others; to whom also I leaue to iudge, whether we may not beginne the 480. yeeres, from the deliuerance out of Aegypt to the Tem∣ple, euen from the first departure out of Aegypt, and yet finde a more probable re∣conciliation of S. Pauls and Iephtas account with this reckoning: than any of those that as yet haue been signified. For first, touching Iephtas 300. yeeres of possession of the East side of Iordan, it is to be remembred, that for a good while before the Is∣raelites possessed it, Sehon and Og had dispossessed Moab and Ammon thereof: so that when the Israelites had conquered Sehon and Og, the right of possession which they had, passed to Israel; and so Iephta might say that they had possessed those Countries 300. yeeres, reckoning 266. yeeres of their owne possession, and the rest of the possession of the two Kings Sehon and Og, whose right the Israelites had by the law of conquest. The second place disputed is this of S. Paul, Act. 13. that from the end of Iosua to Reáde the 24. of Iosua, and the 2. Iud. 7. the beginning of Samuel, there past 450. yeeres. And this place Luther vnderstan∣deth also besides the letter (as I finde his opinion cited by Functius Krentzhemius, and Funct. Chren. fol. 4. in his Annotations vpon the 13. of the Act. . 20 Beza ) for I haue not read his Commentaries. For be accounteth from the death of Moses, to the last yeere of Heli, but 357. yeeres: and this hee doth the better to ap∣proue the times from the egression out of Aegypt to the building of the Temple, which in the first King. 6. is said to be 480. yeeres. Now forasmuch as S. Paul (as it seemes) findes 450. yeeres from the death of Io∣sua, to the last of Heli, and leaues but 30. yeeres for Saul and Samuel, who gouerned 40. for Dauid who ruled 40. and for Salomon who ware the Crowne three whole yeeres ere the foundation of the Temple was laid; therefore Luther takes it, that there was errour in the Scribe, who wrote out this piece of Scripture of S. Paul: to wit, Then afterward hee gaue vnto them Iudges about 450. yeeres, the time of SA∣MVEL Act. 13. 20. the Prophet: the words than afterward, being cleerely referred to the death or after the death of Iosua, as shall be hereafter proued. But where S. Luke rehearsing the words of S. Paul, wrote 350. yeeres (saith Luther ) the Scribe in the transcription being deceiued by the affinitie of those two Greeke wordes, whereof the one signifi∣eth 300. and the other 400. wrote Tetracosicis, for Triacosiois; 400. yeeres, for 300. yeeres; and 450. for 350. This he seeketh to strengthen by many arguments: to which opinion Beza in his great annotations adhereth. A contrary iudgement to this hath Codoman: where Luther and Beza beginne at Moses death, he takes his ac∣count from the death of Iosua, and from thence to the beginning of Samuel he makes 430. yeeres: to wit, of the Iudges (not reckoning Sampsons yeeres) 319. and of yeeres of seruitude and affliction vnder strangers 111. The reason why he doth not reckon Sampsons 20. yeeres, is because hee thinkes that they were part of the 40. yeeres, in which the Philistims are said to haue oppressed Israel. For it is plaine that duringall Iud. 13. Samsons time they were Lords ouer Israel. So then of the Iudges, besides thee 111. Iud. 15. 11. yeeres of seruitude, Codoman reckoneth (as I haue said) 319. yeeres, which two summes put together make 430. yeeres, and whereas S. Paul nameth 450. yeeres, he finds 20. yeeres to make vp S. Pauls number, to haue been spent after the death of Iosua by the Seniors, before the of Cushan, or the election of Othoniel: which 20. yeeres added to 430. make 550. according to S. Paul. To approoue this time of the Elders, hee citeth two places of Scriptures, namely the 24. of Iosua, and the second of Iudges, in each of which places it is written, that Israel serued the Lord all the dayes of IOSVA, and all the dayes of the Elders that ouer-liued IOSVA: so as to these times of the Elders, Codoman giueth 20. yeeres, which make as before 450. ac∣cording to S. Paul. Neither would it breede any great difficulty in this opinion, if here also the 20. yeeres of the Seniors, betweene Iosua and Othoniel, should be denied. For they which denie these yeeres, and make Othoniels 40. to beginne presently vpon the death of Iosua, as in the beginning of this reckoning they haue 20. yeeres lesse than Codoman, so toward the end of it (when they reckon the yeeres of affliction a∣part from the yeeres of the Iudges ) in the number of Sampsons yeeres, and of the 40. yeeres of the Philistims oppressing the Israelites, they haue 20. yeeres more than Codoman. For they reckon these 40. yeeres of oppression all of them a-part from Sampsons 20. but Codoman, as is said, makes Sampsons 20. to be the one halfe of the 40. of the Philistims oppressions; so that if the 20. yeeres of the Seniors, be not allowed to Codoman, then he may reckon (as the letter of the Text seemes to inforce) that the Philistims in an Inter-regnum, before Sampson iudged Israel, vexed the Israelites 40. yeeres, besides the 20. while Sampson was their Iudge, and so the reckoning will come to 450. yeeres betweene the end of Iosua, and the beginning of Samuel, though wee admit not of any Inter-regnum of the Seniors, betweene Iosua and Othoniel: For if the times of their affliction be summed, they make 111. yeeres, to which if wee adde the yeeres the Iudges, which are 339. we haue the iust summe of 450. And this com∣putation either one way or other, may seeme to bee much more probable, than theirs that correct the Text, although we should admit of their correction thereof, and reade with them 350. for 450. For whereas they that this time of 350. yeeres, is to beginne immediatly, or soone after the death of Moses: certainely the place of S. Paul doth euidently teach the contrarie, though it bee receiued for true that there was vitium scriptoris in the rest. For these be S. Pauls words: And about the time of 40. yeeres, God suffered their manners in the wildernesse: And he destroyed seuen Nations in the Land of Canaan, and diuided their Land to them by lot. Then after∣ward hee gaue vnto them Iudges about 450. yeeres, vnto the time of SAMVEL the Prophet. So as first in the eighteenth verse he speaketh of Moses and of his yeeres spent in the wildernesse, then in the nineteenth verse hee commeth to the acts of Iosua; which were that he destroyed seuen Nations in the Land of Canaan, and diuided their Land Ios. 14. 1. to them by lot. In the twentieth verse it followeth: Then afterward hee gaue them Iudges about 450. yeeres, &c. and therefore to reckon from the death of Moses, is wide of S. Pauls meaning, so farre as my weake vnderstanding can pierce it. The only in∣conuenience of any waight in opinion of Codoman touching this place, in the Acts is that it seems irreconciliable with the account, 1. Reg. 6. 11. For if indeede there were spent 450. yeeres betweene the end of Iosua and the beginning of Samuel, certainly there must needes be much more than 480. yeeres betweene the beginning of the Israelites iourneying from Aegypt, and the of the Temple by Salomon. To this difficultie Codoman answereth, that these 480. yeeres, 1. Reg. 6. 1. must be∣ginne to bee reckoned, not in the beginning, but in the ending of their iourneying from Aegypt, which hee makes to be 25. yeeres after the beginning of Othoniels go∣uernment; from whence if wee cast the yeeres of the Iudges, with the yeeres of ser∣uitude (which summes according to his account, of which we haue already spoken, make 397. yeeres) and so to these yeeres adde the 40. of Samuel, and Saul, and the 40. of Dauid, and the 3. of Salomon, wee shall haue the iust summe of 480. yeeres. Neither is it hard (saith he) that the annus egressionis, 1. Reg. 6. 1. should be vnderstood egressionis non incipientis sedfinitae, the yeere of their comming out of (for so it is in the originall) or the yeere after they came out of Aegypt, may well be vnder∣stood for the yeere after they were come out thence, that is, after they had ended their wandring from thence. For so wee finde that things which were done 40. yeeres after they had set foote out of Aegypt, are said to haue been done in their go∣ing out of Aegypt, as Psal. 114. When Israel came out of Aegypt, Iordan was backe, and Deut. 4. 45. These are the testimonies which MOSES spake when they came out of Ae∣gypt. And thus farre it seemes we may very well agree with Codoman, for the inter∣pretation of the word ab , to be as much as quùm , or ab exitu finito: for if Deut. 4. 45. doe well reade quum exiuissent, for in , as it seemes that here∣in he doth well, why may not we also, to auoide contradiction in the Scripture, ex∣pound ab exitu to be, postquàm exiuissent? The next point to be , is how their iourneying should be said not to haue had end vntill the 25. yeere after the victory of Othoniel. To this Codoman answe∣reth, that then it had no end till when all the Tribes had obtained their portions, which happened not vntill this time: at which time the Danites at length seated themselues, as it is declared Iud. 18. For doubtlesse to this time the expedition may most conueniently be referred. And thus without any great inconuenience to him appearing doth Codoman reconcile the account of Iephta, and S. Paul, with that in the first of Kings, c. 6. Now whereas it is said that the expedition of the Danites was when Iud. 18. 1. there was no King in Israel: to this Codoman answereth, that it is not necessary that we should suppose that Othoniel liued all those 40. yeeres of rest, of which Iud. 3. 11. so that by the 25. yeere after his victory, either he might haue been dead, or a least, as Gideon did, he might haue refused all souereigntie, and so either way it might tru∣ly be said that at this time (to wit, the 25. yeere after Othoniels victorie) there was no King in Israel. This opinion of Codoman, if it were as consonant to other Chre∣nologers grounding their opinions on the plaine Text, where it is indisputable, as it is in it selfe round enough and coherent, might perhaps bee receiued as good: espe∣cially considering, that the speeches of S. Paul haue not otherwise found any inter∣pretation, maintaining them as absolutely true, in such manner as they sound, and are set downe. But seeing that he wanteth all helpe of authority, we may iustly su∣spect the supposition whereupon his opinion is grounded; it being such as the con∣sent of many Authors would hardly suffice to make very probable. For who hath told Codoman, that the conquest of Laish, by the Tribe of Dan, was performed in the fiue and twentieth yeere of Othoniel? Or what other probability hath he than his owne coniecture, to shew that Othoniel did so renounce the office of a Iudge after fiue and twenty yeeres, that it might then be truly sayd there was no King in Israel, but euery man did that which was good in his owne eyes? Now concerning the rehearsall of the Law by Moses, and the stopping of Iordan, they might indeed be properly sayd to haue been, when Israel came out of Aegypt; like as we say that King Edward the first was crowned when he came out of the holy Land, for so all iournies with their accidents commonly take name from the place either whence or whither they tend. But I thinke hee can finde no such phrase of speech in Scripture as limiteth a iourney by an accident, or saith by conuerting the proposition, when Iordan was turning back, Israel came out of Aegypt. Indeed most vnproper it were to giue date vnto actions commenced long after, from an expedi∣tion finished long before, namely to say, that King Edward at his arriuall out of Pa∣lestina, did winne Scotland, or died at Carlile. How may wee then beleeue that enter∣prize performed so many yeeres after the diuision of the Land (which followed the conquest at the iourneys end) should be said to haue been at the time of the depar∣ture out of Aegypt? Or who will not thinke it most strange, that the most notable account of time, seruing as the onely guide for certaine ages in sacred Chronologie, should not take name and beginning, from that illustrious deliuerance out of Aegypt, rehearsed often by God himselfe among the principall of his benefits to Israel, wher∣of the very day and moneth are recorded in Scripture (as likewise are the yeere and moneth wherein it expired) and the forme of the yeere vpon that occasion changed; but should haue reference to the surprizing of a Towne by 600. men, that robbed a Chappell by the way, and stole from thence Idols to be their guides, as not going to worke in Gods name? For this accident whereupon Codoman buildeth, hath ei∣ther no time giuen to it, or a time farre different from that which he supposeth, and is indeede rather by him placed in such a yeere, because it best stood with his inter∣pretation so to haue it, than for any certainty or likelihood of the thing it selfe. Wherefore we may best agree with such as affirme that the Saint Paul did not herein labour to set downe the course of time exactly (a thing no way concer∣ning his purpose) but only to shew that God, who had chosen Israel to be his peo∣ple, deliuered them out of bondage, and ruled them by Iudges, and Prophets, vnto the time of Saul, did raise vp our Lord Iesus Christ out of the seede of Dauid the King, in whose succession the Crowne was established, and promise made of a Kingdome that should haue no end. Now in rehearsing briefly thus much which tended as a Preface to the declaration following (wherein he sheweth Christ to haue been the true Messtas ) the Apostle was so farre from labouring to make an exact calculation of times (the Historie being so well knowne and beleeued of the Iewes to whom hee preached) that he spake as it were at large of the 40. yeeres consumed in the wilder∣nesse, whereof no man doubted, saying that God suffered their manners in the wil∣dernesse about 40. yeeres. In like maner he proceeded, saying, that from the diuision of the Land vnto the dayes of Samuel the Prophet, in whose time they required to haue a King, there passed about 450. yeeres. Neither did he stand to tell them, that an hundred and eleuen yeeres of bondage mentioned in this middle while, were by exact computation to be included within the 339. yeeres of the Iudges: for this had beene an impertinent digression from the argument which hee had in hand. Wherefore it is a worke not so needfull as laborious, to search out of this place that which the Apostle did not here intend to teach, when the summe of 480. yeeres is so expresly and purposely set downe. Now that the words of S. Paul (if there be no fault in the Copie through errour of some Scribe) are not so curiously to bee examined in matter of Chronologie, but must be taken, as hauing reference to the memorie and apprehension of the vulgar, it is euident by his ascribing in the same place 40. yeeres to the reigne of Saul: where∣as . 13. it is that those yeeres were diuided betweene Saul and Samuel, yea, that farre the greater part of them were spent vnder the gouernment of the Prophet, how soeuer they are here included in the reigne of the King. As for those that with so much cunning for sake the generall opinion, when it fauoureth not such exposition as they bring out of a good minde, to helpe where the nēede is not ouer-great; I had rather commend their diligence, than follow their example. The words of S. Paul were sufficiently iustified by Beroaldus, as hauing reference to a common opinion a∣mong the Scribes in those dayes, that the 111. yeeres of seruitude were to be recko∣ned apart from the 339 yeeres ascribed to the Iudges; which account the Apostle would not in this place stand to contradict, but rather chose to speake as the vulgar, qualifying it with a quasi, where he saith, quasi quadringentis & quinquaginta annis; As it were foure hundred and fifty yeeres. But Codoman being not thus contented, would needes haue it to be so indeede, and therefore disioynes the members to make the euen. In so doing he dasheth himselfe against a notable Text, whereupon 1. King. 6. all Authours haue builded (as well they might and ought) that purposely and pre∣cisely doth cast vp the yeeres from the departure out of Aegypt, vnto the building of Solomons Temple, not omitting the very Moneth it selfe. Now (as commonly the first apprehensions are strongest) hauing already giuen faith to his owne interpretation of S. Paul, he thinketh it more needfull to find some new exposition for that which is of it selfe most plaine, than to examine his owne coniecture vpon a place that is full of controuersie. Thus by expounding, after a strange methode, that which is manifest by that which is obscure, he loseth him∣selfe in those waies wherein before him neuer man walked. Surely if one should vrge him to giue reason of these new opinions, he must needs answere, That Othoniel could not gouerne aboue 25. yeeres, because then was the taking of Laish, at which time there was no King in Israel; That the Danites must needs haue taken Laish at that time, because else wee could not reckon backwards from the foundation of the Temple to any action that might be termed the comming of Israel out of Aegypt, without excluding the yeeres of seruitude; And that the yeeres of seruitude must needs be included, for that otherwise he himselfe should haue spent his time vainely, in seeking to pleasure S. Paul with an exposition. Whether this ground be strong enough to vphold a Paradoxe, I leaue it to the decision of any iudicious Reader. And now to proceede in our storie. To the time of Iephta referred the death of Hercules, the rape of Helen by Paris, and the prouisions which her husband Mene∣laus, raigning then in Sparta, and his brother Agamemnon King of Mycenae, made for her recouerie. Others referre this rape of Helen to the fourth yeere of Ibzan: from which time, if the Warre of Troy (as they suppose) did not begin till the third of Ailon or Elon, yet the Greekes had sixe yeeres to prepare themselues: the rule hol∣ding not true in this Warre, long a praeparatio belli celerem affert victortam; That a long preparation begets a speedie victorie: for the Greekes consumed ten yeeres in the attempt: and Troy as it seemes was entred, sackt and burnt in the third yeere of Habdon. Three yeeres after Troy taken, which was in the sixt yeere of Habdon, Aeneas ar∣riued in Italie. Habdon in the eighth yeere of his rule died, after he had beene the Father of 40. sonnes and 30. grand-children. And whereas it is supposed, that the Iud. 12. 14. 40. yeeres of Israels oppression by the Philistims (of which Iud. 13. v. 1.) tooke begin∣ning from the ninth yeere of Iair, and ended with the last of Habdon: I see no great reason for that opinion. For Ephraim had had little cause of quarrell against Iephta, for not calling them to Warre ouer , if the Philistims had held them in serui∣tude in their owne Territories: and if Ephraim could haue brought 42000. armed men into the field, it is not likely that they were then opprest: and had it beene true that they were, who will doubt but that they would rather haue fought against the Philistims with so powerfull an Armie for their owne deliuerance, than against their owne brethren the Israelites? But Ammon being ouerthrowne, it seemed at that time, that they feared no other enemie. And therefore these 40. yeeres must either be supplied elsewhere, as in the time of Sampson and afterward: or else they must be referred to the inter-regnum betweene the death of Habdon, and the deliuerance of Israel by Sampson, such as it was. CHAP. XIIII. Of the Warre of Troy. §. I. Of the Genealogie of the Kings of Troy, with a note touching the an∣cient Poets how they haue obserued Historicall truth. THE Warre at Troy with other Stories hereupon de∣pending (because the ruine of this Citie, by most Chro∣nologers is found in the time of Habdon, Iudge of Israel, whom in the last place I haue mentioned) I rather choose here to intreate of in one intire narration, be∣ginning with the descent of their Princes, than to breake the Storie into pieces by rehearsing a-part in diuers yeeres the diuersitie of occurrents. The Historie of the ancient Kings of Troy is vn∣certaine, in regard both of their originall, and of their continuance. It is commonly held that Teucer and were the two founders of that Kingdome. This is the opinion of Virgil: which if he (as Reineccius thinkes) tooke from Berosus, it is the more probable: if Annius borrowed it from him, then it rests vpon the authoritie of Virgil, who saith thus: Creta IOVIS magni medio iacet insula Ponto: AEneid. 3. Mons vbt, & cunabula nostrae. Centum Vrbes habitant magnas, vberrima regna: Maximus Pater (si rite audita recordor) Rhoeteas primum est aduectus ad or as: Optauit{que} locum regno. Nondum Ilium & arces Pergameae steterant: habitabant vallibus imis. Hinc Mater Cultrix Cybele, aera, nemus. In the maine Sea the Ile of Creete doth lie: Where IOVE was borne, thence is our progenic. There is mount Ida: there in fruitfull Land An hundreth great and goodly Cities stand. Thence (if I follow not mistaken fame) TEVCER the eldest of our grand-sires came To the Rhoetean shores: and raigned there Ere yet faire Ilion was built, and The of Troy: their dwelling place they sought In lowest vales. Hence CYBELS rites were brought: Hence Corybantian Cymbales did remoue: And hence the name of our Idaean groue. Thus it seemeth by Virgil, who followed surely good authoritie, that Teucer first gaue name to that Countrie, wherein he reigned Troy was built by Dardanus: of which Dardanus in the same booke he speakes thus: Est locus Hesperiam Graij cognomine dicunt: Terra antiqua, potens armis atque vbere glebae. OEnotrij coluere viri; nuuc fama minores Italiam dixisse, ducis de nomine gentem. Hae nobis propriae sedes: hinc DARDANVS ortus: Iasius{que} Pater, à quo Principe nostrum. Hesperia the Graecians call the place: An ancient fruitfull Land, a warlike race. OEnotrians held it, now the later progenie Giues it their Captaines name, and calls it Italie; This seate belongs to vs, DARDANVS, Hence came the Author of our stocke, Iasius. At{que} equidem memini (fama est obscurior annis) Also Aeneid. l. 7. Aurunces itaferre senes, hic ortus vt agris DARDANVS Idaeas Phrygiae penetrauit ad vrbes, Threiciam{que} Samum, quae fertur. Hinc illum Coryti Tyrrbena ab sede profectum, nunc solio stellantis regia coeli Accipit, &c. Some old Auruncans, I remember well, (Though time haue made the fame obscure) would tell Of DARDANVS, how borne in : From hence he into Phrygia did flie. And leauing Tuscaine (where he had place) With Corytus did saile to Samothrace; But now inthronized he sits high, In golden Palace of the starrie . But contrarie to this, and to so many Authors, approuing and confirming it, thinkes that these names, Troes, Teucri, and Thraces, are deriued from Tiras or Thir as the sonne of Iaphet: and that the Dardanians, , and Ascanians, mixt with the Troians, were Germane Nations, descended from Ashkenaz, the sonne of Gomer: of whom the Countrie, Lake, and of in Asia tooke name. That Ashkenaz gaue name to those and people, it is not vnlikely: neither is it vnlikely, that the , Dardani, and many others, did in after-times passe into Europe: that the name of Teucer came of Tiras, the coniecture is somewhat hard∣Concerning Teucer, whereas Halicarnassaeus makes him an Athenian, I finde none that follow him in the same opinion. Virgil (as is before shewed) reporteth him to bee of Crete, whose authoritie is the more to be regarded, because he had good meanes to finde the truth, which it is probable that he carefully sought, and in this did follow: seeing it no way concerned Augustus (whom other-whiles hee did flatter) whether Teucer were of Crete or no. Reineccius doth rather embrace the opinion of Diodorus, and others, that thinke him a Phrygian, by which report he was the Sonne of Sca∣mander and Ida, Lord of the Countrie, not founder of the Citie; and his Daughter or Neece was the second wife of Dardanus, founder of Troy. Reineccius further thinkes that Atlas raigned in Samothracia, and gaue his Daughter Electra to Corytus, or Coritus: and that these were Parents to Chryse, first wife to Dardanus. Virgil holds otherwise, and the common Tradition of Poets makes Dardanus the sonne of Ele∣ctra by Iupiter, which Electra was the Daughter of Atlas, and wife to Coritus King of , to whom shee bare Iasius. Annius out of his Berosus finds the name of Camboblascon, to whom he giues the addition of Coritus, as a Title of dignitie, making him Father of Dardanus and Iasius; and further telling vs very particularly of the faction betweene these Brethren, which grew to such heate, that finally Dardanus killed his Brother, and thereupon fled into Samothrace. The obscuritie of the hi∣storie giues leaue to Annius of saying what he list. I that loue not to vse such liber∣tie, will forbeare to determine any thing . But if Dardanus were the Sonne of Iupiter, it must haue beene of some elder Iupiter than the Father of those that liued about the Warre of Troy. So it is likewise probable that Atlas the Father of Electra was rather an Italian than an African, which also is the opinion of Boccace. For (as , de gen. . l. 4. c. 31. hath often beene said) there were many Iupiters, and many of almost euery name of the Gods; but it was the custome to ascribe to some one the acts of the rest, with all belonging to them. Therefore I will not greatly trouble my selfe with making any narrow search into these fabulous antiquities, but set downe the according to the generall fame; allowing to Teucer such Parents as Diodorus giues, because others giue him none, and carrying the line of Dardanus in manner following. Concerning the beginning and continuance of the Troian Kingdome, with the length of euery Kings raigne, I haue chosen good Authors to be my guides, that in a Historie, whereon depends the most ancient computation of times a∣mong the Greekes, I might not follow incertainties, ill cohering with the con∣sent of Writers, and generall passage of things elsewhere done. And first for the destruction of Troy, which was of greater note than any accident befalling that Citie whilest it stood, it is reckoned by Diodorus to be 780. yeeres more ancient than . l. 14. the beginning of the 94 th . Olympiad. Whereas therefore 372. did passe betweene the beginning of the Olympiads, and the first yeere of the 94 th . it is manifest that the remainder of 780. yeeres, that is, 408. yeeres went betweene the destruction of Troy, and the first institution of those games by Iphitus, if the authoritie of . . Diodorus bee good proofe, who elsewhere tells vs, that the returne of the Heraclidae, which was 80. yeeres after the fall of Troy, was 328. yeeres before the first Olympiad. . Halic. . l. 2. Heereunto agrees the authoritie of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, who placing the foun∣dation of Rome in the first of the seuenth Olympiad, that is, foure and twentie yeeres after the beginning of those games, accounts it 432. later then the fall of Troy. Solin. Polihist. c. 2 Solinus in expresse wordes, makes the institution of the Olympiads by Iphitus, whom he calleth Iphiclus, 480. yeeres later then the destruction of Troy. The summe is collected by necessarie inference out of diuers other places in the same Euseb. de praep. Euang. l. 10. c. 3. . Alex. strom. lib. 1. booke. Hereunto doth Eusebius reckoning exclusiuely agree: and Eratosthenes, (as hee is cited by Clemens Alexandrinus ) makes vp out of many particulars, the same totall summe, wanting but one yeere, as reckoning likewise exclu∣siuely. The other collections of diuers Writers that are cited by in the same place, doe neither cohere any way, nor depend vpon any collaterall Historie, by which they may be verified. The destruction of Troy being in the yeere before the Olympiads foure hundred and eight: wee must seeke the continuance of that from the beginning to the end, out of Eusebius, who leades vs from Dardanus on-wards through the raignes of foure Kings, by the space of two hundred and fiue and twentie yeeres, and after of Priamus, with whom also at length it ended. As for the time which passed vnder Laomcdon, wee are faine to doe, as others haue done before vs, and take it vpon trust from Annius his Authours; beleeuing Manetho so much the rather, for that in his accompt of the former Kings raignes, and of Priamus, hee is found to agree with , which may giue vs leaue to thinke that Annius hath not heerein corrupted him. But in this point we need not to be very scrupulous: for seeing that no Histo∣rie or accompt of time depends vpon the of the former Kings, but onely vp∣on the ruine of the Citie vnder Priamus, it may suffice that wee are carefull to place that memorable accident in the due yeere. True it is, that some obiections appearing waightie, may bee alleaged in mainte∣nance of different computations, which with the answeres I purposely omit, as not willing to dispute of those yeeres, wherein the Greekes knew no good forme of a yeere; but rather to make narration of the actions which were memorable, and acknowledged by all Writers, whereof this destruction of Troy was one of the most renowned. The first enterprise that was vnder-taken by generall consent of all Greece, was the last warre of Troy, which hath beene famous euen to this day, for the numbers of Princes, and valiant Commanders there assembled: the great battailes fought with variable successe: the long indurance of the siege; the destruction of that great Citie; and the many Colonies planted in sundry Coun∣tries, as well by the remainder of the Troians, as by the victorious Greekes after their vnfortunate returne. All which things with innumerable circumstances of especiall note, haue beene deliuered vnto posteritie, by the excellent wits of many writers, especially by the Poems of that great Homer, whose verses haue gi∣uen immortalitie to the action, which might else perhaps haue beene buried in ob∣liuion, among other worthy deedes, done both before and since that time. For it is true which Horace saith; Vixere fortes ante AGAMEMNONA Multi, sed omnes illachrimabiles Vrgentur, ignoti{que} longa Nocte: carent quia vate sacro. Many by valour deseru'd renowne Ere AGAMEMNON: yet lyc all opprest Vnder long night, vnwept for, and vnknowne: For with no sacred Poet were they blest. Yet so it is, that whilest these writers haue with strange fables, or (to speake the best of them) with Allegories farre strained, gone about to in large the commendati∣ons of those noble vndertakers: they haue both drawne into suspition that great vertue which they sought to adorne, and filled after-ages with almost as much ig∣norance of the Historie, as admiration of the persons. Wherefore it is expedient that wee seeke for the knowledge of such actions, in Histories; learning their quali∣ties who did menage them, of Poets, in whose workes are both profit & delight: yet small profit to those which are delighted ouermuch; but such as can either interpret their fables, or separate them from the naked trueth, shall finde matter in Poems, not vnworthy to bee regarded of Historians. For those things excepted which are gathered out of Homer, there is very little, and not without much disagreement of Authours, written of this great warre. All writers consent with Homer; that the rape of Helen by Paris the sonne of Priamus, was the cause of taking armes: but how he was heereunto emboldened it is doubtfull. §. II. Of the Rape of HELEN: and strength of both sides for the warre. HErodotus fetcheth the cause of this rape from very farre; saying, That whereas the Phoenicians had rauished Io, and carried her into Aegypt, the Greekes to be reuenged on the Barbarians, did first rauish Europa, whom they brought out of Phoenicia into Creta, and afterward Me∣daea, whom they fetcht from Colchos, denying to restore her to her fa∣ther, till such time as they might be satisfied for the rape of Io. By these deedes of the Greekes, Paris (as the same Herodotus affirmes) was imboldened to doe the like; not fearing such reuenge as ensued. But all this narration seemes friuolous. For what had the King of Colchos to doe with the iniurie of the Phoenicians? Or how could the Greekes, as in reuenge of Io, pleade any quarrell against him, that neuer had heard the name of Phoenicians? Thucydides a writer of vnquestionable sinceritie, ma∣keth it plaine, that the name of Barbarians was not vsed at all in Homers time, which was long after the warre of Troy; and that the Greekes themselues were not then called all by one name, Hellenes, as afterwards. So that it were vnreasonable to think, that they should haue sought reuenge vpon all Nations, as barbarous, for the iniu∣rie receiued by one: or that all people else should haue esteemed of the Greekes, as of a people opposed to all the world; and that euen then when as the Greekes had not yet one common name among themselues. Others with more probabilitie say, that the rape of Helen was to procure the redeliuery of Hesione, King Priamus his si∣ster, taken formerly by Hercules, and giuen to Telamon. This may haue beene true. for Telamon (as it seemes) was a cruell man, seeing owne sonne durst not come in his sight, after the warre of Troy, but fled into Cypres, onely because his bro∣ther Aiax (which Teucer could not remedie) had slaine himselfe. Yet, were it so, that Hesione was ill intreated by Telamon, it was not therefore likely, that Priamus her brother would seeke to take her from her husband, with whom she had liued about thirtie yeeres, and to whom she had borne children which were to succeede in his Dominion. Whereupon I thinke that Paris had no regard, either to the rape of Eu∣ropa, Medoea, or Hesione: but was meerely incited by Venus, that is, by his lust, to doe that which in those dayes was very common. For not onely from Barba∣rians, and Barbarians from Greekes, as Herodotus discourseth, but all people were ac∣customed to steale women and cattell, if they could by strong hand or power get them; and hauing stollen them, either to sell them away in some farre Countrie, or keepe them to their owne vse. So did Theseus, and Pirythous attempt Proserpina; and so did Theseus (long before Paris ) rauish Helen. And these practices, as it appeares in Thucydides, were so common, that none durst inhabite neere vnto the Sea, for feare of pyracie, which was accounted a trade of life no lesse lawfull then merchandise: wherefore Tyndareus the father of Helen, considering the beautie of his daughter, and the rape which Theseus had made, caused all her wooers, who were most of the principall men in Greece, to binde themselues by solemne oath, that if shee were ta∣ken from her husband, they should with all their might helpe to recouer her. This done, hee gaue free choyce of a husband to his daughter, who chose Menelaus, brother to Agamemnon. So the cause which drew the Greekes vnto Troy in reuenge of Helens rape, was partly the oath which so many Princes had made vnto her fa∣ther Tyndareus. Heereunto the great power of Agamemnon was not a little helping; for Agamemnon, besides his great Dominions in Peloponnesus, was Lord of many I∣lands: hee was also rich in money, and therefore the Arcadians were well conten∣ted to follow his pay, whom hee imbarked for Troy in his owne ships, which were more then any other of the Greeke Princes brought to that expedition. Thus did all Greece, either as bound by oath, or ledde by the reputation and power of the two brethren, and Menelaus; or desirous to partake of the profit and honour in that great enterprise; take armes against the Troians. The Greekes Fleet was (by Homers account) 1200. sayle, or thereabouts: but the vessels were not great: for it was not then the manner to build shippes with deckes; onely they vsed (as Thucydides saith) small shippes, meete for robbing on the Sea; the leaft of which carried fiftie men, the greatest 120. euery man (except the Captaines) be∣ing both a Marriner and a Souldier. By this proportion it appeares that the Gre∣cian armie consisted of 100000. men, or thereabout. This was the greatest armie that euer was raised out of Greece: and the greatnesse of this armie doth well declare the strength and power of Troy, which tenne whole yeeres did stand out against such forces: yet were the Troians which inhabited the Citie, not the tenth part of this number, as Agamemnon said in the second of Homers Iliades; but their followers and aydes were very many and strong. For all Phrygia, Lycia, Mijsia, and the greatest part of Asia the lesse, tooke part with the . The Amazones also brought them succour. And Rhesus out of Thrace, and Memnon out of Assyria (though some thinke out of Aethiopia ) came to their defence. §. III. Of the Graecians iourney, and Embassage to Troy, and of Helenaes being detained in Aegypt; and of the Sacrificing of Iphigenia. WHerefore the Greekes vnwilling to come to tryall of armes, if things might bee compounded by treatie, sent Menclaus and Embassa∣dours to Troy; who demaunded Helen and the goods were taken with her out of Menelaus his house. What answere the Troians made here∣unto it is vncertaine. Herodotus from the report of the Aegyptian Priests makes it very probable, that Helen was taken from Paris before his returne to Troy. The summe of his discourse is this. Paris in his returne with Helena, being driuen by foule weather vnto the coast of Egypt, was accused for the rape of Helen by some bondmen of his, that had taken Sanctuaric. Proteus then King of Egypt, finding the accusation true by examinati∣on, detained Helen, and the goods taken with her, till her husband should require them: dismissing Paris without further punishment, because hee was a stranger. When therefore the Greekes demaunding Helen had answere, that she was in Egypt, they thought themselues deluded, and thereupon made the warre, which ended with the ruine of Troy. But when after the Citie taken, they perceiued indeed she had not beene there, they returned home, sending to aske his wife of Pro∣teus. Homer and the whole Nation of Poets (except Eurypides ) vary from this Hi∣storic, thinking it a matter more magnificent and more gracefull to their Poems, for the retaining of a faire Ladie, than that they endured all by force, because it lay not in their power to redeliuer her. Yet in the fourth of his Odysses, Homer speakes of Menelaus his being in Egypt, before he returned home to Sparta; which voyage it were not easily beleeued, that he made for pleasure: and if he were driuen thither by contrary windes, much more may we thinke that Paris was likely to haue beene driuen thither by foule weather. For Paris immediatly vpon the rape committed, was enforced to fly, taking such windes as could get, and rather enduring any storme, than to commit himselfe to any Hauen in the Greeke seas; whereas Menelaus might haue put into any port in Greece, and there haue remained with good en∣tertainment, vntill such time as the winde had come about, and serued for his Na∣uigation. One great argument Herodotus brings to confirme the saying of the Aegyptian Priests, which is, that if Helen had beene at Troy, it had beene vtter madnesse for Priamus to see so many miseries befall him, during the warre, and so many of his sonnes slaine for the pleasure of one, who neither was heire to the Kingdome (for Hector was elder) nor equall in vertue to many of the rest. Besides, it may seeme that Lucian spake not more pleasantly than truely, when he said that Helen, at the warre of Troy, was almost as old as Queene Hecuba, considering that she had beene rauished by Theseus the companion of Hercules, who tooke Troy when Priamus was very young; and considering further, that she was sister to Castor and (she and Pollux being said by some to haue beene twinnes) who sailed with the Argonautes, hauing Telamon the father of Aiax in their companie before the time that Hesione was taken; on whom Telamon begat Aiax, that was a principall Commander in the Troian warre. But whether it were so, that the Troians could not, or would not re∣store Helen, so it was that the Embassadours returned ill contented, and not very well intreated; for there wanted not some that aduised to haue them . The Greekes hereupon , made all haste towards Troy: at which time Calchas (whom some say to haue beene a runnagate Troian, though no such thing be found in Homer ) filled the Captaines and all the Hoste with many trouble some answeres and diuinations. For hee would haue Agamemnons daughter sacrificed to appease Diana, whose anger he said withstood their passage. Whether the young Lady were sacrificed, or whether (as some write) the Goddesse was contented with a Hinde, it is not needfull heere to be disputed of. Sure it is, that the malice of the deuill, which awaits for all oportunities, is neuer more importunate, than where mens ignorance is most. also told the Greekes, that the taking of Troy was impossible, till some fatall were remooued: and that till yeeres were past, the towne should hold out against them. All which notwithstanding the Greekes proceeded in their enterprise, vnder the command of Agamemnon, who was accompanied with his brother ; Achilles the most of all the Greekes, his friend Pa∣troclus, and his Tutor Phoenix; Aiax and Teucer, the sonnes of Telamon; Idomeneus, and his companion Meriones; Nestor, and his sonnes Antilochus, and Thrasymedes; Vlisses; Mnestheus the sonne of Petreus, Captaine of the Athenians: Diomedes the sonne of , a man of singular courage; the wise and learned Palamedes, Ascalaphus, and Ialmenus, the sonnes of Mars, who had sailed with the Argonauts; al∣so the sonne of Poean, who had the arrowes of Hercules, without which Calchas said, that the Citie could not be taken; Aiax the sonne of Oileus, , Thoas, , Tysandrus, Euripilus, Athamas, , Tlepolemus the sonne of ; Podalyrius, and Machaon, the sonnes of : Epeus, who is saide to haue made the wood∣den horse, by which the towne was taken, and , who first leapt on shore, neglecting the Oracle that threatned death to him that landed first. §. IIII. Of the Actes of the at the siege. THese, and many other of lesse note, arriuing at Troy, sound such sharpe entertainment, as might easily perswade them to think that the warre would bee more than one yeeres worke. For in the first encounter, they lost Protesilaus, whom Hector slew, and many other, without a∣ny great harme done to the Troians: saue onely that by their numbers of men, they wonne ground enough to incampe themselues in, as appeareth in Thucydides. The principall impediment which the Greekes found, was want of vic∣tuals, which grew vpon them by reason of their multitude, and the smallnesse of their vessels, wherein they could not carry necessaries for such an armie. Heereupon they were compelled to send some part of their men, to labour the ground in : others to robbe vpon the Sea for the of the Campe. Thus was the warre protracted nine whole yeeres, and either nothing done, or if any skirmishes were, yet could the towne receiue little losse by them, hauing equall numbers to maintaine the field against such Greekes as continued the siege, and a more safe retrait if the enemie got the better. Wherefore Ouid saith, that from the first yeere, till the tenth, there was no figh∣ting at all: and Heraclides commends as very credible, the report of Herodicus; That the Greekes did not lye before Troy the first nine yeeres: but onely did beate vp and downe the seas, exercising their men, and themselues, and so by wasting the enemies Country, did blocke vp the towne, vnto which they returned not, vntill the fatall time drew neere when it should be subuerted. This is confirmed by the enquirie which made, when the Greeke Princes came into the field, the tenth yeere, for he knew none of them; and therefore sitting vpon an high tower (as Homer tels) he learned their names of Helen: which though Hom. Iliad. . it is like to be a fiction, yet could it not at all haue beene supposed that should bee ignorant of them, they had shewed themselues before the towne so many yeeres together. Betweene these relations of and Herodicus, the diffe∣rence is not much, the one saying that a few of the remained in the Campe before Troy, whilest the rest made purueyance by land and sea: the other, that the whole armie did spend the time in wasting the sea-coastes. Neither doe the Poets greatly disagree from these authours: for they make report of many townes and Ilands wasted, and the people carried into Captiuitie; in which actions was imployed, whom the armie could not well, nor would bane spared, if any seruice of importance had beene to be performed before the Citie. it was, this is agreed by generall consent, that in the beginning of that Summer, in which Troy was taken, great booties were brought into the Campe, and a great arose among the Greekes: which Homer saith that Apollo sent in reuenge of his Priests daughter, whom Agamemnon had refused to let goe, for any ransome: but interpreting the place, saith that by Apollo was meant the Sunne: who raised pestilent fogges, by which the armie was infected, being lodged in a moorish piece of ground. And it might well bee that the campe was ouer-pestered with those, who had beene abroad, and now were lodged all close together: hauing also grounded their ships within the fortifications. About the same time arose much contention betweene Agamemnon and Achil∣les about the bootie, whereof Agamemnon, as Generall, hauing first chosen for his part a captiue woman, and Achilles in the second place chosen for himselfe another, then , Vlysses, and so the rest of the Chieftaines in order: When the Soothsayer Calchas had willed that woman should be restored to her father, Apollo's Priest, that so the Pestilence might cease, then did Agamemnon greatly rage and say, that hee alone would not lose his part of the spoile, but would either take that which had beene giuen to Achilles, or that which had fallen to , or to Vlysses. Hereupon Achilles defied him, but was faine to suffer all patiently, as not able to hold his Concubine by strong hand, nor to her losse, otherwise than by re∣fusing to fight, or to send forth his Companies. But the Greekes incouraged by their Captaines, presented themselues before the Citie without him and his troupes. The Troians were now relieued with great succours, all the neighbour Coun∣tries háuing sent them ayd: partly drawne to that warre by their Commaunders, who Priamus for money, wherewith hee abounded when the warre began (as appeares by his words in Homer ) or for loue of himselfe and his sonnes, or hope of marriage with some of his many and faire daughters; partly also (as we may well guesse) incited by the wrongs receiued of the Greekes, when they wasted the Coun∣tryes adioyning vnto Troy. So that when Hector islued out of the towne, hee was little inferiour to his enemies in numbers of men, or qualitie of their Leaders. The principall Captaines in the Troian armie, were Hector, Paris, Deiphobus, Helenus and the other sonnes of Priamus: Aeneas, Antenor, and his sonnes, , Sarpedon, Glaucus, Asius, and the sonnes of Panthus, besides Rhosus, who was slaine the first night of his arriuall, , Queene Penthesilea, and others who came towards the end of the warre. Betweene these and the Greekes were many battels fought: the greatest of which were, that at the tombe of King Ilus vpon the plaine; and another at the very trenches of the Campe, wherein Hector brake through the sor∣tifications of the Greekes, and began to fire their ships; at which time Aiax, the sonne of Telamon with his brother Teucer, were in a manner the onely men of note that remaining vnwounded, made head against Hector, when the state of the Greekes was almost desperate. Another battell (for so antiquitic calls it) or rather the same renewed, was fought by Patroclus, who hauing obtained leaue, drew forth Achilles troopes, relieuing the wearie Greekes with a fresh supply. Agamemnon, Diomedes, Vlysses, and the rest of the Princes, though sore wounded, yet were driuen to put on armour, and with help of Patroclus, repelled the Troians very hardly. For in that fight Patroclus was lost, and his body, with much contention recouered by his friends, was brought backe into the Campe: the armour of Acbilles which he had put on, being torne from him by Hector. It was the manner of those warres, hauing slaine a man, to him and hale away his bodie, not restoring it without ransome, if he were one of marke. Of the vulgar little reckoning was made: for they fought all on foote, slightly ar∣med, and commonly followed the successe of their Captaines; who rode not vpon horses, but in Chariots, drawne by two or three horses, which were guided by some trustie followers of theirs, which draue vp and downe the field, as they were directed by the Captaines, who by the swiftnesse of their horses presenting them∣selues where neede required, threw first their Iauelins, and then alighting fought on foote, with swords and battel-axes, retiring into the rankes of the footmen, or else returning to their Chariots when they found cause, and so began againe with a new dart as they could get it, if their old were lost, or broken. Their armes were helmets, brest-plates, bootes of brasse or other metall, and shields commonly of leather, plated ouer. The offensiue were swords and battel-axes at hand; and stones, arrowes or darts when they fought at any distance. The vse of their Chariots (be∣sides the swiftnesse) was to keepe them from wearinesse, whereto the leaders were much subiect, because of their armour, which the strongest and stoutest ware hea∣uiest: also that from them they might throw their Iauelins downewards, with the more violence. Of which weapon I finde not that any carried more than one or two into the field: wherefore they were often driuen to returne to their Tents for a new one, when the old was gone. Likewise of armours they had little change or none; euery man (speaking of the chiefe) carried his owne compleat, of which if any piece were lost or broken, he was driuen to repaire it with the like if he had any fitting, taken from some Captaine whom hee had slaine, and stripped: or else to borrow of them that had by such meanes gotten some to spare. Whereas there∣fore Achilles had lost his armour which Hector (as is said before) had taken from the body of Patroclus, he was faine to await the making of new, ere he could enter the fight: whereof he became very , that he might reuenge the death of Patro∣clus his deare friend. At this time Agamemnon reconciled himselfe vnto Achilles, not onely restoring his Brise is, but giuing him very great gifts, and excusing former matters as well as he might. In the next battell Achilles did so behaue himselfe, that he did not onely put the Troians to the worst, but also slew the valiant Hector, whom (if Homer may herein be beleeued) hee chaced three times about the walles of Troy. But great question may bee made of Homers truth in this narration. For it is not likely that Hector would stay alone without the Citie (as Homer doth report of him) when all the Troians were fled into it: nor that he could leape ouer the riuers of Xan∣thus and Simois, as he must haue done in that flight: nor that the Troians perceiuing Hector in such an extremitie, would haue forborne to open some of their gates and let him in. But this is reported onely to grace Achilles, who hauing (by what meanes soeuer) slaine the noble Hector, did not onely carry away his dead bodie, as the cu∣stome then was, but boring holes in his feet, and thrusting leatherne thongs into them, tyed him to his Chariot, and dragged him shamefully about the field, selling the dead bodie to his father Priamus for a very great ransome. But his crueltie and couetousnesse were not long vnreuenged; for he was shortly after slaine with an ar∣row by Paris, as Homer sayes, in the gate, or as others in the Temple of Apollo, whither he came to haue married Polyxena the daughter of Priamus, with whom he was too farre in loue, hauing slaine so many of her brethren, and his body was ran∣somed (as Lycophron saith) at the selfe-same rate that Hectors was by him sold for. Not long after this, Penthesilea Queene of the Amazons arriued at Troy; who after some proofe giuen of her valour, was slaine by Pyrrhus the sonne of Achilles. §. V. Of the taking of Troy, the woodden Horse, the Booke of DARES and DYCTIS, the Colonies of the reliques of Troy. FInally after the death of many worthy persons, on each side, the Ci∣tie was taken by night, as all writers agree: but whether by the trea∣son of Aeneas and Antenor; or by a woodden Horse, as the Poets, and common same (which followed the Poets) haue deliuered, it is vn∣certaine. Some write that vpon one of the gates of Troy called , was the image of a horse, and that the Greekes entring by that gate, gaue occasion to the report, that the Citie was taken by an artificiall horse. It may well bee that with some woodden engine, which they called an Horse, they either did batter the walls, as the Romans in after-times vsed to doe with the Ramme: or scaled the walls vpon the sudden, and so tooke the Citie. As for the hiding of men in the hollow bodie of a woodden horse, it had beene a desperate aduenture, and seruing to no pur∣pose. For either the Troians might haue perceiued the deceit, and slaine all those Princes of Greece, that were inclosed in it (which also by such as maintaine this re∣port they are said to haue thought vpon) or they might haue left it a fewe dayes without the Citie (for it was vnlikely, that they should the very first day both con∣clude vpon the bringing it into the towne, and break downe their walles vpon the suddaine to doe it) by which meanes they who were shut into it, must haue peri∣shed for hunger, if they had not by issuing foorth vnseasonably discouered the . Whereas further it is said, that this horse was built so high and great, that it could not bee brought into the towne through any of the gates, and that there∣fore the Troians were to pull downe a part of their wall to make way for it, through which breach the Greekes did afterwards enter: it is heereby manifest that the inclosing of so many principall men was altogether needelesse, considering that without their helpe there was way sufficient for the armie, so that the surprising of any gate by them was now to no purpose. Iohn Baptista Gramay in his Historie of Asia, discoursing of this warre, saith that the Greekes did both batter the wall with a woodden engine, and were also let into the Citie by Antenor, at the gate: the townesmen sleeping and drinking without feare or care, because the fleete of the Groecians had hoisted saile, and was gone the day before to the Ile of Tenedos, thereby to bring the Troians into securitie. That the Citie was betrayed, the bookes of Dares and Dictys must proue, which whether we now haue the same that were by them written, it may bee suspected; for surely they who haue made mention of these writers in ancient times, would not, as they did, haue followed the reports of Homer and others quite contradictorie in most points to these two authors, without once taking notice of the opposition, which they hauing serued in that warre made against the Common report: had it not been that either those bookes were euen in those times thought friuolous; or else con∣tained no such repugnancie to the other authours as now is found in them. Also concerning the number of men slaine in this warre, which Dares and Dyctis say to haue beene aboue 600000, on the Troian side, and more than 800000. of the Greekes, it is a report meerely fabulous; forasmuch as the whole fleete of the Greekes was reckoned by Homer, who extolled their armie and deedes as much as hee could, to bee somewhat lesse than 1200. saile, and the armie therein transpor∣ted ouer the Greeke seas, not much aboue 100000. men according to the rate former∣ly mentioned. But it is the common fashion of men to extoll the deeds of their Aun∣cients: for which cause both Homer magnified the Captaines of the Greekes, that ser∣ued in the warre, and Virgil with others were as diligent in commending & extolling the Troians and their Citie, from which the Romans descended. Yea the Athenians long after in the warre which Xerxes the Persian King made against all Greece, did not sorbeare to vaunt of the great cunning which Mnesteus the son of Peteus had shewed, in marshalling the Graecian army before Troy: whereupon, as if it had beene a matter of much consequence, they were so proud, that they to yeeld vnto Gelon King of almost all , the Admiraltie of their Seas, notwith standing that he promised to bring 200 good fighting ships, and 30000 men for their defence. The like vanitic possessed many other Cities of Greece, and many Nations in these parts of the world, which haue striuen to bring their descent from some of the Prin∣ces, that warred at Troy: all difficulties or vnlikelihoods in such their Pedigree not∣withstanding. But those Nations which indeed, or in most probabilitie came of the Troians, were the Albanes in Italy; and from them the Romans, brought into that Countrey by Aeneas: the Venetians first seated in Padua, and the Countrie adioyning by Antenor: the Chaonians planted in Epirus by Helenus, the sonne of King Priamus. To which Hellanicus addeth that the posteritie of Hector did resemble such of the Troians as were left, and raigned ouer them about Troy. §. VI. Of the distresses and dispersions of the Greekes returning from Troy. COncerning the Greekes, they tasted as much miserie as they had brought vpon the Troians. For notes, that by reason of their long abode at the siege, they found many alterations when they returned: so that many were driuen by their borderers from their ancient seats: many were expelled their Countries by faction: some were slaine anon after their arriuall: others were debarred from the Soueraigntie among their people, by such as had stayed at home. The cause of all which may seeme to haue beene the dispersion of the , which weakened much by the ca∣lamitics of that long warre, was of little force to repelliniuries, being diuided into so many pieces vnder seuerall Commaunders, not very well agreeing. For (besides other quarrels arising vpon the diuision of the bootie, and the like occasions) at the time when they should haue set saile, Agamemnon and his brother fell out, the one being desirous to depart immediatly, the other to stay and performe some sacrifices to Minerua. Hereupon they fell to hot wordes, halfe the fleet remaining with Aga∣memnon, the rest of them sailing to the Ile of Tenedos; where when they arriued, they could not agree among themselues, but some returned backe to Agamemnon; o∣thers were dispersed, each holding his owne course. But the whole Fleet was sore vexed with tempests: for Pallas (as Homer saith) would not bee perswaded in haste. They who returned safe were Nestor, and Pyrrhus, whom Orestes afterward slew: also Idomeneus, and Philoctetes, who neuerthelesse, as Virgill tels, were drinen soone after to seeke new seats: among the Salentines, and Philoctetes at Petilia in Italie. Agamemnon like wise returned home, but was foorth with by his wife and by the adulterer Aegysthus, who for a while after vsurped his Kingdome. wandring long vpon the Seas, came into Aegypt, either with Helen, or (as may rather seeme) to fetch her. , after ten yeeres, hauing lost all his company, got home in poore estate, with much adoe recouering the mastership of his owne house. All the rest either perished by the way, or were driuen into , and faine to seeke out new habitations. Aiax the sonne was drowned; fled into Cyprus; Diomedes to King , who was Lord of the Iapyges in Apulia; some of the Locrians were driuen into , others into Italie, all the East part whereof was called Magna , by reason of so many townes which the Greekes were driuen to vpon that coast. Finally; it appeares in , that the Graecian Ladies, whose husbands had beene at the warre of Troy, were wont to call it; The place where the Greekes suffered miserie, and the vnluckie Citie not to be mentioned. And thus much for Troy and those that warred there: the ouerthrow of which Citie, as hath beene said, happened in the time of of Israel, whom Samson after a variance or for certaine yeeres succeeded. CHAP. XV. Of SAMSON, ELI, and SAMVEL. §. I. Of SAMSON. THE birth and actes of Samson are written at large in the 13. 14. 15. and 16. of Iudges; and therefore I shall not need to make a repetition thereof. But these things I gather out of that Storie. First, that the of God for bad the wife of the mother of Samson, to drinke wine or strong drinke, or to cate any vncleane meate, after she was conceiued with childe, because those strong liquors hinder the strength, and as it were wither and shrinke the childe in the mothers wombe. Though this were the counsell of God himselfe, and by his Angell, yet it seemeth that many women of this age haue not read, or at least will not this : the most part for bearing nor drinkes, nor meats, how strong or , filling them∣selues with all sorts of , and with artificiall drinkes farre more : by rea∣son whereof, so many wretched feeble bodies are borne into the world, and the races of the able and strong men in effect decayed. Secondly, it is to be noted, that the of God refused the sacrifice which would haue offered him, commaunding him to present it vnto the Lord: and therefore those that professe diuination by the helpe of , to whom also they sacrifice, may assuredly know that they are Deuils who accept thereof, and not good Angels, who no worship that is proper to God. Thirdly, this Samson was twice by his wiues, to wit, by their impor∣tunitie and deceitfull : by the first he lost but a part of his goods: by the se∣cond his life. nulla vis super are potuit, cuertit; Whom no force could , Voluptuousnesse ouerturned. Fourthly, we may note, that he did not in all deliuer Israel from the oppression of the Philistims; though in some sort hee reuenged, and defended them: for not∣withstanding that he had slaine 30. of them in his first attempt, burnt their Corne in haruest time, and giuen them a great ouerthrow instantly vpon it: yet so much did Israel feare the Philistims, as they assembled 3000. men out of , to besiege Samson in the rocke or mountaine of Etam, vsing these wordes: Knowest not thou that the Philistims are ouer vs? &c. After which they bound him, and deliue∣red him vnto the Philistims, for feare of their reuenge; though he was no sooner loo∣sened, but hee gaue them another ouerthrow, and slew 1000. with the iawbone of an Asse. Lastly, being made blinde, and a prisoner by the treason of his wife, hee was con∣tent to end his owne life, to be auenged of his enemies, when he pulled downe the pillars of the house at the feast whereto they sent for Samson, to deride him, till which time he bare his affliction with patience: but it was truely said of ; Patientia saepe laesa vertitur in furorem, Patience often wounded, is into furie: neither is it at any time so much wounded by paine and losse, as by derision and contumelie. §. II. Of ELI and of the Arke taken, and of DAGONS fall, and the sending backe of the Arke. THe Storie of Eli the Priest, who succeeded Samson, is written in the beginning of Samuel; who foretolde him of the destruction of his house, for the wickednesse of his sonnes, which hee suppressed not, neither did hee punish them according to their deserts: whose 1. . 2. 22. sinnes were horrible, both in abusing the Sacrifice, and pro∣phaning and polluting the holy places: though Leui Ben , to this filthie offence of forcing the women by the sonnes of Eli, hath a contrarie opi∣nion. In this time therefore it pleased God to cast the Israelites vnder the swords of the Philistims; of whom there perished in the first incounter 4000. and in the se∣cond battell 30000. footmen; among whom the sonnes of Eli being slaine, their father (hearing the lamentable successe) by falling from his chaire, brake his necke. Hee was the first that obtained the High-Priesthood of the stocke of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron, before whose time it continued successiuely in the race of the eldest brother of Ithamar: for Aaron was the first, Eleazar the second, Phinees the sonne of Eleazar the third, Abisue the sonne of Phinees the fourth, his sonne Bocci the fift, Ozi the sonne of Bocci the sixt, and then Eli, as Iosephus and Lyranus out of diuers Hebrew authours haue conceiued. In the race of Ithamar the continu∣ed 1. King. . 2. 27. and 1. Chron. 6. after Eli to the time of Salomon who cast out Abiathar, and established Sadock and Achimaas and their successors. The Arke of God which Israel brought into the field, was in this battell taken by the Philistims. For as Dauid witnesseth, God Psal. 78. greatly abhorred Israel, so that hee for sooke the habitation of Shilo: euen the Tabernacle where he dwelt among men, and his power into captiuitie, &c. Now as it pleased God at this time, that the Arke whereby himselfe was repre∣sented, should fall into the hands of the Heathen, for the offences of the Priests and people: so did hee permit the Chaldaeans to destroy the Temple built by Salo∣mon; the Romans to ouerthrow the second Temple; and the Turkes to ouerthrow the Christian Churches in Asia and Europe. And had not the Israelites put more con∣fidence in the sacrament, or representation which was the Arke, then in God him∣selfe, they would haue obserued his Lawes, and serued him onely: which whensoe∣uer they did, they were then victorious. For after the captiuitie they had no Arke 1. Sam. 5. v. 6. at all, nor in the times of the Macchabees: and yet for their pietie it pleased God to make that familie as victorious, as any that garded themselues by the signe in stead of the substance. And that the Arke was not made to the end to be carried into the field as an ensigne; Dauid witnessed when he fled from Absalon. For when the Priests would haue carried the Arke with him; he for bad it, and caused it to be returned into the Citie, vsing these words: If I shall finde fauour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me 2. Sam. 15. againe: if not, let him doe to me as seemeth good in his eyes. The Troians beleeued that while their Palladium or the image of was kept in Troy, the Citie should neuer bee ouerturned: so did the in the last fatall battell against Saladine carrie into the field, as they were made beleeue, the very Crosse whereon Christ died, and yet they lost the battell, their bo∣dies and the wood. But Chrysostome vpon Saint Matthew (if that bee his worke) giueth a good iudgement, speaking of those that ware a part of Saint Iohns Gos∣pell about their neckes, for an amulet or preseruatiue: Si tibi ea nòn prosunt in auribus proderunt in Collo? If those words doe not profit men in their eares, (to wit, the hearing of the Gospell preached) how should it profit them by hanging it a∣bout their neckes? For it was neither the wood of the Arke, nor the wood of the Crosse, but the reuerence of the Father that gaue the one for a memorie of his Coue∣nant: and the Faith in his Sonne, which shed his bloud on the other for redemp∣tion, that could or can profit them and vs, either in this life or after it. The Philistims returning with the greatest victorie and glorie which euer they ob∣tained, carried the Arke of God with them to Azotus, and set it vp in the house of Dagon their Idoll: but that night the Idoll fell out of his place, from aboue to the ground, and lay vnder the Arke. The morning following they tooke it vp, and set it vp, and set it againe in his place. And it fell the second time, and the head brake from the bodie, and the hands from the armes, shewing that it had nor power, nor vn∣derstanding in the presence of God; for the head fell off, which is the seat of reason, and knowledge, and the hands (by which wee execute strength) were sundred from the armes. For God and the Deuill inhabit not in one house, nor in one heart. And if this I doll could not indure the representation of the true God, it is not to bee mar∣uailed, that at such time as it pleased him to couer his onely begotten with flesh, and sent him into the world, that all the Oracles, wherein the Deuill derided and betray∣ed mortall men, lost power, speech, and operation at the instant. For when that true light which had neuer beginning of brightnesse, brake through the clouds of a virgins bodie, shining vpon the earth which had beene long obscured by Idolatrie, all those foule and stinking vapours vanished. Plutarch rehearseth a memorable ac∣cident in that age concerning the death of the great god Pan, as hee stileth him; where (as ignorant of the true cause) hee searcheth his braines for many reasons of so great an alteration: yet finds he none out but friuolous. For not onely this olde Deuill did then die as he supposed, but all the rest, as Apollo, Iupiter, Diana, and the whole rabble became speechlesse. Now while the Philistims triumphed after this victorie, God strooke them with the grieuous disease of the Haemorrhoides of which they perished in great numbers. For it is written that the Lord destroyed them. It was therefore by generall consent or∣dered, that the Arke should be remoued from Azotus to Gath or Geth another of the fiue great Cities of the Philistims; to , as it seemeth, whether this disease were fallen on them by accident, or by the hand of God immediatly: but when it was brought to Gath and receiued by them, the plague was yet more grieuous and mor∣tall. For the hand of the Lord was against this Citie with a very great , and hee 1. Sam. 4. v. 9. smote the men of the Citie both small and great, &c. And being not yet satisfied, they of Gath sent the Arke to Ekron or Accaron, a third Citie of the Philistims: but they also felt the same smart, and cryed out that themselues and their people should be slaine thereby; For there was a destruction and death throughout all the Citie. In the end, by the aduice of their Priests, the Prince of the Philistims did not onely resolue to re∣turne the Arke, but to offer gifts vnto the God of Israel, remembring the plague which had fallen on the Aegyptians, when their hearts were hardened to hold the people of God from their inheritance, and from his seruice by strong hand. Wherefore con∣fessing the power of the God of Israel to almightie, and that their owne Idols were subiect thereunto, they agreed to offer a sinne offering, vsing these words; So C. 6. v. 5. yee shall giue glorie to the God of Israel, that take his hand from you, and from your gods and from your land. And what can be a more excellent witnessing, than where an enemie doth approue our cause? according to Aristotle; Pulchrum est testimonium, quo nostra probantur ab hostibus. So did Pharao confesse the liuing God, when he was plagued in Aegypt: and Nabuchodonosor, and Darius, when they had seene his mira∣cles by Daniel. This counsell therefore of the Priests being imbraced, and the golden Haemor∣hoides, and the golden Mice prepared, they caused two milch kine to bee chosen, such as had not beene yoked, and a new Cart or carriage to bee framed: but they durst not driue or direct it to any place certaine, thereby to make tryall whether it were indeed the hand of God that had strucken them. if the Arke of God were carryed towards Bethshemesh and into the territorie of Israel: then they should re∣solue that from God onely came their late destruction. For the Philistims knew that the milch Kine which drew the Arke, could not bee forced from their Calues, but that would haue followed them wheresoeuer; much lesse when they were to themselues would they a contrary way. For in the darkest night in world if calues be remoued from their dammes, the will follow them through woods, and desarts by the foote, till they finde them. But the kine directly towards Bethshemesh: and when they came into the fields thereof, to wit, of one Iosua of the same , stood still there; which the of the Philistims per∣ceiued, they returned to Ekron: After which, God spared not his people the Bethshemites, in that they presumed to into the Arke. And because they knew God and his commandements and had beene taught accordingly: hee strooke them more grieuously than he did the Heathen, for there perished of them fifty thousand and . From hence the Arke was carried to Kirriath-iearim and placed in the house of Abinadab; where it is written that it twentie yeere in the charge of Eleazar his sonne, vntill Dauid brought it to Hierusalem. Now whereas it is said, that in the meane while the Arke was in Nob, Mispah, 2. Sam. c. 6. and 1. Chron. c. 12. and Galgala, it was the Tabernacle, which was at this time seuered from the Arke: or at least, it was for the See in this booke ch. 12. S. 1. in the . present occasion brought to these places, and anon retur∣ned to Kiriath-iearim. §. III. Of SAMVEL, and of his Gouernment. THese Tragedies ouerpast and ended, Samuel, to whom God appeared while was yet a childe, became now Iudge and of Isra∣el. Hee was descended of the familie of 1. Chro. 6. 22. Chore or . For Leui had three sonnes; Gerson, Cheath, and Merari: Cheath had Amram, and Izaar; of Amram came Moses and Aaron; of Izaar, Chore: and of the familie of Chore, Samnel. His father Eleana a Leuite, was called an , not that the Leuites had any proper inheritance, but because hee was of Which regi∣on was called , as ap∣peareth, . 12 . whence for we reade . 1. 2. Mount Ephra∣im, like as Iesse, Dauids father was called an , because borne at , or Bethelem. Hannah his mother being long fruitlesse, obtained him of God by prayers and teares: it being an exceeding shame to the Iewish women, to be called barren in respect of the blessing of God both to Abraham that his seede should multiply, as the Starres of Heauen, and the sands of the Sea, as in the beginning to Adam, In∣crease and multiply, &c, and in Deuteronomie the seuenth; There shall bee neither male , the towne which is in Iuda, Gen. 35. 19. from the region of , which is in Mount , whence Psal. 132. v. 6. is put for Silo, which was in the tribe of . nor female barren among you. Samuel was no sooner borne, but that his mother, according to her former vow, dedicated him to God, and his seruice, to which shee deliuered him euen from the . For as the first borne of all that were called Nazarites, might be redeemed till they were fiue yeeres old for fiue sheckles, and betweene fiue yeeres and twentie for twentie sheckles: so was it not required by the Law that any of the race of the Leuites should be called to serue about the Tabernacle, till they were fiue and twen∣tie yeeres old. Saint Peter reckons in the Actes the Prophets from Samuel, who was the first of the writers of holy Scriptures, to whom vsually this name of a Prophet was giuen, and yet did Moses account himselfe such a one, as in the 18. of Deuteronomie. The Lord thy God will raise vp vnto thee a Prophel like vnto mee, &c. But he is distinguished from those that preceded him, who were called Seers; as, Beforetime in Israel, when a Vers. 15. man went to seeke an answere of God, thus hee spake; Come and let vs goe to the Seer: 1. Sam. 9. for hee that is now called a Prophet, was in old time called a Seer. And although it pleased God to appeare by his Angels to Moses, as before to Abraham, , and Ia∣cob; yet in the time of Eli, there was no manifest vision; not that God had altoge∣ther Sam. 13. with-drawne his grace from Israel: but as the Chaldaean Paraphrast hath it, those before Samuels time, were more clouded and obscure. The places where∣in See in this book, c. 12. §. 1. Samuel iudged were Maspha or Mitspa, seated on a hill in : also Gilgal, and Bethel, of which we haue spoken elsewhere. The Philistims taking knowledge of the assembly and preparation for Warre at in the beginning of Samuels gouernment, gathered their and marched towards the Citie: at whose approch the Israelites strucken with feare, and with the memorie of their former slaughters and seruitude, besought Samuel to pray to God for them; who was Plutarch re∣ports of the King of Rome, was it was told him that the ene∣mies approch∣ed, he nothing dismaied, an∣swered, Ego au∣tem sacrifico. then performing his sacrifice when the were in view. But God being moued with Samuels prayers (as he was by those of Moses, when fought against the Amalekites at their first entrance into Arabia ) It pleased him with thunder and tempest to disperse and beate downe the Armie of the Philistims, according to the prophecie of Hanna, Samuels Mother. The Lords aduersaries shall be destroyed, and out of heauen shall be thunder vpon them &c. Iosephus affirmes, that a part of the Philistims were swallowed with an earth-quake: and that Samuel himselfe led the Israelites in the prosequution of their victory. After which Samuel erected a Monument in memorie of this happie successe, obtained by the miraculous hand of God, which Iosephus called, Lapidem fortem: Samuel, Ebenezer, or the stone of assi∣stance: 1. Sam. 2. 10. and then following the opportunitie and aduantage of the victory, the Israe∣lites recouered diuers Cities of their owne formerly lost, and held long in possession of the Philistims, who for a long time after did not offer any inuasion or reuenge. And the better to attend ther purposes, and to withstand any of their attempts: the Isra∣elites made peace with the Amorites, or Cananites, which lay on their backes, and to the North of them, that they might not be assaulted from diuers parts at once; ha∣uing the Philistims towards the West and Sea∣coast, the Canaanite toward the North and East, and the Idumite on the South. The estate beeing thus settled, Samuel for the ease of the people gaue audience and iudgement in diuers places by , as hath been elsewhere said. CHAP. XVI. Of SAVL. §. I. Of the deliberation to change the gouernment into a Kingdome. BVT when age now beganne to ouer-take Samuel, and that hee was not able to vnder-goe the burthen of so carefull a gouernement, hee put off from himselfe the waight of the affaires on his Sonnes, Ioel and Abijah, who iudged the people at Beersheba, a Citie, the very vtmost towards the South of . And as the place was inconuenient and farre away, so were themselues no lesse remoued from the iustice and vertue of their Father: For the thirst of couetousnesse, the more it swalloweth, the more it drieth, and desireth, finding taste in nothing but gaine; to recouer which, they set the Law at a price, and sold Iustice and iudgement to the best Chapmen. Which when the Elders of Israel obserued, and saw that Samuel as a naturall man (though a Prophet) could not so well discerne the of his owne, they prayed him to consent to their change of gouernment, and to make them a King, by whom they might be iudged as other Nations were; who might also leade them to the Warre and defend them against their enemies. For after the ill and lamentable successe which followed the of Eli his sonnes, when those of Samuel by their first blos∣somes promised to yeeld fruit no lesse bitter, they saw no way to put the gouerne∣ment from out his race, whom they so much reuerenced, but by the choice of a King. In a cause of so great consequence and alteration, Samuel sought counsaile from God: which surely he did not for the establishing of his owne Sonnes; who being as they were, God would not haue approoued his election. Now as it appeares by the Text, this speach or motion displeasing him, hee vsed his best arguments to de∣hort them: which when hee perceiued to bee ouer-feeble, hee deliuered vnto them from Gods reuelation, the inconueniences and miseries which should befall them. And yet, all which hee fore-shewed was not intolerable, but such as hath beene borne, and is so still by free consent of the Subiects towards their Princes. For first he makes them know that the King will vse their sonnes in his owne seruice to make them his Horse-men, Chariotters, and Foot-men; which is not onely not , but by the Vassals of all Kings according to their birth and condition desired: it be∣ing very agreeable to subiects of the best qualitie to command for the King in his Warres, and to till the ground no lesse proper and appertaining to those that are thereto bred and brought vp: so are likewise the offices of women-seruants to dresse meate, to bake , and the like. But whereas immediatly it is threatned; Hee will take vp your Fields, and your Vineyards, and your best trees, and giue them to his ser∣uants; with other oppressions; this hath giuen, and giues dayly occasion to such as would be ruled by their owne , to affirme that Samuel describeth here vn∣to them the power of a King, gouerned by his owne affections, and not a King that feareth God. But others vpon further examination construe this Text farre other∣wise, as teaching vs what Subiects ought with patience to beare at their Soueraignes hand. The former opinion is grounded first vpon that place of Deuteronomie, . 17. where God fore-sheweth this change of gouernment from Iudges to Kings, and af∣ter he had forbidden many things vnto the Kings, as many wiues, couetousnesse, and the like: he commandeth that the Kings which were to reigne ouer Israel, should write the Law of Deuteronomie, or cause it to be written: and to shew how greatly the King should honour the Law, he addeth, It shall be with him, and he shall reade therein all the dayes of his life: that hee may learne to feare the Lord his God, and to keepe all the words of this Law, and these ordinances for to doe them: that hee may prolong his daies in his Kingdome, he and his Sonnes. But to take away any other mans field, say they, is contrarie to the lawes of God: in the same booke written. For it is said, That which is iust and right shalt thou follow, that thou mayest liue. Now if it bee not permitted to . 6. carrie away grapes more than thou eate out of another mans vineyard, but forbidden by God: it is much lesse lawfull to take the vineyard it selfe from the ow∣ner, and giue it to another. Neither are the wordes of the Text (say they) such as . 23. v. 24. . doe warrant the Kings of Israel, or make it proper vnto them, to take at will any thing from their vassalls. For it is not said that it shall be lawfull for the King, or the King may doe this or that: but it is written, that the King will take your Sonnes: and againe, This shall bee the manner of the King that shall reigne ouer you. God thereby fore-shewing what power seuered from pietie, (because it is accountable to God onely) will doe in the future. And hereof we finde the first example in Achab, who tooke from Naboth both his Vineyard and his life, contrary to the trust which God had put in him, of gouerning well his people. For God commanded, That his . 16. people should bee iudged with righteous iudgement. Wherefore, though the King had vnto Naboth composition, as a Vineyard of better value, or the worth in money which he refused: yet because hee was falsly accused, and vniustly condem∣ned (though by colour of law) how grieuously Achab was punished by God, the Scriptures tell vs. Neither was it a plea sufficient for Achab against the all-righteous God, to say that it was done without his consent, and by the Elders of Israel. For God had not then left his people to the Elders, but to the King, who is called a li∣uing Law, euen as Dauid testifieth of himselfe: Posuisti me in caput gentium: For this of S. Augustine is very true: Simulata innocentia, non est innocentia: simulata aequitas non est aequitas: sed duplicatur peccatum in quo est iniquit as & simulatio; innocence, and fained equitie, are neither the one nor the other: but the fault or offence is there doubled, in which there is both iniquitie and dissimulation. Such in effect is their disputation, who thinke this place to containe the description of a Tyrant. But the arguments on the contrary side, as they are many and forcible, so are they well knowne to all; being excellently handled in that Princely discourse of The true Law of free Monarchies, which Treatise I may not presume to abridge, much lesse here to insert. Only thus much I will say, that if practice doe shew the greatnesse of authoritie, euen the best Kings of Iuda and Israel were not so tied by any lawes, but that they did what soe∣uer they pleased in the greatest things; and commanded some of their owne Prin∣ces, and of their owne brethren to be slaine without any triall of law, being some∣time by Prophets reprehended, sometime not. For though Dauid confessed his offence for the death of Vriah, yet Salomon killing his elder brother and others, the same was not imputed vnto him as any offence. That the state of Israel should receiue this change of gouernment, it was not only fore-told by Moses in Deuteronomie, but of by Iacob in this Scripture: The Gen. 49. shall not depart from Iuda, &c. It was also promised by God to Abraham for a Gen. 15. blessing: For it was not onely assured that his issues should in number equall the Gen. 17. Starres in heauen, but that Kings should proceede of him: Which state seeing it is framed from the patterne of his sole rule, who is Lord of the Vniuersall; and the excellencie thereof in respect of all other gouernments, hath been by many iudi∣cious men handled and proued, I shall not neede to ouer-paint that which is gar∣nished with better colours already, that I can lay on. In the time of the Iudges euery man hath obserued what ciuill Warre Israel had: what slaughters they committed vpon each other: in what miserable seruitude they liued for many yeeres: and when it fared best with them, they did but defend their owne , or recouer some parts thereof formerly lost. The dwelt in the best vallies of the Countrie. The Ammonites held much of Gilead ouer Iordan; the Philistims the Sea-coasts: and the it selfe, till Dauids time: all which that King did not conquer and establish, but hee mastered and subiected all the neighbour Nations, and Kings, and made them his tributaries and vassals. But whether it were for that the Israelites were moued by those reasons, which allure the most of all Nations to liue vnder a Monarch, or whe∣ther by this meanes they sought to bee cleered from the sonnes of Samuel, they be∣came 1. Sam. 8. deafe to all the and threats which Samuel vsed, insisting vpon this point that they would haue a King, both to iudge them and defend them: where∣unto when Samuel had warrant from God to consent, he sent euery man to his and abiding. §. II. Of the election of SAVL. AFter that Samuel had dismissed the assembly at , hee forbare the election of a King, till such time as he was therein directed by God: who fore-told him the day before, that hee would present vnto him a man of the Land of Beniamin, whom hee commanded Samuel to anoint. So Samuel went vnto Ramath Sophim, to make a feast for the entertainement of Saul (whom yet hee knew not, but knew the truth of Gods promises) and Saul also ha∣uing wandred diuers dayes to seeke his Fathers Asses, at length by the aduice of his seruant trauailed towards Ramath, to finde out a Seer or Prophet, hoping from him to be told what way to take, to finde his beasts. In which iourney it pleased God (who doth many times order the greatest things by the simplest passages and per∣sons) to elect Saul, who sought an asse, and not a Kingdome: like as formerly it had pleased him to call Moses, while he fed the sheepe of ; and after to make choice of Dauid the yongest of eight sonnes, and by the Scriptures called a little one, who . . 16. was then keeping of beasts, and changed his sheep-hooke into a Scepter, making him of all other the most victorious King of Iuda and Israel. So Iohn and Iacob were taken from casting their nets, to become fishers of men, and honoured with the ti∣tles of Apostles, a dignitic that died not in the , as all worldly Honours doe: but permanent and euerlasting in Gods endlesse Kingdome. When Samuel was entred into Ramath, he prepared a banquet for the King, whom he expected and staied his arriuall at the gate. Not long after came Saul, whom God shewed to Samuel, and made him know that it was the same whom hee had foretold him of, that he should rule the people of God. Saul finding Samuel in the gate, but knowing him not, though a Prophet and Iudge of Israel, much lesse knowing the Honour which attended him, asked Samuel in what part of the Citie the Seer dwelt. Samuel answered that himselfe was the man he sought, and prayed Saul to goe before him to the high place, where Samuel setting him according to his degree, aboue all that were inuited, conferred with him afterwards of the affaires of the Kingdome, and of Gods graces to bee bestowed on him, and the morning following anointed him King of Israel. After this he told him all that should happen him in the way homeward; that two men should incounter him by , who should tell him that his Asses were found, and that his Fathers cares were changed from the feare of losing his beasts, to doubt the losse of his Sonne: that he should then meete three other men in the plaine of Tabor; then a company of Prophets: and that he should be partaker of Gods spirit, and prophecie with them: and that thereby his condition and dispo∣sition should bee changed from the vulgar, into that which became a King elected and fauoured by God. But the Prophets here spoken of, men indued with spirituall gifts, were not of the first and most reuerenced number, who by diuine reuelation fore-told things to come, reprehended without feare the errours of their Kings, and wrought mira∣cles; Chrys. in psal. 43 of which number were Moses, Iosua, Samuel, and after them Gad, Nathan, Abias, Elias, Elisaeus, Isay, Ieremie, and the rest; for these Prophets, saith S. Chrysostome, Omnia tempora percurrunt, praeterita, presentia, & futura: but they were of those of whom S. Paul speaketh of, 1. Cor. 1. 14. who inriched with spirituall gifts, expounded the Scriptures and the Law. At Mispeth Samuel assembled the people, that hee might present Saul to them, who as yet knew nothing of his election: neither did Saul acquaint his owne Vncle therewith, when he asked him what had past betweene him and Samuel: for either he thought his estate not yet assured, or else that it might bee dangerous for him to reueale it, till he were confirmed by generall consent. When the Tribes were as∣sembled at Mizpeth, the generall opinion is, that hee was chosen by lot. Chimbi thinkes by the answere of The and Thumim in the ornaments of the High were in∣serted within the , which therfore was , they pla∣ced in the pe∣ctor. ouer a∣gainst the hart of the High Priest. It is plain that they were not the precious stones nor any thing made by the . See Exod. c. 38. Vrim and Thumim: that is, by the answere of the Priest, wearing that mysterie vpon his brest when he asked counsaile of the Lord. But the casting of lots was not only much vsed among the Iewes, but by many others, if not by all nations. The Land of promise was diuided by lot: God commanded lots to be cast on the two Goates, which should be sacrificed, and which turned off: a fi∣gure of Christs suffering, and our deliuerance, for whose garments the Iewes also . de diuin. . in Mes. cast lots. Cicero, Plautus, Pausaniaes, and others haue remembred diuers sorts of lots, vsed by the Romanes, Graecians, and other Nations: as in the diuision of grounds or honours; and in things to bee vnder-taken: the two first kindes were called diui∣sorie; the third, diuinatory; and into one of these three all may be reduced: all which kindes how soeuer they may seeme chancefull, are yet ordered and directed by God: as in the Prouerbs: The lot is cast into the lap, But the whole disposition is of the Lord. And in like sort fell the Kingdome of Israel on Saul, not by chance, but by Gods or∣dinance, who gaue Samuel former knowledge of his election: from which election Saul with-drew himselfe in modestie, as both Iosephus consters it, and as it may bee gathered by his former answers to Samuel, when he acknowledged himselfe the least of the least Tribe. But Samuel inlightened by God, found where Saul was hidden, and brought him among the people, and he was taller than all the rest by the shoul∣ders. And Samuel made them know that he was the chosen King of Israel, whereup∣on all the multitude saluted him King, and prayed for him; yet some there were that enuied his glory (as in all estates there are such) who did not acknowledge him by of∣fering him presents, as the manner was: of whom Saul, to auoide sedition, tooke no 1. Sam. c. 10. notice. §. III. Of the establishing of SAVL by his first victories. NO sooner was Saul placed in the Kingdome, but that hee receiued knowledge that Nahas King of the Ammonites prepared to besiege Iabes Gilead: which Nation since the great ouerthrow giuen them by Iephta, neuer durst attempt any thing vpon the Israelites, till the be∣ginning of Saul his rule. And although the Ammonites did alwayes attend vpon the aduantage of time, to recouer those Territories which first the A∣morite, and then Israel dispossest them of; which they made the ground of their in∣uasion in Iephta's time; yet they neuer perswaded themselues of more aduantage than at this present. For first they knew that there were many of the Israelites that did not willingly submit themselues to this new King: secondly, they were remem∣bred that the Philistims had not long before 34000. of their men of Warre: and besides had vsed great care and policie that they should haue no Smithes to make them swords or speares: neither was it long before that of the Bethshemesites and places adioyning, there perished by the hand of God more then 50000. and therefore in these respects, euen occasion it selfe inuited them to inlarge their Do∣minions vpon their borderers: Iabes Gilead being one of the neerest. Besides it may further be conictured, that the Ammonites were imboldened against Iabes Gilead, in respect of their weaknesse: since the Israelites destroyed a great part of them, for not . 21. ioyning with them against the Beniamites: at which time they did not onely slaugh∣ter the men and male-children, but tooke from them their yong women, and gaue them to the Beniamites: and therefore they were not likely to haue beene increased to any great numbers: and if they had recouered themselues of this great calami∣tie, yet the Ammonite might flatter himselfe with the opinion, that hauing for long time been disarmed by the Philistims, was not apt to succour those whom they had so deepely wounded and destroyed. But contrariwise, when the tidings came to Saul of their danger, and that the Ammonites would giue them no other condition to ransome themselues, but by pulling out their right eies, by which they should be vtterly disabled for the Warre, as elsewhere hath been spoken: Saul, both to value himselfe in his first yeeres raigne, and because perchance hee was descended of one of those 400. Maides taken from the Gileadites, and giuen to the , gaue or∣der to assemble the forces of , he wing a yoke of Oxen into pieces, and sending them by messengers ouer all the coasts, protesting thus: whosoeuer came not forth after SAVL and after SAMVEL, so should his Oxen bee serued: threatning the people by their goods, and not by their liues at the first. Seuen dayes had Saul to assem∣ble an Armie, by reason that the Gileadites had obtained the respite of these seuen dayes to giue Nahas the Ammonite an answere: who, could they haue obtained any reasonable condition, were contented to haue seuered themselues from Israel, and to become Vassals and Tributaries to the Heathen. In the meane while Saul assem∣bled the forces which repaired vnto him at Bezec, neere Iordan, that he might readi∣ly passe the Riuer; which done, he might in one day with a speedy march arriue at Iabes, vnder the Hills of Gilead. The Armie by Saul led, consisting of three hundred and thirty thousand, here∣turned 1. Sam. 11. 8. an answere to those of Iabes, that they should assure themselues of succour by the next day at noone. For, as it seemeth, Saul marched away in the latter part of the day, and went on all night; for in the morning watch he surprized the Armie of Nahas the Ammonite. And to the end that he might set on them on all sides, he di∣uided his force in three parts, putting them to the sword vntill the heate of the day, and the wearinesse of Sauls troupe inforst them to giue ouer the pursuit. Now the Ammonites were become the more carelesse and secure, in that those of Iabes promi∣sed the next morning to render themselues and their Citie to their mercie. After this happie successe the people were so farre in loue with their new King, that they would haue slaine all those Israelites that murmured against his election, had not himselfe forbidden and resisted their resolutions. Such is the condition of wordly men, as they are violent louers of the prosperous, and base Vassals of the time that flourisheth: and as despightfull and cruell without cause against those, whom any misaduenture, or other worldly accident hath throwne downe. After the Armie remoued, Samuel summoned the people to meete at Gilgal, where 1. Sam. 11. Saul was now a third time acknowledged, and as some Commenters affirme, anoin∣ted King: and here Samuel vsed an exhortation to all the assembly, containing pre∣cepts, and a rehearsall of his owne Iustice, during the beginning of his gouernment 1. Sam. 12. to that day. After Saul had now raigned one yeere before hee was established in Gilgal, or Galgala, he strengthened himselfe with a good guard of 3000. chosen men, of which he assigned 1000. to attend on Ionathan his sonne at , the Citie of his natiuitie: the rest hee kept about his owne person in Micmas; and in the Hill of Bethel. §. IIII. Of SAVLS disobedience in his proceedings in the Warres with the Philistims and Amalekites, which caused his finall reiection. IONATHAN with his small Armie or Regiment that attended him, taking a time of aduantage, surprized a Garrison of Philistims: the same, as some thinke, which Saul past by, when hee came from Rama, where hee was first anointed by Samuel, which they thinke to haue beene Cariath-iearim: because a place where the Philistims had a Gar∣rison, 1. Sam. 10. is called the Hill of God, which they vnderstand of Cariath-iearim: but Iunius vnderstands this Garrison to haue been at Gebab in Beniamin neere Gibha, where Ionathan abode with his thousand followers. Howsoeuer by this it appeareth that the Philistims held some strong places, both in the times of Samuel, and of Saul, within the Territory of Israel: and now being greatly inraged by this surprize, they assembled 30000. armed Chariots, and 6000. Horse, where-with they inuaded Iu∣daea, 1. Sam. 13. 5. and incamped at Machmas, or Michmas, a Citie of Beniamin, in the direct way from Samaria to Hierusalem, and in the midst of the Land betweene the Sea and . With this sudden inuasion the Israelites were strucken in so great a feare, as some of them hid themselues in the caues of the mountaines, other fled ouer Iordan into Gad and Gilead: Saul himselfe with some 2000. men of ordinaric, and many o∣ther people, staid at Galgala in Beniamin, not farre from the passage of Iosua when he led Israel oucr Iordan. Heere Saul by Samuels appointment was to attend the com∣ming of Samuel seuen daies: but when the last day was in part spent, and that Saul percciued his forces to diminish greatly, he presumed (as some expound the place 1. Sam. 13. 9.) to exercise the office which appertained not vnto him, and to offer a burnt offering and a peace offering vnto God, contrarie to the Ecclesiasticall lawes of the Hebrewes, and Gods Commaundements: others expound the word, obtulit, in this place, by obtulit per Sacerdotem, and so make the sinne of Saul not to haue beene any intrusion into the Priests office, but first a disobedience to Gods Commaundement, in not staying according to the appointment 1. Sam. 10. 8. secondly a diffidence or mistrust in Gods helpe, and too great relying vpon the strength of the people, whose departing from him he could not beare patiently; and lastly a Contempt of the holy Prophet Samuel, and of the helpe which the prayers of so godly a man 1. Sam. c. 13. might procure him. But whatsoeuer was his sinne, not withstanding his excuses, he was by Samuel reprehended most sharply, in termes vnfitting his estate, had not ex∣traordinarie warrant beene giuen to Samuel so to doe, from God himselfe, at which time also Samuel feared not to let him know, that the Kingdome should be confer∣red to another (a man after Gods owne heart) both from Saul and his posteritie. Vers. 14. After this Samuel and Saul returned to Gibeah, where Saul, when he had taken view of his armie, found it to consist of 600. men: for the most were fled from him and scattered, yea and among those that staid, there was not any that had either sword or speare, but Saul and his sonne Ionathan only. For the Philistims had not left them any Smyth in all Israel, that made weapons; besides, they that came to Saul came ha∣stily, 1. Sam. 13. 7. and left such weapons and armour as they had, behind them in the garrisons: for if they had had none at all, it might be much doubted how Saul should be able the yeere before, or in some part of this very yeere, to succour Iabes Gilead with 300. and thirtie thousand men, if there had not now beene any yron weapon to defend themselues withall, saue onely in the hand of Saul and Ionathan his sonne. But how∣soeuer, all the rest of the people were formerly disarmed by the Philistims, and all those craftesmen carried out of the land that made weapons: there being left vnto the Israelites onely files to sharpen and amend such stuffe as serued for the Plough, and for nought else: yet that they had some kinde of armes it is manifest, or els they durst not haue attempted vpon the Philistims as they did. And it is not said in the Text that there was not any sword in all Israel, but onely that there was not any found amongst those 600. souldiers which stayed with Saul after Samuels departure: 1. Sam. 13. 22. and it seemeth that when Samuel had publiquely reprehended Saul, that his owne guards forsooke him, hauing but 600. remaining of his 3000. souldiers, and of all the rest that repaired vnto him, of which many were fled from him before Samuel . With this small troupe he held himselfe to his owne Citie of Gibeah, as a place of more strength and better assured vnto him, then Gilgal was. Neither is it obscure how it should come to passe that the Philistims should thus disarme the most part of the Israelites, howsoeuer in the time of Samuel much had bin done against them. For the victories of Samuel were not got by sword or speare, but by thunder from heauen: and when these craftsmen were once rooted out of the Cities of Israel, no maruaile if they could not in a short peace vnder Samuel bee replanted againe. For this tiranny of the Philistims is to be vnderstood, rather of the precedent times, than vnder Samuel: and yet vnder him it is to bee thought that by their crafts they proceeded in the policie, not suffering their artificers to teach the Israelites, and so euen to the times of Saul kept them from hauing any store of armour. The same policie did Nabuchodonosor vse after his Conquest in Iudaea: in Sicilie; and many other Princes else-where in all ages. But these lost weapons in part the Israelites might repaire in Gilead, for ouer Iordan the Philistims had not inuaded. The rest of their defences were such as antiquitie vsed, and their present necessitie ministred vnto them; to wit, clubs, bowes, and slings. For the Beniamites exceeded in casting stones in slings: and that these were the naturall weapons, and the first of all nations, it is manifest; and so in the first of Chronicles the twelfth Chapter, it is written of those that came to succour Dauid against Saul, while he lurked at Siklag, That they were weaponed with bowes, and could vse the right and the hand with stones; and with a sling it was, that Dauid himselfe slew the Gyant . While the State of Israel stood in these hard termes, the Philistims hauing parted their armie into three troupes, that they might spoile and destroy many parts at once; Ionathan strengthened by God, and followed with his Esquire onely, scaled a mountaine, whereon a companie of Philistims were lodged: the rest of their armie 1. Sam. 14. 12. (as may bee gathered by the successe) beeing incamped in the plaine adioyning. And though hee were discouered before he came to the hill top, and in a kinde of derision called vp by his enemies: yet hee so behaued himselfe, as with the assistance of God hee slew twentie of the first Philistims that hee incountred. Whereupon the next companies taking the alarme, and being ignorant of the cause, away amazed altogether. In which confusion, feare, and iealousie, they slaughtered one another in stead of : whereupon those Hebrewes which became of their par∣tie, because they feared to be spoiled by them, tooke the aduantage of their destru∣ction, and slew of them in great numbers. And lastly, Saul himselfe taking know∣ledge of the rout and disorder, together with those Israelites that shrouded them∣selues 1. Sam. 14. in mount Ephraim, set vpon them and obtained (contrary to all hope and ex∣pectation) a most happie and glorious victorie ouer them. Heere was that prophe∣cie in Deuteronomie fulfilled by Ionathan, That one of those which feared God, should kill a thousand, and two of them ten thousand. This done, the small armie of Israel made retrait from the pursuit. And though Saul had bound the people by an oath not to take foode till the euening, yet his sonne Ionathan being infeebled with extreme labour and emptinesse, tasted a drop of hony in his passage: for which Saul his father would haue put him to death, had not the people deliuered him from his . The late miraculous victorie of Saul and Ionathan, seemes to haue reduced vnto the remembrance their former ouerthrow likewise miraculous in the of Samuel; so that for some space of time they held themselues quiet. In the meane while Saul being now greatly encouraged, vndertooke by turnes all his bor∣dering enemies; namely, the Moabits, Ammonits, Edomits, and the Arabians of , 1. Sam. 14. against all which he preuailed. Hee then assembled all the forces hee could make, to wit, 210000. men, and receiuing the commaundement of God by Samuel, hee inuaded Amalec, wasting and destroying all that part of Arabia , and the de∣sart, belonging to the Amalekits, from Hauilah towards Tigris vnto Shur, which bor∣dereth Aegypt; in which warre he tooke Agag their King prisoner. But whereas he was instructed by Samuel to follow this Nation without compassion, because they . 17. first of all other attempted Israel, when they left Aegypt in Moses time: he notwith∣standing did not onely spare the life of Agag, but reserued the best of the beasts and spoile of the Countrie, with pretence to offer them in sacrifice to the liuing God. Therefore did Samuel now a second time make him know, that God would cast him from his roiall estate to which he was raised, when he was of base condition, and as the Text hath it, little in his owne eyes. And though the offence was great in Saul for not obeying the voice of God by Samuel, had there bin no former precept to that ef∣fect: yet seeing Saul could not be ignorant how seuerely it pleased God to inioyne the to reuenge themselues vpō that Nation, he was in all vnexcusable. For . 25. 15. God had commanded that the Israelites should put out the remembrance of AMALEC from vnder heauen. For the crueltie which the of this Agag vsed against the Israelites, especially on those which were ouer wearied, faint, sicke, and aged people, was now to be reuenged on him, & his Nation aboue 400. yeeres afterward; and now hee was to pay the debt of bloud, which his forefathers borrowed from the innocent: himselfe hauing also sinned in the same kind, as these words of Sa∣muel witnesse: As thy sword hath made other women childlesse, so shall thy mother be child∣lesse 1. Sam. 15. 33. among other women; at which time Samuel himselfe (after he had bin by many bootlesse intreaties perswaded to stay awhile with Saul ) did cut Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal, and soone after he departed to Ramath, and came no more to see SAVL, vntill the day of his death. §. V. Of the betweene the reiection of SAVL and his death. NOw while Samuel mourned for Saul, God commanded him to choose a King for Israel, among the sonnes of Ishai: which Samuel (doubting the violent hand of Saul ) feared in a sort to performe, till it pleased God to direct him, how hee might auoid both the suspition, and the danger. And if Samuel knew that it was no way derogating from the prouidence of God, that by his cautious care and wisedome he sought to auoid the inconuenience or dangers of this life, then doe those men mistake the nature of his diuine ordinance, who neglecting the reason that God hath giuen them, doe no o∣therwise auoid the perills and dangers thereof, than as men in the opinion of fate, or destinie, neglecting either to beg counsaile at Gods hand by prayer, or to exercise that wisedome or fore-sight, where-with God hath inriched the mind of man, for his preseruation. Neither did the all-powerfull God (who made and could destroy the world in an instant) disdaine here to instruct Samuel, to auoid the furie of Saul, by the accustomed cautious waies of the world. Of the sonnes of Ishai, Samuel by God directed, made choise of Dauid, the yongest, hauing refused Eliab, the first borne: who though he were a man of a comely person and great strength; yet vnto such outward appearance the Lord had no respect. For as it is written, God not as man seeth, &c. but the Lord beholdeth the heart. Hee also refusing the other sixe brethren, made choise of one whom his Father had al∣together 1. Sam. 26. neglected, and left in the field to attend his flock, for of him the Lord said to SAMVEL, Arise and anoint him, for this is he: which done, Samuel departed & went to Ramath. Neither was it long after this that Saul began to seeke the life of Dauid: in which bloudy mind he continued til he died, ouercome in battaile by the Philistims. The Philistims hauing well considered (as it seemes) the increase of Saul his power through many victories by him obtained, whilest they had sitten still and for borne to giue impediment vnto his prosperous courses, thought it good to make new trial of their fortune, as iustly fearing that the wrongs which they had done to Israel might be repaied with aduantage, if euer opportunitie should serue their often iniu∣red neighbours against , as lately it had done against Moab, Ammon, and the rest of their ancient enemies. Now for the qualitie of their Souldiers, and all Warlike prouisions, the Philistims had reason to think themselues equall, if not superiours to Israel. The successe of their former wars had for the most part bin agreeable to their owne wishes; as for late disasters, they might, according to humane wisedome, im∣pute them to second causes, as to a tempest happening by chance, and to a mistaken alarme, whereby their Armie possessed with a needlesse feare had fallen to rout. Ha∣uing therefore their forces and taken the field, encamping so neere to the Armie which King Saul drew forth against them, that they could not easily depart without the triall of a battaile, each part kept their ground of aduantage for a while, not ioyning in grosse, but maintaining some skirmishos, as refusing both of them to passe the valley that lay between their Camps. Iust causes of feare they had on both sides; especially the Philistims, whose late attempts had beene confounded by the angrie hand of God. Vpon this occasion perhaps it was, that they sought to decide the matter by single combat, as willing to try in one mans person, whether any stroake from heauen were to be feared. of Gath a strong Giant, fearing neither God nor man, vndertooke to defie the whole hoste of Israel, prouoking them with despightfull words, to appoint a Champion that might fight with him hand to hand, offering condition, that the partie vanquished in Champion, should hold it selfe as ouercome in grosse, and become vassall to the other. This gaue occasion to young Dauid, whom Samuel by Gods appointment had anointed, to make a fa∣mous entrance into publike notice of the people. For no man durst expose him∣selfe to encounter the great of Goliah, vntill Dauid (sent by his father of an errand to the campe) accepted the combat, and obtained the victorie, without other armes offensiue or defensiue than a , wherewith hee ouerthrewe that haughtie Gyant, and after with his owne sword strooke off his head. Hereupon the Philistims, who should haue yeelded themselues as subiects to the Conque∣rour, according to the couenant on their owne side propounded, fled without stay; and were pursued and slaughtered euen to their owne gates. By this victorie the Philistims were not so broken, that either any of their townes were lost, or their people discouraged from the Territories of Israel. But Dauid, by whom God had wrought this victorie, fell into the grieuous indignation of his master Saul, through the honour purchased by his well deseruing. For after such time as the spirit of God departed from Saul and came vpon Dauid, he then became a cruell Tyrant, faithlesse, and irreligious. Because the high Priest fed Da∣uid 1. Sam. 16. v. 13. in his necessitie with hallowed bread, and armed him with the sword of his own conquest taken from ; Saul not only by his wicked Edomite Doeg murthered this Abimelech and 85. Priests of Nob, but also he destroyed the Citie, and smote with 1. Sam. 22. 18. the edge of the sword both man and woman, both childe and suckling, both Oxe and Asse, and sheepe. And he that had compassion on Agag the , who was an enemy to God and his people, and also spared and preserued the best of his Cattell, contra∣rie to the Commaundement and ordinance of God, both by Moses and Samuel, had not now any mercie in store, for the innocent, for the Lords seruants the Priests of Israel. Yea he would haue slaine his owne sonne Ionathan, for pitying and pleading Dauids innocencie, as also once before for tasting the hony, when his fainting for hunger made him forget his fathers vnreasonable commination. The companions 1. Sam. 24. 23. of crueltie are breach of faith towards men, and impietie towards God. The for∣mer he shewed in denying Dauid his daughter, whom he had promised him: and a∣gaine in taking her away from him, to whom he had giuen her; also in that when as Dauid had twice spared his life in the Territory of Ziph, and Saul twice sworne to do him no hurt, and his errours, yet he sought still to destroy him, by all the meanes he could. His impietie towards God he shewed, in that he sought counsell of the witch of , which was the last preparatiue for his destruction. For wher∣as when he sought counsel from God he had beene alwaies victorious: from the O∣racle of the Deuil this successe followed, that both himselfe, and his three sons, with his neerest and faithfullest seruants, were all slaughtered by the : his bodie with the bodies of his sonnes (as a spectacle of shame and dishonour) were hung o∣uer the walls of Bethsan: and there had remained till they had found buriall in the bowels of rauenous birds, had not the gratefull of their carca∣ses thence and interred them. This was the end of Saul, after he had gouerned Israel, together with Samuel 40. yeres, and by himselfe after Samuel 20. yeeres, according to , , and Iosephus. But yet it seemeth to mee, that after the death of Act. 13. 21. . pa. . . l. 3. p. 3. . l. 28. Samuel, Saul did not rule very long. For in the beginning of the 25. chapter, it is written that Samuel died: and in the rest of the same chapter the passages are writ∣ten of Dauid, Nabal, and Abigail, after which the death of Saul quickly ensued. An exceeding valiant man he was, and gaue a faire entrance to all those victories which Dauid afterward obtained, for he had beaten the Ammonites with their neigh∣bouring Nations; crusht the Syrians, and their adhaerents; broken the strength of the Amalekites; and greatly wasted the power and pride of the Philistims. §. VI. Of such as liued with SAMVEL and SAVL; of HELLEN and HERCVLES, and of their issues: vpon occasion of the DORES, with the HERA∣CLIDAE, entring PELOPONESVS about this time. IN the second yeere of Samuel, according to Eusebius, was Dauid borne: after Codoman later, and in the ninth yeere: after Bunting in the tenth. For Dauid, saith he, was thirtie yeeres old when he began to reigne: whence it followeth, that he was borne in the tenth of the fortie yeeres, which are giuen to Samuel and Saul. About the eleuenth of Samuel, Aeneas Siluius the sonne of Posthumus began his raigne ouer the Latines in Alba, who gouerned that State 31. yeeres. There are who place before him Latinus Siluius, as brother to Posthumus, calling him the fifth from Aeneas, and fourth King of Alba, whereof I will not stand to dispute. In the eleuenth of Samuel, Dercilus sate in the Throne of Assyria, being the one and thirtieth King; he ruled that Empire 40. yeeres. In this age of Samuel the Dores obtained Peloponnesus, and at once with the Heraclidae, who then led and commanded the Nation, possest a great part thereof 328. yeeres before the first Olympiad, according to Diodorus and Eratosthenes. For all Greece was anciently possessed by three Tribes or Kindreds, viz. the Ionians, Do∣rians, and : at length it was called Helles, and the people Hellenes, of Hellen, the sonne of Deucalton, Lord of the Countrie of Pthiotis in Thessalie. But before the time of this Hellen, yea and long after, Greece had no name common to all the in∣habitants, neither were the people called Hellenes, till such time as partly by trading in all parts of the Land, partly by the plantation of many Colonies, and sundrie great victories obtained, the issues of Hellen had reduced much of the Countrie vnder their obedience, calling themselues generally by one name, and yet euery seuerall Nation after some one of the posteritie of Hellen, who had raigned ouer it. And be∣cause this is the furthest antiquitie of Greece, it will not be amisse to recount the Pe∣digree of her first planters. Iapetus (as the Poets fable) was the sonne of Heauen and Earth, so accounted, ei∣ther because the names of his Parents, had in the Greeke tongue such signification: or perhaps for his knowledge in Astronomie and Philosophie. Iapetus begat Prometheus, and Epimetheus: of whom all men haue read that haue read Poets. Prometheus begat Deucalion: and Epimetheus, Pyrrha. Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha raigned in Thessalie, which then was called Pyrrha (as Cretensis Rhianus affirmeth) of Pyrrha the Queene. In Deucalions time was that great floud, of which we haue spoken elsewhere. Deucalion begat Hellen: whose sonnes were Xuthus, Do∣rus, and Aeolus: of Dorus and Aeolus, the Dores and Aeolians had name. The Aeoles inhabited Boeotia. The Dores hauing first inhabited sundrie parts of Thessalie, did af∣terward seate themselues about Parnassus, and finally became Lords of the Coun∣tries about Lacedaemon: Xuthus the eldest sonne of Hellen, being banished by his bre∣theren, for hauing diuerted from them to his owne vse some part of their Fathers goods, came to Athens: where marrying the Daughter of King Erictheus, hee begat on her two sonnes, Achaeus and Ion. Of these two, Achaeus, for a slaughter by him committed, fled into Peloponnesus: and seating himselfe in Laconia, gaue name to that region: from whence (as some write) he afterwards departed; and leuying an Armie, recouered the Kingdome of his Grand-father in Thessalie. Ion being Generall for the Athenians, when Eumolpus the inuaded Atli∣ca, did obtaine a great victorie, and thereby such loue and honour of the people, that they committed the ordering of their State into his hands. Hee diuided the Citi∣zens into Tribes, appointing euery one to some occupation, or good course of life. When the people multiplied, he planted Colonies in Sycionia, then called Aegialos, or Aegialia: In which Countrie Solinus then raigning, thought it safer to giue his Daughter Helice in marriage to Ion, and make him his Heire, than to contend with him. So Ion married Helice, and built a Towne called by his wiues name in Aegia∣lia, where he and his posteritie raigned long, and (though not obliterating the old name) gaue to that Land the denomination. But in after-times the Dores assisting the Nephewes of Hercules, inuaded Peloponnesus, and ouer-comming the Achaeans, possessed Laconia, and all those parts which the Achaei had formerly occupied. Here∣upon the Achaei driuen to seeke a new seate, came vnto the Iones, desiring to inhabit Aegialia with them, and alleadging in vaine, that Ion and Achaeus had beene bre∣thren. When this request could not be obtained, they sought by force to expell the Ionians, which they performed; but they lost their King Tisamenes, the sonne of Orestes, in that Warre. Thus were the Iones driuen out of Peloponnesus, and compelled to remoue into Attica, from whence after a while they sailed into Asia, and peopled the coast thereof, on which they built twelue Cities, inhabited by them, euen to this day, at the least without any vniuersall or memorable transmigration. This expe∣dition of the Iones into Asia hath been mentioned of all which haue written of that Age, and is commonly placed 140. yeeres after the warre of Troy, and 60. yeeres af∣ter the descent of the Heraclidae into Peloponnesus. These Heraclidae were they of whom the Kings of Sparta issued; which race held that Kingdome about 700. yeeres. Of their Father Hercules many strange things are deliuered vnto vs by the Poets, of which some are like to haue beene true, others perhaps must be allegori∣cally vnderstood. But the most approued Writers thinke that there were many cal∣led Hercules, all whose exploits were by the Greekes ascribed to the sonne of Alcme∣na, who is said to haue performed these twelue great labours. First, he slew the Nemaean Lyon: secondly, he slew the Serpent Hydra, which had nine heads, whereof one being cut off, two grew in the place: The third was the o∣uer-taking a very swift Hare: The fourth was the taking of a wild Bore aliue, which hanted mount Erymanthus in Arcadie: The fift was the cleansing of Augias his Oxe-ftall in one day, which hee performed by turning the Riuer Alpheus into it: The was the chasing away of the Birds from the Lake Stymphalis: The seuenth was the fetching a Bull from Crete: The eighth was the taking of the Mares which Diomedes King of Thrace fed with humane flesh: The ninth was to fetch a Girdle of the Queene of the Amazons: The three last were, to fetch Gerions Beeues from Gades; the golden Apples of the Hesperides; and Cerberus from hell. The Mythologicall inter∣pretation of these I purposely omit, as both ouer-long to be here set downe, and no lesse perplexed than the labours themselues. For some by Hercules vnderstand Fortitude, Prudence, and Constancie, interpreting the Monsters, Vices. Others make Hercules the Sunne, and his trauailes to be the twelue signes of the Zodiac. There are others who apply his workes historically to their owne conceits; as well assured, that the exposition cannot haue more vnlikelihood, than the fables: That he tooke Elis, Pylus, OEchalia, and other Townes, being assisted by such as either ad∣mired his vertues, or were beholding vnto him. Also that he slew many Theeues, and Tyrants, I take to be truly written, without addition of Poeticall vanitie: His trauailes through most parts of the world are, or may seeme, borrowed from Her∣cules Libycus. But sure it is that many Cities in Greece were bound to him: for that he (bending all his indeuours to the common good) deliuered the Land from much oppression. But after his death no Citie of Greece ( Athens excepted) re∣quited the vertue and deserts of Hercules, with constant protection of his children, persequuted by the King Eurystheus. This Eurystheus was sonne of , and grand-child of Perseus; he raigned in Mycena, the mightiest Citie then in Greece. He it was that imposed those hard taskes vpon Hercules, who was bound to obay him (as Poets report) for expiation of that Murther, which in his madnesse he had committed vpon his owne Children; but as others say, because hee was his Subiect and Seruant: wherefore there are who commend Eurystheus for im∣ploying the strength of Hercules to so good a purpose. But it is generally agreed by the best writers, that Hercules was also of the stocke of Perseus, and holden in great iealousie by Eurystheus because of his vertue, which appeared more and more in the dangerous seruices, wherein hee was imployed, so that hee grew great in re∣putation and power through all Greece; and had by many wiues and Concubines aboue threescore children. These children Eurystheus would faine haue got into his power, when Hercules was dead: but they fled vnto Ceyx King of Trachinia, and from him (for he durst not withstand Eurystheus ) to Athens. The not onely gaue them entertainement, but lent them ayd, wherewith they encountred Eurystheus. Iolaus the brothers sonne of Hercules, who had assisted him in many of his trauels, was captaine of the Heraclidae. It is said of him, that being dead, he ob∣tained leaue of Pluto to liue againe till hee might reuenge the iniuries done by Eu∣rystheus: whom when hee had slaine in battell, hee died againe. It seemes to mee, that whereas he had led Colonies , and aboade there a long time forgot∣ten: he came againe into Greece to assist his cousins, and afterwards returned back. When the Peloponnesians vnderstood that Eurystheus was slaine, they tooke Atreus the sonne of Pelops to their King: for hee was rich, mightie, and fauourcd of the people. Against him the Heraclidae marched vnder Hyllus the sonne of Hercules. But to auoid effusion of bloud, it was agreed, that Hyllus should fight with Echenus King of the Tegeatae a people of Arcadia, who assisted Atreus, with condition, that if Hyllus were victor, hee should peaceably enioy what hee challenged as his right: other∣wise the Heraclidae should not enter Peloponnesus in 100. yeeres. In that combat Hyllus was slaine, and the Heraclidae compelled to forbeare their Country, till the third generation: at which they returned vnder Aristodemus (as the best au∣thoritie shewes, though some haue said, that they came vnder the conduct of his children) and brought with them the Dores, whom they planted in that country, as is before shewed, hauing expelled the Achaei, ouer whom the issue of Pelops had raigned after the death of Eurystheus foure generations. §. VII. Of HOMER and HESIOD, and many changes in the world, that happened about this age: ABout this time that excellent learned Poet Homer liued, as many of the best affirme. Hee was by race of the Maeones, descen∣ded (as Functius imagineth) of Berosus his Anamaeon, who gaue name to that people. But this Functius imagineth Homer the Poet to haue Funct. Chro. . 11 col. D. beene long after these times, rashly framing his according to This author set out with Berosus and o∣thers, first at Basil, and after with Fryer An∣nius his Com∣ment at Ant∣werp is . Archilochus in the tract, or rather fragment de temporibus; and makes seuen more of this name to haue florished in diuers Cities in Greece. Whence, perhaps, sprang the diuersitie of opinions, both of the time and of the natiue Citie of Homer. According to this Archilochus, Functius finds Homer about the time of Manasse King of Iuda, and Numa of Rome. He was called Melesigenes from the place of his birth, and at length Homer, because blind men follow a guide, which signification among others, is in the verbe : for this Homer in his lattter time was blind. Stromatum l. 5 Clemens re∣cites . f. 147. placeth Homer in the 32. ge∣neration in the time of Samuel. many different opinions touching the question of the time when Homer liued. So also Nat . l. 3. c. 11. item. l. 17. c. 21. Aulus Gellius, and Assyrius in his Oration ad gentes. Paterculus rec∣kons that Homer florished 950. yecres before the Consulship of Marcus Vinutius: which Mercator casteth vp in the worlds yeere 3046. and after Troy taken, about 260. yeeres: and about 250. yeeres before the building of Rome, making him to haue florished about the time of Ichosaphat King of Iuda. But Clemens Alexandrinus and Tatianus aboue named, mention authours that make him much ancienter. The difference of which authours in this point is not the readers considera∣tion, that by this one instance hee may guesse of the difficultie, and so pardon the in the computations of ancient time: seeing in such diuersitie of opinions a man may hardly finde out what to follow. For Crates the Grammarien (as Clemens Alexandrinus reports) gaue being to Homer about 80. yeeres after Troy taken, neere the time that the Heraclidae returned into Peloponnesus: and As both . Alex. and Tati∣an. Assyr. re∣port his opini∣on rerum . 41. Eratosthenes after Troy 100. yeeres. Theopompus 500. yeeres after the armie of Greece sailed into for the warre of Troy. makes him contemporarie with Gyges, who be∣gan to reigne in the 18. Olympiad (which was 45. yeeres after Rome was built) and Sosibius saith, that he was 90. yeeres before the first Olympiad: which seekes to Ros. in disc. tem∣porum. proue by the times of Charillus and his sonne Nicander; Philocorus placeth him 180. after Troy: Aristarchus 140. in the time of the seating of the Colonies in Ionia. Apol∣lodorus Phil. in comm. in . affirmes that hee liued while Agesilaus gouerned ; and that Ly∣curgus in his young yeeres, about 100. yeeres after the Ionian plantations, came to visit him, neere 240. yeeres after Troy taken. Herodotus findes Homer florishing 622. Her. in vita . yeeres before Xerxes enterprise against the Graecians: which Beroaldus accounteth at 168. yeeres after the Troian warre. Eusebius seemes to make him to haue beene about the time of Ioas King of Iuda 124 yeeres before Rome built: though els∣where in his Chronologie he notes, that some place him in the time of Samuel, and o∣thers in the end of Dauid, and others in other ages. In his Euangelicall preparation, where out of Tatianus Assyrius he citeth sundry opinions touching the time when Homer liued, hee reckoneth many other Greeke writers more ancient than Homer; as Linus, Philammon, Epimenides, Phemius, Aristaeus, Orpheus, Musaeus, Thamyras, Am∣phion, and others. Now whether Homer or Hesiodus were the elder, it is also much disputed. Aulus Noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 11. Gellius reports that Philochorus and Xenophanes affirme, that Homer preceded Hesiod: and on the contrarie, that Luc. Accius the Poet, and Ephorus the Historian make He∣siod of an elder time than Homer. Varro leaues it vncertaine which of these learned Varro de imag. lib. 1. fablers was first borne: but he finds that they liued together some certaine yeeres, wherein he confirmes himselfe by an Epigram, written vpon a Treuit, and left by Hesion in Helicon. Cornelius Nepos reports that they both liued 160. yeeres before Rome built: while Nep. in Chron. . l. 1. annal. the reigned in Alba, about This number cor∣rects, & reads 240. for it. 140. yeeres after the fall of Troy. Euthy. in . apud Clem. Alex. Strom. 5. Euthimenes findes them both 200. after Troy taken, in the time of Acastus the sonne of Pelias, King of Thessaly. For my selfe, I am not much troubled when this Poet li∣ued; neither would I offend the Reader with these opinions, but onely to shew the vncertaintie and disagreement of Historians, aswell in this particular, as in all other questions and dispute of time. For the curiositie of this mans age is no lesse ridicu∣lous, than the inquisition why he began his Iliades with the word Menin, as perhaps containing some great mysterie. In derision whereof Lucian faining himselfe to haue beene in hell, and to haue spoken with Homer, there asked him the cause why he be∣gan his booke with that word: who answered, That he began in that sort, because it came in his head so to doe. It seemeth that Senyes, or after Macrobius Senemires, ruled Aegypt at this time: for Tanephersobris was his successour, who preceded Vaphres, father in law to Salomon. About the end of Sauls gouernment, or in the beginning of Dauids time accor∣ding Eus. & Cass. in. Chron. to Cassiodorus, the Amazones with the Cymmerians inuaded Asia, then ruling in Italie. And besides the ouerthrow of that famous State of Troy (which fell 103. yeeres before Dauids time) there were many other changes in the middle part of the world, not onely by reason of those Northerne Nations: but there sprung vp, somewhat neerely together, Kingdomes into greatnesse not before erected. In Italie, that of the Latines: in the South part of Greece, those of Lacedaemon, , and the Achaei. In Arabia, Syrja Soba, and Damascus, the Adads made them∣selues Princes, of which there were tenne Kings, which began and ended with the King of Israel in effect: and somewhat before these, the State of the Israeelites ha∣uing now altered their forme of Gouernment, began to flourish vnder Kings, of which Dauid, in a few yeeres, became master of all those neighbouring Nations, who by interchange of times had subiected the Iudaeans, corrupted their religion, and held them vnder in a most abiect, and grieuous slauerie; to wit, the Edumaeans, Moabites, Ammonites, Midianites, Ituraeans, and the rest of the Arabians, with the Phi∣listims, Iebusites, Geshurites, Machathites, all which acknowledged Dauid for their So∣ueraigne Lord, and paid him tribute. CHAP. XVII. Of DAVID. §. I. Of DAVIDS estate in the time of SAVL. THE hazards which Dauid ran into while he was yet onely designed King, and liuing as a priuate man, ex∣pected the Empire, were very many. The first perso∣nall act of fame, was his killing of Goliah in the view of both armies, whereby became knowne to Saul, and so highly affected of Ionathan the sonne of Saul, that hee loued him as his owne soule: In so much as when Saul sought to perswade his sonne, that Dauid would assuredly be the ruine of his house, and estate, and offered him violence when he pleaded his cause, Ionathan could neuer be perswaded, neuer forst, nor wearied from the care of Dauids life, and well doing. It was not long after this signall act of Dauids, but that Saul became exceeding iealous of him, though he were become as his houshold seruant, and his Esquire, or armour-bearer. Saul being vexed with an euill spirit, was aduised to procure some cunning Musician to play before him vpon the Harpe; whereby it was thought that hee might finde ease; which came to passe accordingly. He entertained Dauid for this purpose, and began to fauour him, giuing him a place of Commaund among the men of warre. But the iealous tyrant soone waxed wearie of his good affections, and sought to kill Dauid, being thereunto moued onely through enuie of his vertue. This passion first brake forth in the middest of his rauing fit, at which time hee threw a speare at Dauid that was then playing on his Harpe to doe him ease. Censorinus remembreth one Asclepius a Physician, who practised the curing of Cens. c. 12. & 14 the Frenzie, by the like Musick: and tempered thereby those diseases which grew from passion. That Pythagor as did also the like by such a kinde of harmonie, Seneca in his third booke of anger witnesseth. But the madnesse of Saul came from the cause of causes, and was thereby incurable, howsoeuer it sometimes left him, and yeelded vnto that Musicke, which God had ordained to be a meane of more good to the Musician than to the King. Saul hauing failed in such open attempts, gaue vnto Dauid the Commaundement of 1000. souldiours, to confront the Philistims withall. For hee durst not trust him as before, about his person, fearing his reuenge. Now the better to couer his hatred towards him, hee promised him his daughter Merab to wife: but hauing married her to Adriel, hee gaue to Dauid his younger daughter Michol, but with a condition, to present him with an hundred foreskinnes of the Philistims: hoping (in re∣spect of the valour of that Nation, that the Philistims would take Dauids head, than hee their foreskinnes. This hope failing, when as now Dauids victories begat new feares and iealousies in Saul, hee practised with Ionathan, and afterwards with his owne hands attempted his life, but his purposes were still frustrated. After all this hee sought to murther him in his owne house, but Michol his wife deliuered him. So Dauid sought Samuel at Ramah, and being pursued by Saul, fled thence vnto Nob in Beniamin, to , then to Achis the Philistim, Prince of Geth: where to ob∣scure 1. Sam. 19. himselfe, he was forc't to counterfeit both simplicitie and distraction. But being ill assured among the Philistims, he couered himselfe in the Caue of Adullam: 1. Sam. 21. and after conueying such of his kinsfolks as were not fit to follow him into Moab, he hid himselfe in the desarts of Ziph, Maon, and the hilles of Engaddi, where hee cut 1. Sam. 24. off the lap of Sauls garments, and spared his : as he did a second time in the de∣sart 1. Sam. 26. of , after his passage with Nabal and Abigail. After which he repaired to A∣chis of Geth the second time, and was kindly entertained in regard of the , with which his master Saul was knowne to prosecute him. Iansen in Psal. Of Achis Dauid obtained It seemeth that Simeon neuer obtai∣ned Siglag till this time, for it is said in the 1. of Sam. c. 27. v. 6. therefore Siglag pertai∣neth vnto the King of Iuda vnto this day. Siklag in Simeon, pretending to inuade Iudoea: but hee bent his forces another way and strooke the Amalekites, with other enemies of Isra∣el, letting none liue to complaine vpon him. Achis supposing that Dauid had drawne bloud of his owne Nation, thought himselfe assured of him: and therefore preparing to inuade Israel, summoneth Dauid to assist him, who dissembling his intent, seemeth very willing thereto. But the rest of the Philistim Princes knowing his valour, and doubting his disposition, liked not his company, and therefore hee withdrew himselfe to Siklag. At his returne he found the towne burnt, his two wiues with the wiues and children of his people taken by the Amalekites: Here∣upon his fellowes mutined, but God gaue him comfort, and assurance to recouer all againe: which he did. This armie of the Philistims commaunded by Achis, encountred Saul at Gilboa, in which hee and his three sonnes were slaine. The newes with Sauls Crowne and bracelets were brought to Dauid at Siklag, in his returne from being victorious ouer Amalech, by a man of the same Nation, who auowed (though falsly) that himselfe at Sauls request had slaine him. Dauid, because hee had accused himselfe, made no scruple to cause him to be slaine at the instant: and the sooner, because the probabi∣lities strong euidence withall. Otherwise it followeth not that man 2. Sam. 1. ought to bee beleeued of himselfe to his owne preiudice. For it is held in the lawe; Confessio reorum non habenda est pro explorato crimine, nisi approbatio alia instruit religio∣nem In F. de quoest. l. prim. cognoscentis. The prisoners confession must not be taken for an euidence of the crime, vnlesse some other proofe informe the conscience of the Iudge. For a man may confesse those things of himselfe, that the Iudge by examination may know to bee impossi∣ble. But because it is otherwise determined in the title de custodia reorum l. si confes∣sus, et in cap. de poenis l. qui sententiam, therfore doth the Glosse reconcile these two pla∣ces in this sort: Si quis in iudicio sponte de seipso confiteatur, & posteà maneat in confes∣sione, id est satis. If any man in iudgement doe confesse of himselfe, of his owne accord, and after doth perseuere in his confession, it is enough. That Dauid greatly bewailed Saul it is not improbable, for death asunder all : and the lamentable that befell him, being a King, with whom in effect the strength of Israel also fell, could not but stirre vp sorrow, and moue compassion in the heart of Dauid. The victorie which the Philistims had gotten was so great, that some townes of the Israelites, euen beyond the riuer of Iordan, were abandoned by the inhabitants, and left vnto the enemie, who tooke possession of them without any resistance made. Wherefore it may seeme strange, that a Nation so warlike and ambitious as were the Philtstims, did not follow their fortune with all diligence, and seeke to make the Conquest entire. Most like it seemes, that the Ciuill warre immediatly breaking out betweene Dauid and the house of Saul, wherein Iuda was diuided from the rest of Israel, gaue them hope of an easie victorie ouer both; and thereby cau∣sed them to attempt nothing at the present, lest by so doing they should inforce their enemies to a necessarie reconciliation; but rather to permit that the one part should consume the other, by which meanes, both the victors, and the vanquished, would become a prey to the violence of such as had beaten them, when their forces were vnited. §. II. Of the beginning of DAVIDS reigne, and the warre made by ABNER for ISBOSETH. AFter the death of Saul, Abner, who commaunded for Saul in the war, sought to aduance Isboseth (or Iebostus according to Iosephus ) though hee had no right to the Kingdome of Israel: for Mephiboseth the first sonne of Ionathan liued. Against this Abner, and Isboseth, Dauid made a defensiue warre, till Abner past Iordan, and entred the border of Iuda; at which time he sent Ioab with such forces as he had, to resist Abner: Isboseth remaining in Gilead, and Dauid in Hebron. The armies encountred each other neere , where it seemeth, that Abner made the offer to trie the quarrell by the hands of a few; like to that Combat betweene the Lacedoemonians, and the Argiues, remembred by Herodotus, 300. being chosen of each Nation, of which number three persons were onely left vnslaine. The like triall by a farre lesse number was perfor∣med by the Horatij and Curiatij for the Romanes and Latines. The same challenge Goliah the Philistim made, whom Dauid slew: a custome very ancient. Edward the third offered the like triall in his owne person to the French King; and Francis the French King to Charles the Emperour. There were twelue chosen of each part, in this warre of Dauid with the house of Saul, to wit, so many of Beniamin, and as ma∣ny of Iuda: whose force and valour was so equall, as there suruiued not any one to challenge the victorie. But the quarrell not here: for the armie of Iuda prest Abner in , and brake him. Three hundreth and men of Abners compa∣nions were slaine, and but twentie of Iuda; whereof Asabel the brother of Ioab was one: who when he would needs pursue Abner, and by Abners perswasions could not 2. Sam. 2. be moued to quit him, he was forced to turne vpon him, wounding him to death, with the stroake of his speare. For though Asahel were an excellent footman, and as it is written in the Text, as light as a wild Roe, and as Iosephus reporteth, conten∣ded not onely with men, but with horses; and hoped to haue gotten great same, if he could haue mastered Abner (who as Asahel perswaded himselfe, had by being o∣uerthrowne and flying away lost his courage) yet here it fell out true; That the race Eccles. is not to the swift. That this ciuill warre lasted two yeeres, wee finde it written in the second of Samuel the second Chapter; though in the beginning of the third it is againe made Vers. 10. probable, that this contention dured longer; and therefore the matter resteth still in dispute, and some of the Rabbines conceiue that Isboseth had then reigned two yeeres, when this was written, the warre as yet continuing a longer time. For Ab∣ner held for the partie of Isboseth after this, and till such time as there grew iealou∣sie betweene him and Isboseth for Sauls concubine: neither did the death of Isboseth instantly follow; but how long after the murther of Abner it happened, the same doth not certainly appeare. §. III. Of the death of ABNER slaine by IOAB, and of ISBOSETH by RECHAB and BAANAH. ABner, reconciled to Dauid, was anon by Ioab murdered; for Ioab could 2. Sam. 3. 27. not endure a companion in Dauids fauour, and in the commande∣ment of his forces, by which hee was growne so powerfull, as Dauid forbare to call him to account; for thus much hee confesseth of him∣selfe: I am this day weake, and these men the sonnes of ZERVIAH bee too 2. Sam. 3. 39. hard for mee. In this sort Dauid complained after Abners death; and to make it cleare that hee hated this fact of Ioab, hee followed him with this publike imprecation; Let the bloud fall on the head of IOAB, and on all his fathers house: and let them be sub∣iect Vers. 29. to vlcers, to the leprosie, to lamenesse, to the sword, and to pouertie, &c. For could a∣ny thing haue withstood the ordinance of God, this murther committed by Ioab might greatly haue indangered Dauids estate, Abner being the mouth and trust of all the rest of the Tribes, not yet reconciled. This mischaunce therefore Dauid o∣penly bewailed, so that all Israel perceiued him to bee innocent of that fact. The place which Abner held, being Generall of the men of warre, was of such impor∣tance, that the Kings themselues were faine to giue them great respect, as hath bene shewed more at large. This office Ioab held in the armie of Iuda, & thought himselfe worthy to hold the place , if once his Lord might obtaine the whole Kingdome. For hee was neere to Dauid in kinred, and had beene partaker of all his ; wherefore hee did not thinke it meete, that an old enemie should in re∣ward of new benefits, be made his partner. Indeed he was by nature so of his dignitie and place, that hee afterward slew Amasa his owne kinsman, and the Kings, vpon the same quarrell, taking it in high to see him ioyned with himselfe as captaine of the of Iuda; much lesse could brooke a superiour, and such a one as had his brother, and beene beaten himselfe in battell. But howsoeuer did hate or despise Abner, Dauid esteemed highly of him as of a Prince, and a great man in Israel, excusing the ouersight by which he might seeme to haue perished, by affirming that died not like a foole, nor a man vanquished, But as a man falleth before wicked men, so (said hee) diddest thou fall. And certainly it is 2. Sam. 3. no errour of wit, nor want of valour and vertue in him whom a stronger hand de∣stroyeth Vers. 34. vnawares, or whom subtiltie in free trust bringeth to confusion. For all vnder the Sunne are subiect to worldly miseries and misaduentures. Howsoeuer Is∣boseth meant to haue dealt with Abner, yet when he heard of his death, hee despai∣red greatly of his estate, and with him all Israel were possest with great feare: inso∣much as two of Isboseths owne Captaines, Rechab and Baanah, murthered Isboseth, 2. Sam. 4. and presenting his head to Dauid, receiued the same reward that the Amalekite lately did, for pretending to haue slaine Saul. Isboseth being dead, all the Elders of Israel repaired to Dauid at Hebron, where he was the third and last time anointed by ge∣nerall consent. §. IIII. Of the flourishing time of DAVIDS Kingdome, the taking of Ierusalem, with two ouerthrowes giuen to the Philistims, and the conduction of the Arke to the Citie of DAVID. WHen Dauid was now established in the Kingdome, his first enterprise was vpon the , who in derision of his force, and in the strength of the place (as is thought) manned their walles with the blinde and lame of their Citie; which Dauid soone after entred: all 2. Sam. 5. their other forces notwithstanding. For hauing mastered the fort of Zion (which was afterward the Citie of Dauid ) hee became Lord of Hierusalem, without any great danger, expelling thence the Iebusites, who had held it from the foundation, to the times of Moses and Iosua, and after them almost 400. yeeres. There are who expound this place otherwise: Except thou take away the blinde and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither. For some thinke that it was meant by the Idols of the Iebusites: others, that it had to the made long before with Isaac, and : the one blinde by nature and age, the other made lame by wrestling with the Angell, and that therefore till those (that is, till that ) be broken, Dauid ought not to molest them. But for my selfe I take it with Iosephus, that they armed their wals with certaine impotent people at first, in scorne of Dauids at∣tempt. For they that had held their Citie about 400. yeeres against all the children of Israel, Iosua, the Iudges, and Saul, did not doubt but to defend it also against Dauid. When he had now possest himselfe of the very heart and Center of the Kingdom, and receiued congratulatorie Embassadours & presents from Hiram King of Tyre: he entertained diuers other concubines & married moe wiues, by whom he had ten sons in Ierusalem, and by his former wiues he had six in Hebron where he reigned 7 yeeres. The Philistims hearing that Dauid was now anointed king, as well of Iuda as of Isra∣el, they thought to try him in the beginning, before hee was fully warme in his seat. And being encountred by Dauid at two seuerall times in the of , or of 2. Sam. 5. the Giants, they were at both times ouerthrowne. After which hee called the place Baalperazim. Then Dauid assembled 30000. choice Israelites to conduct the Arke of God from the house of Abinadab in , to the Citie of Dauid, which businesse was in∣terrupted by the death of Vzzah the sonne of Aminadab, whom the Lord slewe for presuming to touch the Arke, though it were with intent to stay it from taking harme, when it was shaken. But after three yeeres it was with great solemnitie brought into the Citie with sacrifices, musicke, dances, and all signes of ioyfulnesse, in which Dauid himselfe gladly bare a part. Heereupon derided him for dan∣cing before the Arke, and afterward told him in scorne, That hee was vncouered as a foole in the eyes of the maidens his seruants; namely that forgat his regall dignitie both in apparrell and behauiour; and mixed himselfe among the base multitude, dancing as fooles doe in the wayes and streetes: not that shee disliked Dauids beha∣uiour (as I take it) though she made it the colour of her derision. But rather the a∣boundant griefe, which this spectacle stirred vp, beholding, the glorie of her hus∣band to whom shee was deliuered lastly by force, and remembring the miserable end of her father and brethren, out of whose ruines she conceiued that the sonne of had built this his greatnesse, together with the many new wiues and concu∣bines imbraced since his possession of Ierusalem, made her breake out in those de∣spitefull tearmes, for which she remained barren to her death. This done, Dauid consulted with the Prophet Nathan for the building of the 1. Chron. c. v. 3. Temple or house of God: but was forbidden it, because he was a man of warre, and had shed bloud. So greatly doth the Lord and King of detest homicide; hauing threatned, not in vaine, that hee would require the bloud of man, at the hand of man and beast. The warres which Dauid had made were iust, and the bloud there∣in shed was of the enemies of God, and his Church: yet for this cause it was not permitted that his hands should lay the foundation of that holy Temple. Hereby it appeares how greatly those Princes deceiue themselues, who thinke by bloud∣shed and terrour of their warres, to make themselues in greatnes like to the Almigh∣tie, which is a damnable pride; not caring to imitate mercie and goodnesse, or seeke the blessednesse promised by our Sauiour vnto the peacemakers. Now although it was not pleasing to the Lord to accept a Temple of Dauids founding, yet was his religious intent so well accepted, that hereupon hee receiued both a confirmation of the Kingdom to him and his heirs, and that happie promise of the euerlasting throne, that should be established in his seede. §. V. The of the Philistims and Moabites. SOone after this Dauid ouerthrew the Philistims, which made them al∣together 2. Sam. 8. v. 1. powerlesse, and vnable to make any inuasion vpon Israel in haste. For it is written, Accepit Amgaris è manu Philisthoeorum; which place our English Geneua conuerts in these words, And DAVID tooke the of bondage out of the hand of the Philistims. The Latine of Iunius giueth another and a better sense; for by that bridle of Amgar was meant the strong Citie of Gath, or Geth, and so the Geneua hath it in the marginall note. This Citie of Gath was the same which was afterward , set on the frontier of Paloestina at the entrance into and Ephraim. From thence they made their in∣cursions, and thereinto their retrait in all their inuasions, which being taken by and demolished, there was left no such frontier towne of equall strength to the Philistims on that part. The hill whereon Geth or Gath stood, the Hebrewes cal Ammoe, in 8 c. of the second of Sam. whereof and of the word Gar is made Amgar, of which Plinie in his first booke, and thirteenth Chap. This exposition is made plaine and confirmed in the first of Chro. the 18. There was no nation bordering the Iewes that so greatly afflicted them as the Phi∣listims did, who before the time of Saul, (to the end they might not sharpen any wea∣pon against them) did not leaue one Smith in al their Cities & villages of that kinde, but inforst them to come downe into their territorie, for all iron worke whatsoeuer they needed; so as the till this time of Dauid were seldome free from pay∣ing 1. Sam. 13. tribute to the Philistims. After this he gaue them foure other ouerthrowes: but the war of the and Arabians came betweene. In the first of which he was indangered by , the head of whose speare weighed 300. shickles of brasse, which make nine pound three quarters of our poizes: at which time succoured Dauid and slew the Philistim, whereupon the Councellors and Captaines of Dauid (lest the light of Israel might 2. Sam. 21. v. 17. by his losse be quenched) vowed that he should not thencefoorth hazard himself in any battaile. The second and third incounter and ouerthrow of the Philistims was at Gob a place neere Gesar, and the last at Gath or Geth. And being now better assu∣red of the Philistims by the taking of Geth, hee inuaded Moab, from whom notwith∣standing in his aduersitie hee sought succour and left his parents with him in trust. But whether it were the same King or no it is not knowne. The Rabines that Moab slew those kinsfolkes of , which liued vnder his protection in time, but questionlesse well knew how that Nation had bin alwayes enemies to Israel, and tooke all the occasions to vexe them that were offered. And he also remembred that in the 23. of Deuter. God commaunded Israel not to seeke the peace or of the , which Dauid well obserued, for he de∣stroyed two parts of all the people, leauing a third to till the ground. This victorie obtained, he led his armie by the border of Ammon towards Zobah, the region of Adadezer the sonne of Rehob King thereof. The place is set downe in the descrip∣tion of the holy Land: to which I referre the Reader. §. VI. The warre which DAVID made vpon the Syrians. IT is written in the Text: DAVID smote also HADADEZER &c. as hee went to recouer his border at the riuer Euphrates. Now whether the words ( as hee went to recouer his border ) be referred to Dauid or it is not agreed vpon. Iunius thinkes that the article ( he ) hath relation to Dauid, who finding Tohu opprest by , ouer∣threw the one and succoured the other. But the ancient and most receiued opinion, that this recouerie hath reference to the Syrian, is more probable. For if Dauid had intended any such enterprize towards , hee was in farre better case to haue proceeded after his victorie than before: seeing that ( being taken) he had now left no enemie on his backe, either to pursue him, to take victuals and supplies from him, or to stop the passages of the mountaines vpon him at his returne. Againe, seeing Dauid was either to passe through a part of Arabia the desart, or by the plains of , his armie consisting of footmen, for the most, if not all: Hee had now both horse and chariots good store to carry his prouisions through those vncultiued places, by which he was to haue marched before he could haue reached Euphrates or any part thereof. But we find that Dauid returned to , after hee had twice ouerthrowne the armie, not bending his course towards the riuer Euphrates, but seeking to establish his purchases alreadie made. Whereby it may appeare, that it was the Syrian, and not King Dauid, that was going to inlarge his bor∣der, as afore is said. The king of , and of , wherof that region is so called, hea∣ring that was ouerthrowne by the , fearing his owne estate, & the losse of his owne country which adioyned to Zobah of , sent for an ar∣my of or to his succour: but these, as it appeareth, came too late for , and too soone for themselues: for there perished of those supplies 22000. This king of Damascus, Iosephus (out of an ancient Historian) calleth Adad, who was also of the same name & family as all those other Adads were: which now began to grow vp in greatnesse, and so continued for ten descents, till they were ex∣tinguished by the Assyrians, as is shewed heretofore. Dauid hauing now reduced Da∣mascus vnder his obedience, left a garrison therin, as he did in Edom: hauing also sackt the adioyning cities of Betah, and Berati, belonging to Adadezer, of which Cities Pto∣lomy calleth Betah, Tauba: and Berathi he nameth Barathena. Tohu or Thoi whose coun∣try of Hamath ioyned to Adadezer (as in the description of the Holy land the reader may perceiue) sent his son Ioram to congratulate this successe of Dauid: partly because he had warre with Adadezer, and partly because he feared Dauid now victorious. He also presented Dauid with vessels of gold, siluer, and brasse, all which together with the golden shields of the Aramites, and the best of all the spoils of other Nations, Dauid 2. Sam. 8. dedicated vnto God at his returne. Iunius translated the words ( aureos ) by vm∣bones, as if all the parts of the targets were not of gold but the bosses only. The Sep∣tuagint call them bracelets: Aquils, golden chaines. But because Roboam made shields of brasse in place of these of , at such time as the Aegyptian sackt the Temple of Hierusalem, it may be gathered thereby, that those of Adadezer were golden shelds. This done, Dauid sent Embassadours to Hanum King of the Ammonites to con∣gratulate 2. Sam. 1. his establishment in his fathers Kingdome: for Dauid in the time of his affliction vnder Saul, had beene relieued by Nahash, the father of Hanum. But this Ammonite being ill aduised, and of his estate, vsed Dauids messengers so barbarously, and contemptuously (by curtailing their beardes, and their gar∣ments) as he thereby drew a warre vpon himselfe, which neither his owne strength, nor all the aydes purchased could put off, or sustaine. For notwithstanding that had waged three and thirtie thousand Souldiers of the Amalekites, and their confederates; to wit, of the vassalles of Adadezer twentie thousand, and of Maa∣chah Maachah the North part of Traconitis re∣membred in Deut 3. 14. and Ishtob thirteene thousand (for which hee disbursed a thousand talents of siluer) yet all these great armies together with the strength of the Ammonites, were by and his brother Abishai casily broken and put to ruine: and that without Ishtob or a country neer Gad vnder the rockes of Ar∣non. any great losse or slaughter at that time. And it is written that when the Aramites fled, the Ammonites also retraited into their Cities, the one holding themselues within the walles, the other in their desarts adioyning, till Ioab was returned to Hierusalem. 2. Sam. 10. hearing that Ioab had dismissed his armie, assembled his forces againe, and sent for all the companies that he could leuie out of Mesopotamia, who vnder the command of Shobach passed Euphrates, and incamped at Helam, on the South side thereof. Dauid hearing of this new preparation, assembled all the men of Israel, Helam or Che∣lam which Pto∣lomy calleth A∣lamatha neere the foords of . and towards the Syrian in Palmyrena, not yet entred into Arabia; to wit, at Helam, a place no lesse distant from Damascus, towards the Northeast, than Hierusalem was towards the Southwest. Now Dauid (speaking humanely) might with the more confidence goe on towards Euphrates (which was the farthest-off iourney 2. Sam. 10. that euer he made) because he was now Lord of Damascus, which lay in the mid∣way. He also possest himselfe of See c. 18. §. 2. Thadmor or Palmyrena, which Salomon afterward strongly fortified, and this Citie was but one dayes iourney from Helam, and the ri∣uer Euphrates. So had he two safe retraites, the one to Thadmor, and the next from thence to Damascus. In this incounter between Dauid and the Syrians, they lost 40000 horsemen, and 700. chariots, together with Shobach Generall of their armie. The Chronicles call these 40000. Souldiers footmen, and so Iunius conuerts it, and so is it very probable. For the armie of Israel consisting of footemen, could hardly haue slaughtered 40000. horsemen, except they quitted their horse and fought on foote. So are the chariots taken in this battell, numbred at 7000. in the first of Chron. the 9. in which number, as I conceiue, all the Souldiers that serued in them with the con∣ductors are included: so as there died of the Syrians in this warre against Dauid, be∣fore he them to tribute; 100000. footmen, besides all their horsemen and wag∣goners, and besides all those that Ioab slew, when they fled at the first encounter, to∣gether with the Ammonites before Rabba. Notwithstanding all which, the Adads in following ages gathered strength againe, and afflicted the Kings of Iuda often: but the Kings of Israel they impouerished euen to the last end of that State. Dauid hauing now beaten the Arabians and from the partie and confederacie of : He sent out Ioab the Lieutenant of his armies to forradge and destroy their territorie, and to besiege Rabbah, afterward Philadelphia, which af∣ter a while the Israelites mastered and possest. The Kings crowne which weighed a talent of gold, garnished with precious stones, Dauid set on his , and carri∣ed away with him the rest of the riches and spoile of the Citie. And though Dauid stayed at Hierusalem, following the warre of Vriah- his wife, till such time as the Citie was brought to extremitie, and readie to be entred: yet Ioab in honour of Dauid for∣bare the last assault, and entrance thereof, till his masters arriuall. To the people he vsed extreme rigour (if wee may so call it being exercised against heathen Idolaters) for some of them he tare with harrowes, some he sawed asunder, others he cast into burning kils, in which he baked tile and bricke. §. VII. Of DAVIDS troubles in his reigne, and of his forces. BVt as victorie begetteth securitie, and our present worldly felicitie a forgetfulnesse of our former miseries, and many times of God him∣selfe the giuer of all goodnesse: so did these changes, in the fortune and state of this good King, change also the zealous care which hee had to please God in the precise obseruation of his Lawes and Commaundements. For hauing now no dangerous ene∣mie (against whom hee was wont to aske counsaile from the Lord) hee be∣ganne to be aduised by his owne humane affections and vaine desires. For hee was not only satisfied to take Vriahs wife from him, and to vse her by stealth: but hee imbrodered his adultery with Vriahs slaughter, giuing order to his trustie Ioab to marshall him in the front or point of those Israelites, which gaue an assault 2. Sam. 11. . vpon the suburbes of Rabba, when there was not as yet any possibilitie of preuailing. And, that which could no lesse displease God than the rest, he was content that ma∣ny others of his best seruants and Souldiers should perish together with Vriah, ho∣ping thereby to couer his particular ill intent him. After which he began by degrees to fall from the highest of happinesse; and his dayes then to come were fil∣led with ioyes and woes interchangeable, his trodden-downe sorrowes began againe to spring; and those perils which he had pulled vp by the rootes (as he hoped) gaue him an after-haruest of many cares and discontentments. And if it had pleased God to take the witnesse of Dauids owne mouth against him, as Dauid himselfe did against the Amalekite, which pretended to haue slaine Saul, he had then appeared as worthy of reprehension as the other was of the death he suffered. For when Nathan the Pro∣phet propounded vnto him his owne errour, in the person of another, to wit, of him that tooke the poore mans sheepe that had none else, the bereauer being Lord of many: He then vowed it to the Lord, that such a one should die the death. And heereof, although it pleased God to pardon Dauid, for his life, which remission the Prophet Nathan pronounced: yet he deliuered him Gods iustice together with his mercie in the tenour following; Now therefore the sword shall neuer depart from thy 2. Sam. 12. house, &c. Because thou hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slaine VRIAH with the vers. 9 and 10. sword of the children of Ammon. Soone after this Dauid lost the childe of adulterie which he begot on Bersheba. Secondly, his owne sonne Amnon being in loue with his halfe sister Thamar, by the aduice of his Cousin german the sonne of Shimeah Da∣uids brother, possest her by force: which when he had performed, he thrust her from him in a carelesse and despightfull manner. Two yeeres after which foule and in∣cestuous act, Absalom caused him to be , at the feast of his sheep-shearing; not perchance in reuenge of Thamars rauishment alone: but hauing it in his heart to vsurpe the Kingdome; in which, because he could not in any sort be assured of Am∣non, hee thought his affaire greatly aduanced by his destruction. So the one bro∣ther hauing rauished his owne sister, and then despised her; the other after along dissembled malice, first, made his owne brother drunken, and then slaugh∣tered him; which done he fled away, and liued vnder the sauegard of Talmai King of Gessur, neere Damascus, who was his grandfather by the mother, but a heathen King. 2. Sam. 17. Thirdly, when Absalom by the inuention of Ioab, (but chiefly because of the great affection of Dauid towards his sonne) was brought againe: first to the Kings fauour, 2. and then to his presence: He began instantly to practise against Dauid his father, see∣king by the pretence of common iustice, and by lowly and manner to all men, and by detracting from his fathers equitie, to win vnto himselfe a popular re∣putation. Here began the great affliction, threatned by the Lord as a punishment of Dauids sinne. The company which Absalom gathered at the first were but 200. men: which 2. Sam. 15. he carried with him from Hierusalem to Hebron; pretending, though impiously, the performance of a vow to God. There when repaired vnto him, and ma∣ny troopes of people from all places, he proclaimed himselfe King, and was by the people (whose hearts God had turned from their lawfull Prince) accepted so readi∣ly, that Dauid doubting to be set vpon on the suddaine, durst not trust himselfe in his owne Citie of Hierusalem, nor in any other walled towne for feare of surprise: but in∣camped in the fields, & desarts with some 600. of his gards, and few else. The priests in Hierusalem with the Arke of God, from whom he desired to be aduertised of those things that chanced, to whom he directed Hushai his trustie friend, and ser∣uant, praying him to make himselfe in all his outward actions and councels of 2. Sam. 15. partie and confederacie, thereby the better to discouer vnto him the pur∣poses of Achitophel, a reuolted Counsailor, whose practices he greatly doubted. And now when treason was in fashion, Ziba also sought to betray his master the sonne of Ionathan: And Shimei of the house of Saul (the fire of whose hatred Dauids prosperitie had smothered, but his illighte∣ned) holding himselfe vpon the aduantage of a mountaine side, cast stones at Dauid, and most despightfully cursed him to his face: but Dauid attending no 2. Sam. 16. , for badde Abishai to pursue him for the present, yet left him among others in the rolle of his reuenge, to his sonne Salomon. Absalom being now of Hierusalem, was aduised by to vse his fathers concubines in some such publique place, as all Israel might assure themselues, that hee was irreconciliable to his father: whereof being perswaded, they would then resoluedly adhere to Absa∣lom and his cause, without feare of being giuen vp vpon a betweene them. This saluage and impious (though craftie counsaile) Achitophel indeed vr∣ged 2. Sam. 17. for his owne respect, as fearing that this rebellion might take end to his destru∣ction; who most of all other inflamed Absalom against his father. And now was it fulfilled that Nathan had directly foretold Dauid: I will raise vp euill against thee out of thine owne , and will take thy wiues before thine eyes, and giue them vnto thy neigh∣bour, 2. Sam. c. 12. v. 11. and hee shall lye with thy wiues in the sight of the Sunne: for thou diddest it secretly, but I will this thing before all Israel, and before the Sunne. Hee also gaue aduice to Absalom, that himselfe with an armie of 12000. men might bee imployed at the in∣stant 2. Sam. 17. v. 14. for the suprizing of Dauid, which had willingly beene imbraced by Absalom, had not Dauids faithfull seruant giuen counter-aduice, and swayed it: perswa∣ding Absalom, that it was fitter and more safe for him with all the strength of Israel, to pursue his father, then by such a troope, which Dauids valour and those of his at∣tendants might either indanger or resist. This delay in Absalom, and aduantage of time gained by , was indeed, after God, the losse of the one and of the other. Whereupon Achitophel rightly fearing (by the occasion fore-shewed) the 2. Sam. 17. 23. successe which followed, disposed of his owne estate, and then forsooke both the and the of Absalom, and of his owne life. Dauid being aduertised of this enterprize against him, marched away all night, and past Iordan, possessing himselfe of Mahanaim in the tribe of Gad: the same wherein Isboseth himselfe in the warre against Dauid after Sauls death seated himselfe. To which place there repayred vnto him , the sonne of the Ammonite, whom Dauid loued, the same which Iosephus calleth Shiphar. And though it bee greatly disputed, what this Shobi was, yet the most generall and probable opinion makes him a second brother to Hanum, whom Dauid for his fathers sake established in the Kingdome, after Hanums ouerthrow. In thankfulnesse whereof hee relieued Dauid in this his extremitie. There came also to Dauids assistance Machir of Loda∣bar, Gardian in former times to Mephiboseth, and among others Barzillai the Gilea∣dite, who willingly fed Dauid and all his companie. In the meane time both the King and Absalom prepared to fight; Absalom made A∣masa Commaunder of the armie of Israel, the same place which Ioab held with Da∣uid; an office next the King himselfe, like vnto that of the Maiors of the Palace aun∣ciently in Fraunce. Dauid, perswaded by his companie, stayed in Mahanaim, and disposed the forces had to Ioab, Abishai, and Ittai, giuing them charge in the hea∣ring of all that issued out of the port of Mahanaim, that they should spare the life of . But Ioab, besides that he was very cruell by nature, remembred that Absalom had lately disposed of his Gouernement to Amasa, and therefore the victo∣rie being obtained, and newes brought him that Absalom by the haire of his 15 16 head on a tree, when he could not perswade the messenger to returne and kill him, 2. Sam. 18. 14. hee himselfe with his owne seruants dispatcht him. It appeared also by the sequell 2. Sam. 18. that Ioab affected whom hee afterward acknowledged, yet liuing; and fearing the disposition of Absalom, he imbraced the present aduantage offered. Hereof, together with newes of the victorie, when knowledge was brought to Dauid, he mourned and sorrowed, not onely as a man that had lost a sonne, but as one that had outliued all his worldly ioyes, and seene euery delight of life interred. For hee so hid himselfe from his people, as those which hoped for honour and re∣ward after so great a victory, couered themselues also in the Citie, as if they had committed the greatest offences, and had rather deserued death than . Whereupon Ioab presenting himselfe before Dauid, perswaded him to dissemble his sorrow for the present, and to shew himselfe to the Armie. For first he told him that he had discountenanced his faithfull seruants, who had that day preserued his life; in∣ferring that nothing could be more dangerous to a King, than not onely to not ac∣knowledge so great a loue and constancie in his people, who being but in num∣ber, did yet resoluedly expose themselues to great perils for his sake: but on the con∣trary grieue and lament at their good successe. For, no doubt, they might all haue bought their peace of Absalom at an easie rate. Secondly, hee vrged that it was gene∣rally beleeued, that he loued his enemies and hated his friends, and that he witnessed by this his mourning, that he had not any respect of his Princes, and others his faith∣full seruants, but would more haue ioyed if they had all perished, and Absalom liued, than in the victorie by their faithfulnesse and approued valour gotten. Lastly, he vsed this preualent argument, that the King came not out and shewed himselfe publikely to his men of warre, that they would all that very night abandon him, and returne: concluding with this fearefull threatning: And that will bee worse 2. Sam. 19. vnto thee than all the euill that fell on thee from thy youth . By these ouer-bold and arrogant speeches (though perchance vttered with a good intent) Ioab raised Dauid from his bed of sorrow, and brought him to the gates of the Citie among the people, whom he assured of his loue and affection, especially Amasa, who comman∣ded the Armie of Absalom, to whom he promised the office of Lieutenantship; the same which Absalom had giuen him, and which Ioab now enioyed. For Dauid doub∣ted, that if Amasa were not satisfied, hee might draw from him a great part of the strength of Israel, now vnder his commandement. This done, the King marched towards Iordan homeward, where in his passage he pardoned , who had lately reuiled him to his face; but this remission was but 2. Sam. 19. 23. externall, as appeared afterward. He also accepted of Mephibosheth his excuse, whom Ziba had formerly falsly accused and betrayed. He also intreated Barzillai the Gileadite, his late liberall Oast, to follow him to Ieru∣salem, 2. Sam. 19. 38. that he might reward his seruice done him; who excusing himselfe by his age, appointed his Chimham to attend the King. At Gilgal on this side Iordan, all the Tribes assembled, and after some contention which of them ought to haue most interest in Dauid, the Armie brake, and Dauid re∣turned to Ierusalem. But Sheba the sonne of Bichri, a Beniamite, of the faction of the house of , finding some discontentment among the Israelites, withdrew them from Dauid, as from a stranger in whom they had no interest, and it seemeth that many of the people of the out Tribes, and in effect of all but Iuda, bare still a good af∣fection to the issues of their first King. Dauid imployed his reconciled Captaine A∣masa, to giue him contentment, and to witnesse his trust, as also because concei∣ued that Amasa had interest in those reuolts of Israel more than Ioab had. He commandement from Dauid to assemble the Armie within three dayes, which he foreslowed: but being onward on his way, , Ioabs brother, was sent after him, with Dauids guard and best Souldiers, whom also Ioab accompanied: and ouer∣taking Amasa neere Gibeon, pretending to imbrace him, gaue him a wound, whereof he fell dead, being no lesse iealous of Amasa than hee was of Abner, whom he mur∣dered 2. Sam 20. 10. in the same manner, and out of the same impatient ambition. This done, he pursued Sheba, and finding him inclosed in , assaulted the Citie with that furie, 2. Sam. 20. 22. that the Citizens by the perswasions of a wise woman there inhabiting, cut off Sheba his head, and flnng it to Ioab the walls: which done, hee retraited his to Ierusalem, and commanded, as before, all the of Israel. The next act of Dauids, was the deliuerie of Sauls sonnes or kinsemen to the , whom those Citizens hung vp in reuenge of their Fathers . Dauid had knowledge from the Oracle of God, that a famine which had continued on the land three yeeres, came by reason of Saul and his house; to wit, for the slaughter of the Gibeonites: and therefore he willingly yeelded to giue them this satisfaction, both because he had warrant from God himselfe, as also if wee may iudge humanely, to rid himselfe of Sauls line, by whom hee and his might, as well in the present as in the future, be greatly molested and endangered; onely he spared Mephibosheth the sonne of Ionathan, both for the loue hee bare to his father, as for his oath and vow to God. Now where it is written in the Text; The King tooke the two sonnes of RISPAH, whom she bare vnto SAVL, and the fiue sonnes of MICHOL the daughter of SAVL, whom 2. Sam. 21. bare to ADRIEL, and deliuered them to the Gibeonites: Iunius calls this the sister of her that was Dauids wife, she whom Saul mar∣ried to Phaltiel; but here named had Adriel to her husband: the same which is named Merab in the first of Samuel the eighteenth, who was first promised to Da∣uid, when he slue Goliah in the valley of : and because it is written that Mi∣chol loued Dauid, which perchance Merab did not, whether Dauid had any humane respect in the deliuerie of her children, it is onely knowne to God. Now whereas the nameth Michol for Merab the wife of Adriel: the better translation were out of the Hebrew word here vsed, hauing an eclipsis or defect, and signifieth, as I am informed, one of the same kinred, as in the 19. verse of the same 21. Chapter it is said of Goliah whose speare was weighty as a weauers beame, when as by the same Eclipsis it must be vnderstood by the brother of Goliah: Goliah himselfe being formerly slaine. As by the death of Sauls children God secured the house of Dauid, leauing no head vnto rebellion; so did hee strengthen both the King and Nation against for∣raine enemies, by the valour of many braue Commaunders, the like of whom, for number and qualitie, that people of Israel is not knowne to haue had at any time be∣fore or after. Thirtie Captaines of thousands there were, all men of marke, and great reputation in warre. Ouer these were sixe Coronels, whose valour was so ex∣traordinary, that it might be well held as miraculous. These Coronels had some difference of place and honour, which seemeth to haue been giuen vpon meere con∣sideration of their vertue. For Abishai the brother of , who in the warre against the and Aramites was Lieutenant, and commanded halfe the armie, could not attaine to the honour of the first ranke, but was faine to rest contented with be∣ing principall of the three Coronels of the second order, notwithstanding his in bloud vnto the King, the flourishing estate of his owne house, and his well approued seruices. All these Coronels and Captaines, with the Companies belon∣ging to them, may seeme to haue been such as were continually retained, or at the kept in readinesse for any occasion, considering that the numbers which were mustered and drawne out, if need required into the field, very farre exceeded thirtie thousand, yea, or thirtie times as many. They were most of them such as had fol∣lowed the King in Sauls time, and been hardened with his aduersities. Others there were very many, and principall men in their seuerall Tribes, that repaired vnto him after the death of Saul; but these Captaines and Coronels, (who with Ioab, that was Generall of all the Kings forces, make vp the number of 37.) were the especiall men 2. Sam. c. v. 39. of warre, and reckoned as Dauids Worthies. The long reigne of Dauid, as it is knowne to haue consumed many of these excellent men of warre, so may it probably be ges∣sed to haue wasted the most of those whose deaths finde no-where mentioned. For the sonnes of Zeruia, who had been too hard for Dauid, were worne away, and onely Ioab left in the beginning of Salomon, who wanted his brother Abishai to stand by his side in his last extremitie. By the actions forepassed in the time of Dauid, it is gathered that hee had now 33. yeeres, or thereabout; when the posteritie of Saul was rooted out, so that hee enioyed about seuen yeeres of entire quiet and securitie, wherein it pleased God to remoue all impediments that might haue troubled the succession of Salo∣mon in his Fathers . In this time also Dauid hauing established all things in Iuda and Israel, and the borders thereof, hee againe displeased God by numbring the people, as in ostentation of his power: in which he employed Ioab, with other Cap∣taines of his armie, who after nine moneths and twenty dayes trauell, returned with the account and register of all the people, able and fit to beare Armes, and they a∣mounted to the number of thirteene hundred thousand, besides and Beniamin, 2. Sam. 24. 1. Chron. c. 21. whereof in Iuda and the Cities thereof fiue hundred thousand, and in Israel eight hundred thousand. For this, when by the Prophet Gad hee was offered from God the choice of three punishments, whereof he might submit himselfe to which he pleased; to wit, seuen yeeres famine; three moneths warre, wherein hee should be in all at∣tempts, and bee chaced by his enemies; or a generall pestilence to last three dayes: Dauid made choice to bow himselfe vnder the hand of God onely, and left him∣selfe subiect to that cruell disease, which bath no compassion or respect of persons, of which there perished seuentie thousand. And hereby he hath taught all that liue, that it is better to fall into the hands of God than of men; whereof he giueth vs this diuine reason; For his mercies are great. 2. Sam. . §. VIII. Of the last acts of DAVID; ADONIAHS faction; the vpon IOAB and SHIMEI. LAstly, when hee grew weake and feeble, and past the acts and know∣ledge of women, hee was yet aduised to lie in the armes of a yong and well complexioned maiden, to keepe him warme. In this his weake estate of bodie, when he was in a manner bed-rid, Adonijah his eldest sonne ( Amnon and Absalom being now dead) hauing drawne vnto his partie that , renowmed and feared Ioab, with the Priest, beganne manifestly to prepare for his establishment in the Kingdome after his father. For be∣ing the eldest now liuing of sonnes, and a man of a goodly personage, Salomon yet yong, and borne of a mother formerly attainted with adultery, for which her name was omitted by S. Matthew (as Beda, Hugo, Thomas, and others suppose) hee presumed to carrie the matter without resistance. Hereof when Dauid had knowledge by Bersabe the mother of Salomon, who did put him in minde of his faithfull pro∣mise, that Salomon her sonne should reigne after him ( Nathan the Prophet affirming the same thing vnto the King, and seconding her report of Adonijah his presumpti∣on) the King calling vnto him Zadoc the Priest, Nathan the Prophet, and the Captaine of his guard, gaue charge and commission to anoint Salomon, and to set him on the whereon himselfe to ride in his greatest state: which done, Salo∣mon attended, and strongly guarded by the ordinarie and choice men of warre, the and Pelethites, shewed him selfe to the people. Those tidings being repor∣ted to Adonijah, he presently abandoned his assistants, and for the safety of his life he held by the hornes of the Altar, whom for the present Salomon pardoned. After 1. Kings 1. this, Dauid had remaining two especiall cares, whereof he was desirous to discharge his thoughts; the one concerning the peace of the land, which might be disturbed by some rebellion against Salomon; the other concerning the building of the Tem∣ple, which he sought by all meanes to aduance, and make the businesse publique. To bring these intentions to good effect, he summoned a Parliament, consisting of all the . c. 28 . Princes of Israel, the Princes of the seuerall Tribes, all the Captaines and Officers, with all the mighty, and men of power; who repaired vnto . In this assembly the King stood vp, and signified his purpose of building the Temple, shewing how the Lord had approued the motion. Herein he tooke occa∣sion to lay open his owne title to the Crowne, shewing that the Kingdome was by Gods ordinance due to the Tribe of luda (as Iaacob in his blessing prophetically be∣queathed it) and that God himselfe was pleased to make choice of him among all his fathers sonnes. In like manner he said that God himselfe had appointed Salomon by name to be his successor: whereupon he earneftly charged both the people and his sonne, to conforme themselues vnto all that God had commanded, and particu∣larly to goe forward in this worke of the Lords house, which Salomon was chosen to build. Then produced he the patterne of the worke according to the forme which 1. . 29. 9. God himselfe had appointed; and so laying open his owne preparations, he exhor∣ted all others to a voluntary contribution. The Kings proposition was so well approoued by the Princes and people, that whereas hee himselfe had giuen three thousand talents of gold, and seuen thou∣sand of siluer, they added vnto it thousand of gold, and tenne thousand of sil∣uer, besides brasse, iron and iewels, heartily reioycing in the aduancement of so re∣ligious a worke. This businesse being well dispatched, a solemne feast with great sacrifice was made, at which time Salomon was againe anointed King, and fealtie of all the Princes and people of the Land, and of all the Princes his brethren, the sonnes of King Dauid. Salomon being thus established King, his Father finding himselfe euen in the hands of death, first exhorted his sonne to exercise the same courage and strength of minde, which himselfe had done in all his attempts, and to the end that a happy end might follow the beginning of all his enterprizes, he vttered these mightie wordes; Take heede to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walke 1. . 2. 3. in his wayes, and keepe his statutes and his commaundements, and his iudgements, and his testimonies, as it is in the Law of MOSES, &c. to the performance of which God fastened the succession, and prosperitie of his issues. For this done (sayth God ) Thou shalt not want one of thy posteritie to sit vpon the Throne of 1. Kin. 1. 20. Israel. Secondly, hee aduised him concerning Ioab, who out of doubt had serued Dauid from the first assault of Ierusalem to the last of his warres, with incomparable va∣lour and fidelitie, sauing that hee fastened himselfe to Adonijah (his mafter yet li∣uing) and thereby vexed him in his feeble age. But as God hath neuer left cruelty vnreuenged, so was it his will that Ioab should drinke of the same cuppe, whereof hee had enforced other men to taste, and suffer the same violence which himselfe had strooken others withall, qui gladio percutit, gladio peribit: for he had berea∣ued Abner and Amasa of their liues, hauing against the one the pretence onely of his brothers , whom Abner had slaine in the time of warre, and could not him: against the other but a meere iealousie of his growing great in the fauour of Dauid. And though Ioab assured himselfe that Abner and Amasa being dead, there was none left either to equall him or supplant him, yet God (deriding the po∣licies of wicked men) raised vp Benhaiah the sonne of Iehoiadah, to pull him from the Sanctuary, and to cut him in pieces. For Dauid giueth this cause to Salomon against Ioab, that he slue the Captaines of the hoste of Israel, and shed bloud of battell in 1. King. 2. peace; and to this apparant and iust cause, it is not improbable but that Dauid re∣membred the ill affection of Ioab towards Salomon, which Ioab made manifest by the vntimely setting vp of Adonijah, Dauid yet liuing. Some other offence Ioab had committed against Dauid, of which in these words he put his sonne Salomon in mind; Thou knowest also what IOAB the sonne of did to mee, &c. Now whether 1. King. . this were meant by the killing of Absalom, contrary to the Kings desire, or by the proud words vsed to him when hee mourned in Mahanaim for Absalom; or whe∣ther it were the publishing of Dauids letter vnto him for the killing of Vriah, there∣by to disgrace Salomon as descended of such a mother, the Scriptures are silent. True it is, that those great men of warre doe oftentimes behaue themselues excee∣ding insolently towards their Princes, both in respect of their seruice done, as also be∣cause they flatter themselues with an opinion, that either their masters cannot misse them, or that they dare not offend them. But this kinde of pride hath ouerthrowne many a worthie man otherwise deseruing great honour and respect. Hee also gaue order to Salomon, to ridde himselfe of Shimei, who not long before had cast stones at Dauid, and cursed him to his face. And albeit by reason of his oath and promise Dauid spared Shimei all the time himselfe liued, yet being dust and in the graue, he slue him by the hand of Salomon his Sonne. Hence it seemeth that King 1. King. 2. Henrie the seuenth of England had his patterne, when he gaue order to Henrie the eight to execute Pool as soone as himselfe was buried, hauing made promise to the King of Spaine when hee deliuered Pool vnto him, that while he liued he would ne∣uer put him to death, nor suffer violent hands to be laid vpon him. And yet did not the execution of Ioab yeeld vnto Salomon any such great or assurance as hee hoped for. For he found a yong Adad of Idumaea, and Rezin of Damascus to vexe him: who, as the Scriptures witnesse, were emboldened to enter∣prize 1. King. 11. vpon Salomon, hearing that Dauid slept with his fathers, and that Ioab the Cap∣taine of the host was dead. Now when Dauid had reigned in all fortie yeeres, to wit, in Hebron seuen yeeres, and in Ierusalem three and thirtie, he died. For his person, he was of small stature, but exceeding strong. For his internal gifts and graces he so farre exceeded all other men, as putting his humane frailitie apart, he was said by God himselfe to be a man according to his owne heart. The Psalmes which he wrote witnesse his pietie, and his excellent learning: of whom Hierome to : DAVID SIMONIDES noster, PINDARVS & ALCAEVS, FLACCVS, quoque CATVLLVS, & SERENVS, Christum lyra personat, & in dechachor do Psalterio ab inferis suscitat resurgentem; DAVID (saith hee) our SIMONIDES, PINDARVS, ALCAEVS, HORACE, GATVLLVS and SERENVS, he playeth Christ on his harpe, and on a ten stringed Psalter hee raiseth him vp rising from the dead. And being both a King and a Prophet, hee foretelleth Christ more lightsomely and liuely than all the rest. The booke of the Psalmes, saith Glycas, was diuided, ordered and distinguished by Ezekias: but whether all the Psalmes were written by Dauid, it is diuersly dispu∣ted. For Athanasius, Cyprian, Lyranus, and others conceiue diuers Authors, answering . in Synop. Hier. . 134. Lyr. in exp. i. ps. the titles of the seuerall Psalmes, as Moses, Salomon, and the rest hereafter named, and that onely 73. Psalmes were composed by Dauid himselfe, namely, those which arc intituled ipsius Dauid. For the 50. and the 72. with the ten that follow, are bestow∣ed on Asaph the sonne of Barachia, eleuen other on the sonnes of Korah, and eleuen are ascribed to Moses, to wit, the 89 and the ten following, and so they are intituled in the old Hebrew Copies, though the vulgar and Septuagint (three excepted) stile them otherwise. The supposed nine Authors of these Psalmes which Dauid wrote not. Sixt: Senensis nameth as followeth; Salomon, Moses, (whom Aben Ezra, contra∣rie Vid. Sixt. Senen. Bib. sanct. l. 1. fol. 10. & 11. to Hierome, maketh one of Dauids singers) Asaph, Ethan-Eziachi, Eman-Eziaira, I∣dithum, and the three sonnes of Chore. But S. Chrysostome makes Dauid the sole Au∣thour Aug. de Ci. Dei, l. 13. c. 14. of all the Psalmes, and so doth S. Augustine, reasoning in this manner: Al∣though (saith he) some there are that ascribe those Psalmes onely to Dauid, which are ouer-written ipsius Dauid, and the intituled ipsi Dauid, to others, this opinion (saith he) Voce Euangelica saluatoris ipsius refutatur, vbi ait quòdipse DAVID in Christum dixerit esse suum Dominum, quoniam Psalmus 109. sic incipit, Dixit Dominus Domino , Sede à dextris meis, &c. The voyce of the Gospel refutes this opinion, where it saith, that Dauid himselfe in the spirit called Christ his Lord, because the 109. Psalme beginnes thus: The Lord said vnto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, &c. Lastly, his are vsed both by Christ and the Apostles, and he was as a pa∣terne to all the Kings and Princes that succeeded him. His Storie and all his particular actions, were written by the Prophets, Samuel, Nathan and Gad, as it is in the first of Chron. 29. ver. 19. For the seuerall parts of the bookes of Samuel which intreat chiefly of , were as it seemes written by these three holy men. Constantine Manasses hath an opinion, that the Troians during the time of the siege, c. 17. §. 6. 7. sought for succour from Dauid, and that he stayed neuter in that warre. But it see∣meth In his annales translated out of Greeke Latin by Ioan∣nes Leunclaius. that Manasses did miscast the time twixt Dauid and the Troian warre. For it is generally receiued that Troy fell betweene the times of Abdon and Samson Iudges of Israel, about the worlds yeere 2848 and Dauid died in the yeere 2991. §. IX. Of the treasures of DAVID and SALOMON. HIs treasures were exceeding great. For it is written in the 22. of the first Vers. 14. of Chronicles, that he left Salomon for the building of the Temple a hun∣dred thousand talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand talents of sil∣uer, and of brasse and yron passing all weight, which is more then any King of the world possest besides himselfe, and his son to whom he left it. For it amounteth to three thousand three hundred thirtie and three cartload and a third of a cartload of siluer, allowing two thousand weight of siluer or sixe thou∣sand pound sterling to euery cartload, besides threescore and seuenteene millions of French Crownes, or of our money twenty three millions and a thousand pound: a matter, but for the testimonie of the Scriptures, exceeding all beleefe. For that any riches were left him it doth not appeare, seeing that the Iudges had not any trea∣sure, nor any soueraigne power to make leuies: but when they went to the warres, they were followed by such voluntaries as the seuerall tribes by turnes gaue them: seeing also that Saul who was of a meane Parentage, and perpetually vexed and in∣uaded by the , could not in all likelihood gather great riches (if any at all) his Territories beeing exceeding narrow, and thereof the better part by his enemies. Therefore it were not amisse to consider how Dauid within the space of not very many yeeres, might amasse vp such mighty treasures. For though parsimonie bee it selfe a great reuenue, yet needs there must haue been some other great meanes. It seemes that hee made the vttermost profit of all that hee had, that was profitable. Eusebius in his ninth booke and last Chapter de praeparatione Euangelica, citeth the words of Eupolemus, who reporteth that Dauid, among other preparations for the Temple, built a nauie in Melanis (or as Villalpandus corrects it, Achanis ) a Citie of Arabia, and from thence sent men to digge for gold in the Iland Vrphe, which Orte∣lius thinkes, was Ophir, though Eupolemus in his place of Eusebius (crring perhaps in this circumstance) saith that this Iland is in the red Sea; from whence, saith this Eu∣polemus, they brought gold into Iury. Pineda lib. 4. de rebus Salomonis c. 1. thinkes that Dauid did this way also inrich himselfe, and citeth this testimony of Eupolemus: and yet certainely Dauid had many other wayes to gather great riches. Much Land doubtlesse hee gained by conquest, from the Canaanites and Philistims, besides those fruitfull valleys neere Iordan in Trachonitis and Basan, and the best of Syria, and other Countries bordering the Israelites. These demaines belike he kept in his own hands, and with his infinite number of captiues, which he tooke in his warres, which were not able to redeeme themselues, husbanded those grounds for his greatest aduan∣tage. For it is written, 1. Chron. 17. that Iehonathan was ouer his treasures in the field, in the villages, in the Cities, in the townes; that Ezri was ouer the labourers, that til∣led his ground; Simei ouer the vineyards; and Sabdi ouer the store of the wine; Baal Hanan ouer the oliue trees, and Ioash ouer the store of the oyle, also that hee had herdmen that had charge ouer his cattell, both in the high Lands, and in the plaines, ouer his sheepe, camels, and asses. And this custome of enriching them∣selues by husbandry and Cattell, the ancient Kings euery where held, both before and after Dauids time. For wee reade of Pharao, that hee spake to Ioseph to appoint Gen. 47. some of his brethren or of their seruants, to be Rulers ouer his cattell. We reade of 2. Chron. 26. Vzzia, that he loued husbandrie, had much cattell, and plough- , and dresters of Vines: likewise we reade it in all Greeke Poets, that the wealth of the ancient Kings did especially consist in their Heards and flocks, whereof it were needlesse to cite Augeas and Admetus or any other for examples, the rule holding true in all. Now concerning Dauid it is not vnlikely, but that those captiues which were not imploicd in husbandrie, were many of them vsed by him in all sorts of gainefull professions, as the ancient Romans in like manner vsed their slaues. To these profits (besides the tributes and impositions which doubtlesse were great, and besides the innumerable presents which yeerely were brought him, or ex∣traordinarily sent him, by Tehu and others) wee may adde the great spoiles which hee found in the Cities and Countries which he conquered: also the head money which was gathered per legem capitationis; By the law of capitation or head money, euery man rich or poore paying halfe a sickle of the Sanctuarie, which is about as much as fourteene pence, and so in all it amounted to a wondrous summe in that Kingdome: wherein one thousand thousand fiue hundred and seuentie thousand fighting men 1. Chron. 21. were numbred by Ioab. Now although this Law of capitation be thought by some very learned not to haue beene perpetuall (which opinion of theirs neuerthelesse they confesse is against the Hebrew expositions) yet Dauid vpon this occasion is not vnlikely to haue put it in practize. And by these meanes might he be able to leaue those huge treasures to Salomon. Yet it may seeme that this great masse of gold and siluer left by Dauid, the least part was his owne in priuate, and so will it appeare the lesse wonderfull that he left so much. Of his owne liberalitie we finde, that he gaue to the building of the Temple three thousand talents of gold, and seuen thou∣sand talents of siluer, a great summe: but holding a very small proportion to the o∣ther. Wherefore we are to consider, that the treasures of the Sanctuarie it selfe were exceeding great, as needs they must haue been, hauing receiued continuall encrease, without any losse or diminution euer since the time of Moses and Iosuah. The re∣uennues of the Sanctuarie (besides all manner of tithes and oblations, which de∣fraied the daily expences, and maintayned the Priest and Leuites ) were partly raised out of the head money before mentioned; partly out of the spoiles gotten in warre. For all the bootie was diuided into two parts, whereof the Souldiers had one, and Numb. 31. 27. the People which remayned at home, had the other halfe; whereby all the Coun∣trie receiued benefit of the victorie, yet so, that the Souldiers had a farre greater pro∣portion than the rest, as being fewer, and therefore receiuing more for euery single share. Out of this purchase was deducted the Lords tribute, which was one in fiftie, of that which the people receiued, and one in fiue hundred, of that which was giuen to the Souldiers; namely one hundred and one thousand part of the whole bootie. So in the spoile of Midian, thirtie two thousand women being taken, the armie had sixteene thousand of them for slaues, and the Congregation had other sixteene thou∣sand; . 31. 40. but out of the sixteene thousand giuen to the Armie, were exempted two and thirtie for the Lords tribute. Out of the peoples number were taken three hundred and twentie. By this meanes, the lesser that the Armie was which had exposed it selfe to danger, the greater profit had euery Souldier; but when it confisted of ma∣ny hands, they who remayning at home were faine to vndergoe more than ordina∣rie trauaile in domesticall affaires, did receiue by so much the greater portion. But the Lords tribute was alwaies certaine, yea many times it was increased, either by some especiall commandement, as when all the gold, and siluer, and other metalls found in , were consecrated vnto God; or by thankfulnesse of the Rulers and Ios. 6. 19. People, as when after the victorie obtayned against the Midianites without the losse of one man, all Iewells, Bracelets, Eare-rings, and the like, were offered vp, as volun∣tarie . 31. 50. presents. Now howsoeuer the Israelites were many times oppressed, and troden downe by other Nations, yet were not these treasures robbed or spoiled; for the ne∣uer gat possession of the Tabernacle that was in Shilo. it cannot other∣wise be, than that the wealth of the Sanctuarie must haue beene exceeding great; as contayning aboue one hundreth part of all the and other goods found by the Israelites in the whole Land of Canaan; and of all that was purchased by so many 1. Chron. c. 26. v. 27. & 28. victories, as they obtayned against the bordering Nations. For that this treasurie was not defrauded of the due portion, it is euident; seeing that before the time of Dauid and his Lieutenant Ioab, it is recorded that Saul and Abner, and before them Samuel, had vsed to dedicate of the spoyles obtayned in warre, to maintayne the house of the Lord: the like whereof may be well presumed of the former Iudges and Captaines in other Ages. Certaine it is, that the Conquest of Dauid brought into the Land far greater abundance of riches, than any former victories had purchased, those of Iosua perhaps excepted: but these vast summes of an hundred thousand Ta∣lents of siluer, may seeme rather to haue beene made vp, by the addition of his winnings and liberalitie, to the treasures laid vp in many former Ages, than to haue beene the meere fruits of his owne industrie. Now concerning the riches of Salomon, it is more manifest how he gathered them, for he receiued of yeerely reuennues with his tributes sixe hundred sixtie sixe Ta∣lents A Talent of gold is 770. french crowns. 1. King. 10. 14. of gold, besides the Customes of Spices. He had also sixe rich Returnes from the East India, which greatly increased his store. For his ships performed that voyage euery three yeeres, and he began that trade in the two and twentieth yeere of his raigne, and ruled fortie yeeres. Besides this, all Iudaea and Israel were now mastered to his hands; all the Arabians his borderers, the Syrians of Zobah, of Damascena, of Palmyra, of Ituraea; all of Idumaea, Moab, and Ammon, paid him tribute; as likewise did 1. King. c. 9. v. 20 & . 10. v. 29. the Hittites, who with the Perizzites, Heuites, Iebusites, and other races of the Cana∣anites, were not as yet extinguished, though subjected. Into this flourishing estate was the Kingdome of Israel reduced by Dauid, who af∣ter fortie yeeres raigne, and seuentie yeeres of life, dyed in a good age, full of dayes, riches, and and was buried in the Citie of Dauid. It is written by Iosephus 1. Chron. 29. 28. that there was hid in Dauids Tombe a maruailous quantitie of treasures, in so much as Hyrcanus (who first of the Chasmanaei, or race of the Maccabees, called himselfe . Antiq. l. 7. King) one thousand and three hundred yeeres after, drew thence three thousand Talents, to rid himselfe of Antiochus then besieging Ierusalem, and afterward Herod opening another Cell, had also an exceeding masse of gold and siluer therein. And it was an ancient custome to burie treasure with the dead. So the Peruvians and other Americans did the like, which being discouered by the Spaniards, they inriched them∣selues by nothing so much in their first Conquest. That Salomon did burie so much treasure in his fathers graue, it would hardly be beleeued, in regard of the great ex∣actions with which he was faine to burthen the people, notwithstanding all the ri∣ches which he got otherwise, or which were left vnto him: were it not withall con∣sidered that his want of monie grew from such magnificent imployments. Particu∣larly of the Sepulcher of Dauid the Scriptures haue no mention, but onely the Se∣pulchers of the Kings of Iuda, as of an honourable place of buriall. Yet the Monu∣ments of those Kings, as (by Relation of the Duke of Vlika ) they remayned within Peregrinat. . D. N. Ch. . . 2. these thirtie yeeres, and are like to remaine still, are able to make any report credible, of the cost bestowed vpon them. §. X. Of the Philistims, whom DAVID absolutely mastered: and of sundry other contemporaries with DAVID. OF the Philistims, whose pride Dauid was the first that absolutely ma∣stered, in this conclusion of Dauids time somewhat heere may bee spoken. They descended of Casloim, who, according to Isydor and Iosephus, Isid. l. 9. 19. was one of the sonnes of Misraim, and was surnamed Philistim, as Esau Ios. l. 1. ant. 17. was surnamed Edom, and Iacob Israel. There were of them fiue Cities of pettie prin∣cipalities; namely, Azotus, or Asdod, Gaza or Aczaph, Ascalon, Geth or Gath, and Acca∣ron. 1. Sam. 6. It seemeth that Casloim was the first founder of this nation, because of his kind∣red on either hand, the Canaanites and the Aegyptians. The first King of these Philistims, which the Scriptures haue named, was that Gen. 20. Abimelech which loued Sara, Abrahams wife. The second Abimelech liued at once with Isaac, to whom Isaac repaired in the time of famine, Abimelech then residing at Gerar in the border of , which Abimelech Gen. 26. fancied Isaac his wife: as his father had done Sara. After Abimelech the second, the Philistims Kings are not remembred in the Scrip∣tures, till Dauids time: perhaps the gouernment was turned into Aristocraticall. For they are afterwards named Princes of the Philistims, howsoeuer Achis be named Iud. 16. 1. Sam. 18. 20. king of Gath, the same to whom Dauid fled, and who againe gaue him Siklag to inha∣bit 1. Sam. 21. 11. 1. King. 2. in Sauls time. After him wee read of another who liued with Salomon, to whom Semei trauailed to fetch back his fugitiue seruant, what time the seeking of his seruant was the losse of his life. Ieremie the Prophet speaketh of the Kings of Palaestin or Phili∣stim. Amos nameth the King of Ascalon: Zacharias, a King of Gaza. The rest of the warres of the Philistims are remembred in the Catalogue of the Iudges, of Sanl and Dauid, and therefore I shall not neede to collect the particulars in this place. There liued at once with Dauid, the third of the Siluij King of Alba, called La∣tinus Siluius, who is said to haue ruled that part of Italy fiftie yeeres. And about his fourteenth yeere Codrus the last King of the Athenians died, to whom succeeded the first Prince of those, who being called after Medon, Medontidae, without regall name gouerned Athens during their life. The reasons which moued the Athenians to change their gouernment, were not drawne from any inconuenience found in the rule of Soueraigntie, but in honour of Codrus onely. For when the Graecians of Doris, a region betweene Phocis and the mountaine of Oeta, sought counsaile from the Oracle, for their successe in the warres against the , it was answered, that then vndoubtedly they should pre∣uaile and become Lords of that State, when they could obtaine any victorie a∣gainst the Nation, and yet preserue the Athenian King liuing. Codrus by some intelligence being informed of this answere, withdrew himselfe from his owne forces, and putting on the habit of a common souldier, entred the Campe of the Dorians, and killing the first hee encountred, was himselfe forthwith cut in pieces. the 31. King of Assyria, which others account but the 30. began to rule that Empire, about the 13. yeere of Dauid, and held it 38. yeeres. Neere the same time began Ixion the second King of the Heraclidae, the sonne of Eurysthenes in Corinth; and Agis the second of the Heraclidae in Lacedaemon: in ho∣nour of which Agis, his successours were called Agidae, for many yeeres after. He restored the Laconians to their former libertie: hee ouercame the Citizens of Helos in Laconia, who had refused to pay him tribute: hee condemned them and theirs to perpetuall slauerie; wherof it came, that all the Messenians, whom at length they brought into the like bondage, were after called Helotes. In like sort from the came the word Slaue. For when that Nation issuing out of , now called Russia, had seised vpon the countrie of Illyria and made it their owne by Conquest, their victorie pleased them so highly, that thereupon they called themselues by a new name, Slauos, which is in their language glorious. But in after-times (that warmer Climate hauing thawed their northerne hardines, and not ripened their wits) when they were troden down, and made seruants to their neigh∣bours; the Italians which kept many of them in bondage, began to call all their bondmen Slaues, vsing the word as a name of reproch: in which sense it is now cur∣rant through many countries. Other Chronologers make this Agis, the third King of Sparta, and somewhat later, about the 23. yeere of Dauid, and say, that Achestratus was the fourth King of this race, the same whom Eusebius calls Labotes, and sets him in the thirteenth yeere Euseb. in Chron. of Salomon. In the tenth yeere of Achestratus, Androclus the third sonne of Codrus assisted by the Iones, built Ephesus in Caria, who after the adioyning of the Ile of Samos to his territorie, was slaine by the Carians whose countrie he vsurped. He was buried (saith Pausanias ) in one of the gates of Ephesus called Magnetes, his armed Statua being set The East-gate of Ephesus to∣ward Magnesia vpon the riuer Mocander. ouer him. reports that after Androclus had subdued the Ionians (the next prouince to Ephesus on the sea coast of Asia the lesse) he inlarged his Dominions vpon the Aeoles, which ioyneth to Ionia: and that his posteritie gouerned the Cities of Ephesus and Erythrae by the name of Basilidae in Strabo his owne time. Of the ex∣pedition Arist. l. 5. pol. c. 6. of the Iones how they came hither out of Peloponesus, I haue See Ch. in this 17. Ch. 9. 1. post. medium. spoken alrea∣die vpon occasion of the returne of the Heraclidae into Peloponesus, wherein with the Dores, they expelled the Achaei, and inhabited their places in that land: though this of the Iones succeeded that of the Heraclidae 100. yeeres. The Citie of Ephesus became exceeding famous: first, for the temple of Diana therein built: which had in length 425. foote, and 220. in bredth, sustained with 127. pillars of marble, of 70. foote high: whereof 27. were most curiously grauen, Plin. l. 2. c. 58. & l. 7. c. 37. and all the rest of choice marble polisht, the worke being first set out by Ctesiphon of . Secondly, it became renowned by being one of the first that receiued the Christian faith, of which Timothie was Bishop; to whom, and to the Ephesians, Saint Paul wrote his Epistles so intituled. The other Citie possest by Androclus in Aeolis was also vniuerfally spoken of by reason of Sibylla, surnamed Erythraea: who liued seuen hundred and fourtie yeeres before Christ borne. Saint Augustine auoweth that a Romane Proconsul shewed him in an ancient Greeke coppie certaine verses of this Prophetesse: which began (as Saint Augustine changed them into Latine) in these wordes: Iesus Christus Dei filius saluator. Iesus Christ sonne of God the Sauiour. About the time that Ioab besieged Rabba in Moab, Vaphres beganne to go∣uerne in Egypt, the same that was father in Law to Salomon, whose Epistles to Salomon, and his to Vaphres, are remembred by Eusebius out of Polemon. In the 21. of Dauid, was the Citie of Magnesia in Asia the lesse founded, the same which is seated vpon the riuer Moeander, where Scipio gaue the great ouerthrow to An∣tiochus. In this territorie are the best Horses of the lesser Asia bred, whereof Lucan: Et Magnetis equis, Minyaegens cognita remis. About the same time Cuma in Campania was built by the inhabitants of Chalcis in . in AEneid. 3. Strabo. l. 5. Euboea, according to Seruius, with whom Strabo ioyneth the Cumaeans of Aeolis, say∣ing, that to the one of these people the gouernment was giuen, with condition that the other should giue name to the Citie. Of this Cuma was Ephorus the famous schol∣ler of Isocrates. Eusebius and finde the building of Carthage at this time, to wit, in the 31. yeere of Dauid, but much mistaken. For the father of Dido was Metinus the sonne of Badezor brother to Iezabel, who married Achab King of Israel; and be∣tweene the death of Dauid, and the first of Achab, there were wasted about 95. yeeres. In this time also Acastus liued, the second of the Athenian Princes after Codrus, Euseb. in Chron. of which there were thirteene in descent before the State changed into a Magistra∣cie . in vit. of tenne yeeres. Some writers make it probable that the Aeolians led by Graus, Hom. & Strab. 1. 14. the grand nephew of Orestes, possest the Citie and Island of Lesbos about this time. In Antiq. 8. & cont. Ap. l. 1. the 32. yeere of Dauid, Hiram began to reigne in Tyre, according to Iosephus, who saith, that in his twelfth yeere Salomon began the worke of the Temple. But it is a familiar errour in Iosephus, to misreckon times, which in this point hee doth so strangely, as if hee knew not how at all to cast any accompt. For it is manifest that Hiram sent messengers, and Cedars to Dauid, soone after his taking of Ierusalem, which was in the very beginning of Dauids reigne ouer Israel, when as yet hee had reigned onely seuen yeeres in Hebron, ouer the house of Iuda. Wherefore it must Sam. 5. needs be that Hiram had reigned aboue 30. yeeres before Salomon; vnlesse more credit should be giuen to those Tyrian records which are cited by Iosephus, than to the plaine words of Scripture contradicting them. For that it was the same Hiram which liued both with Dauid and with Salomon, the Scriptures make it plainely manifest. CHAP. XVIII. Of SALOMON. § I. Of the establishing of SALOMON: of birthright, and of the cause of ADONIAHS death, and of SALOMONS Wisedome. SALOMON, who was brought vp vnder the Pro∣phet Nathan, began to reigne ouer Iuda and Israel, in the yeere of the world 2991. Hee was called Sa∣lomon by the appointment of God: hee was also cal∣led Iediddia, or Theophilus, by Nathan, because the Lord loued him. Hiram King of Tyre, after Salomons anointing, dispatched Embassadours toward him, congratula∣ting his establishment: a custome betweene Princes very ancient. Whence we reade that Dauid did in like sort salute Hanum King of the Ammonites, after 2. Sam. 10. his obtaining the Kingdome. The beginning of Salomon was in bloud, though his reigne were peaceable. For soone after Dauids death, hee caused his brother Adonijah to bee slaine by Benaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, taking occasion from Adonijah his desiring by Bersheba, that the young maid Abishag (which lay in Dauids bosome in his latter dayes, to keepe him warme) might be giuen to him. Whatsoeuer he pretended, it was enough that Ado∣nijah was his elder brother, and sought the kingdome contrary to the will of Dauid, whom God inclined towards Salomon. And yet it is said that a word is enough to the wise, and he that sees but the claw, may know whether it bee a lyon or no: so it may seeme that to the quick-sighted wisdome of Salomon, this motion of , was a demonstration of a new treason. For they which had beene concubines to a King, might not after bee touched but by a King: whence Achito∣phel 2. Sam. 16. 21. wished Absalon to take his Fathers Concubines as a part of the Royaltie. And Dauid after that wrong, determining to touch them no more, did not giue them to any other, but shut them vp, and they remained widowed vntill their death. And this it seems was the depth of Isbosheths quarrell against Abner, for hauing his Fa∣thers 2. Sam. 20. 3. Concubine. And some signification of this custome may seeme too in the words of God by to Dauid; I haue giuen thee thy masters house, and thy masters 1. Sam. 20. 30. wiues. And in the words of Saul, vpbraiding Ionathan, that he had chosen Dauid to the shame of the nakednesse of his Mother. perhaps was some reference in this purpose of , to marrie with her that was present with Dauid in his latter daies, and who belike knew all that was past, for the conueying of the Kingdome to Salomon. There might be farther occasions, as either that hee would learne such things by her as might be for the aduantage of his ambition, or that he would perswade her to forge some strange tale about Dauids last Testament, or any thing else that might preiudice the title of Salomon. As for the right of an elder brother which pretended, though generally 1. King. . 15. it agreed both with the law of Nations, and with the customes of the Iewes: yet the Kings of the Iewes were so absolute, as they did therein, and in all else what they pleased. Some examples also they had (though not of Kings) which taught them to vse this paternall authoritie in transferring the birthright to a younger sonne: namely, of Iacobs disheriting , and giuing the birthright (which was twice as much as any portion of the other brethren) to Ioseph: of whom hee made two Deut. 21. 15. Filium ag∣noscito, portionem duo∣rum: ipsius est ius primoge∣nitorum. 1. Reg. 1. v. 17. & 20. & . 29. & 34. tribes. And that it was generally acknowledged that this power was in Dauid, it ap∣peares by the words of Bersabe and Nathan to Dauid, and of Ionathan to . For as for popular election, that it was necessarie to confirme, or that the refusall of the people had authoritie to frustrate the elder brothers right to the Kingdome, it now here appeares in the stories of the Iewes. It is said indeed that the people made Saul King at Gilgal: that is, they acknowledged and established him. For that he was 1. King. 1. 1. v. 20 & 27. King long before no man can doubt. In like manner elswhere the phrase of chusing or making their King, is to bee expounded: as where in the prohibition, that they 1. Sam. 11. 14. Deut. 28. 30. should not make themselues a King, it is said, Thou shalt make him King whom the Lord shall chuse. But to proceed with the acts of Salomon: at the same time that he put to death, he rid himselfe also of Ioab, and three yeeres after of Shimei, as Dauid had aduised him: he displaced also the Priest Abiathar, who tooke part with against him: but in respect of his office, and that he followed Dauid in all his afflicti∣ons; 1. King. 2. and because hee had borne the Arke of God before his Father, he spared his life. And thus being established in his Kingdome, hee tooke the daughter of Vaphres King of Aegypt to Wife: for so Eusebius out of Eupolemus calls him. offered a thousand Sacrifices at Gibeon, where God appearing vnto him in a dreame, bade him aske what he would at his hands; SALOMON chooseth wisdome, which pleased God. And God said vnto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thy selfe long life, neither hast thou asked riches for thy selfe, nor hast asked the life of thine ene∣mies, behold, I haue done according to thy words: by which wee may informe our selues what desires are most pleasing to God, and what not. For the coueting after long life, in respect of our selues, cannot but proceede of selfe-loue, which is the roote of all impietic: the desire of priuate riches is an affection of couetousnesse which God abhorreth; to affect reuenge, is as much as to take the sword out of Gods hand, & to distrust his Iustice. And in that it pleased God to make Salomon know that it liked him, that he had not asked the life of his enemies, it could not but put him in mind of his brothers slaughter, for which he had not any warrant either from Dauid, or from the Law of God. But because Salomon desired wisedome onely, which him both to obey God, and to rule men, it pleased God to giue him withall that which he desired not. And I haue also giuen thee (saith God) that which thou hast not asked, both riches and honour. This gift of wisedome our Commentators stretch to almost all kinds of learning: but that it comprehended the knowledge of the na∣ture of plants and liuing creatures the Scripture testifieth, though no doubt the 1. King. 4. 33. 1. King. 3. 9. chiefe excellencie of Salomons wisedome, was in the knowledge of gouerning his kingdome: whence, as it were for an example of his wisedome, the Scripture telleth how soone he iudged the controuersie betweene the two harlots. §. II. Of SALOMONs buildings and glorie. HE then entred into league with Hiram King of Tyre, from whom hee had much of his materials, for the Kings Palace and the Temple of God: for the building whereof he had receiued a double charge, one from his father Dauid, and another from God. For like as it is written of Dauid, that He called SALOMON his sonne, and charged him to build a house for the Lord God of Israel: so doth Tostatus giue the force of a diuine precept 1. Chron. 22. 6. . 9. 26. in 1. Chron. to these words, Behold; a sonne is borne vnto thee, &c. Hee shall build an house for my name. Hee began the worke of the Temple, in the beginning of the fourth yeere of his 1. King. c. 6. reigne, at which time also hee prepared his fleete at Esiongaber to trade for gold in the East Indies, that nothing might be wanting to supplie the charge of so great a worke. For that the Temple was in building, while his fleetes were passing to and fro it is manifest. For the pillars of the Temple were made of the Almaggim trees brought from Ophir. Of this most glorious building, of all the particulars (whereof 1. Chron. 28. 29. the forme and example was giuen by God himselfe) many learned men haue writ∣ten, as Salmeron, Montanus, Ribera, Barradas, Azorius, Villalpandus, Pineda, and others, to whom I referre the Reader. For the cutting and squaring of the Cedars which serued that building, Salomon employed thirtie thousand Carpenters, tenne thousand euery moneth by course: he also vsed eightie thousand Masons in the mountaine, and seuentie thousand la∣bourers that bare burdens, which it is conceiued, he selected out of the Proselites, 1. King. 5. besides three thousand three hundred masters of his worke, so as he paid and im∣ployed in all one hundred eightie three thousand and three hundred men, in which number the Zidonians which were more skilfull in hewing timber than the Isra∣elites, may (as I thinke) be included. For Hiram caused his seruants to bring downe the Cedars and Firres from to the sea, and thence sent them in raffes to Iop∣pe, 1. King. 5. v. 9. or the next port to Hierusalem. For in the second of Chronicles the second Chap∣ter, it is plaine that all but the thirtie thousand Carpenters, and the ouerseers, were strangers, and as it seemeth the vassals of Hiram, and of Vaphres King of Egypt. In re∣compence 1. King. 5. 11. of all this timber and stone, Salomon gaue Hiram twentie thousand mea∣sures of wheate, and twentie measures of pure oyle yeerely. Eusebius out of Eupole∣mus in the ninth booke of his preparation the last Chapter, hath left vs a Copie of Salomons Letter to Suron (which was the same as Huram or Hiram ) King of Tyre in these words: REx SALOMON , Tyri, Sydonis, atque regi. Amico sa∣lutem. Scias me à Deo magno DAVID patris meiregnum accepisse, cum{que} mihi pater templum Deo, qui ter ram creauit, condere, vt etiam ad te scriberem : Scri∣bo igitur, & peto à vt artifices atque fabros ad aedificandum Templum Dei mittere velis. KIng SALOMON to King SVRON, of Tyre, Sydon, and Phaenicia King, and my fa∣thers friend, sendeth greeting; You may vnderstand that I haue receiued of the great God of my father DAVID, the Kingdome: and when my father commaunded mee to build a Temple to God which created heauen and earth, hee commaunded also that I should write to you. I write therefore to you, and beseech you, that you would bee pleased to send mee Arti∣ficers and Carpenters to build the Temple of God. To which the King Suron made this answere. SVRON, Tyri, Sydonis, & Phoeniciae rex, SALOMONI regi salutem. Lectis literis gra∣tias egi Deo, qui tibi regnum patris tradidit: & quoniam scribis fabres ad condendum Templum esse tibi mittendos, misi ad te millia hominum octoginta, & Archi∣tectum Tyrium hominem ex matre Iudaea, virum in rebus architecturae mirabilem. vt non egeant, & Templo Dei condito ad nos redeant. SVRON of Tyre, Sidon and Phoenicia King, to King SALOMON greeting: when I read your letters, I gaue God thankes, who hath installed you in your fathers Kingdome. And because you write, that carpenters and workemen may be sent to build Gods Temple, I haue sent vnto you fourescore thousand men, and a Master-builder a Tyrian, borne of a Iewish woman, a man admirable in building. You will be carefull that all necessaries be pro∣uided for them, and when the Temple of God is built, that they come home to vs. Ios. Ant. l. 8. c. 2. The Copies of these letters were extant in Iosephus time as him selfe affirmeth, and to be seene, saith he, Tam in nostris quàm in Tyriorum annalibus, as well in our owne as in the Tyrian annals. But he deliuereth them somewhat in different tearmes, as the Reader may finde in his Antiquities. But were this intercourse betweene Salomon and Hiram either by message or by writing, it is somewhat otherwise deliuered in 1. King. 5. from the 1. v. to the 9. the Scriptures, than either Eupolemus or Iosephus set it downe, but so, that in sub∣stance there is little difference betweene the one and the other. The like letter in effect Salomon is said to haue written to Vaphres King of Aegypt, and was answered as from Hiram. But whereas some Commentors vpon Salomon finde that Hiram King of Tyre, and King of Aegypt, gaue Salomon the title of Rex magnus, and cite Eupolemon in Eusebius, I doe not finde any such addition of magnus in Eusebius in the last chapter of that ninth booke; neither is it in Iosephus in the eight booke and second chapter of the Iewes antiquities: it being a vaine title vsed by some of the Assyrian and Per∣sian Kings, and vsed likewise by the Parthians, and many other after them, insomuch as in latter times it grew common, and was vsurped by meane persons in respect of the great the first, which was honoured by that name for his noble quali∣ties, as much or more than for his mightinesse. After the finishing and dedication of the Temple and house of the Lord, Salo∣mon fortified Ierusalem with a treble wall, and repaired Hazor which had beene the ancient Metropolis of the Canaanites, before time: so did he Gaza of the Phi∣listims: he built Bethoron, Gerar and the Millo or munition of Hierusalem. For Pha∣raoh Ios. . l. 8. c. 2. (as it seemeth in fauour of Salomon ) came vp into the edge of Ephraim, and tooke Gerar, which the Canaanites yet held, and put them to the sword, and burnt their Citie. The place and territorie he gaue Salomons wife for a dowrie. And it is probable that because Salomon was then busied in his magnificent buildings, and could not attend the warre, that he entreated his father in law to rid him of those neighbours, which performed. But he thereby taught the Aegyptians to visite those partes againe before they were sent for; and in his sonne Rehoboams time Sheshack this mans successor did sacke Ierusalem it selfe. Salomon also built Megiddo in Manasse, on this side Iordan; and Balah in Dan: also Ios. l. . ant. c. 2. Thadmor, which may be either Ptolomies Thamoron in the desart of (or as Iose∣phus thinkes Palmyra in the desart of Syria, which Palmyra because it stood on the vtmost border of Salomons dominion to the northeast of Libanus, and was of Dauids conquest when he wan ; it may seeme that Salomon therefore bestowed Ioseph. l. 8. ant. c. 2. thereon the most cost, and fortified it with the best arte that that age had. Iose∣phus calls this place , by which (saith hee) giuen by Salomon, the Sy∣rians as yet call it. in his booke of Hebrew places calls it Thermeth. In after∣times, when it was rebuilt by Adrian the Emperour, it was honoured with his name, and called Adrianopolis. In respect of this great charge of building Salomon raised tribute through all his Dominions, besides an hundred and twentie talents of gold receiued from Hirams seruants, Salomon offered Hiram twentie towns in or neere the vpper Galilee, but because they stood in an vnfruitfull and marish ground, Hiram re∣fused them, and thereof was the territorie called Chabul. These townes, as it is supposed, lay in of the Gentiles, Non quod gentes ibi : sed quia sub ditione regis gentilis er at, Not that it was by Gentilcs (saith Nauclerus) but because it was vnder the rule of a King that was a Gentile. Howsoeuer it were, it is true that Salomon in his 21. yeere fortified those places, which Hiram re∣fused. Further, he made a into Zobah, and established his tributes; the first and last warre (if in that expedition were driuen to fight) that hee made in person in all his life. He then visited the border of all his Dominions, passing from Thadmor to the North of Palmyrena, and so to the Desarts of , from whence hee visited Eziongaber and Eloth, the vttermost place of the South of all his terri∣tories, bordering to the red sea: which Cities I haue described in the Storie of Moses. §. III. Of SALOMONs sending to Ophir, and of some seeming contra∣dictions about SALOMONs riches, and of PINEDAES conceipt of two strange passages about Africke. HEre Salomon prepared his of Ships for India, with whom Hiram ioyned in that voyage, and furnished him with Mariners and Pilots, the Tyrians being of all other the most expert sea-men. From this part of Arabia, which at this time belonged to Edom, and was conquered by Dauid, did the passe on to the East India, which was not farre off, namely to Ophir, one of the Islands of the Moluccas, a place exceeding rich in gold: witnesse the Spaniards, who notwithstanding all the aboundance which they gather in Peru, doe yet plant in those Islands of the East at Manilia, and recouer a great quantitie from thence, and with lesse labour than they doe in any one part of Peru, or new Spaine. The returne which was made by these Ships amounted to foure hundred and twentie talents, but in the second of Chronicles the eight, it is written foure hundred and fiftie talents: whereof thirtie talents went in expence for the charge of the fleet, and wages of men, and foure hundred and twentie talents, which makes and twentie hundred and twentie thousand Crownes came cleere. And thus must those two places be reconciled. As for the place 1. Reg. 10. 14. which speaketh of sixe hun∣dred sixtie and six talents of gold, that summe, as I take it, is of other receipts of Salo∣mons which were yeerely, and which came to him besides these profits from Ophir. My opinion of the land of Ophir, that it is not Peru in America (as diuers haue thought) but a countrey in the East Indies; with some reason why at those times they could not make more speedie returne to Ierusalem from the East Indies then in C. 8. § 9. 10. * 5. Lib. 4. de rebus Salomonis c. 6. & 15. three yeeres; and that in Scripture is diuers times taken for the Ocean, hath beene alreadie declared in the first booke. Onely it remaineth that I should speake somewhat of Pineda his strange conceits, who being a Spaniard of Baetica, would faine haue Gades or Calis-malis, in old times called Tartessus, which is the South west corner of that Prouince, to be the Tharsis from whence Salomon fetcht his gold; for no other reason, as it seemes, but for loue of his owne countrie, and because of some affinitie of sound betweene Tharsis and Tartessus. For whereas it may seeme strange that it should be three yeere they, that tooke ship in the red sea, should returne from the East Indies to Ierusalem, this hath been in part answered alreadie. And further the intelligent may conceiue of sundry lets, in the digging and refining of the metall, and in their other trafficke, and in their land-carriages betweene Ierusalem and the red sea, and perhaps also elswhere: so that wee haue no neede to make Salomons men to goe many thousand miles out of their way to Gades, round about all Affrick, that so they might belong a comming home. For the direct way to Gades (which if Salomon and the Israclites knew not, the Ty∣rians which went with them, could not haue beene ignorant of) was along the Me∣diterran sea, and so (besides many wonderfull and terrible nauiga∣tion in rounding Africa) they should haue escaped the troublesome land-carriage betweene Ierusalem and the red sea through drie, desart, and thoeuish Countries: and within 30. mile of Ierusalem at Ioppe, or some other hauen in Salomons owne Countrie, haue laden and vnladen their ships. But this direct course they could not hold (saith Pineda) because the huge Island of Atlantis in largenesse greater than all Africk and Asia being swallowed vp in the Atlantik Ocean Salomons ships from passing through the straits of Gibraltar: for this he alleadgeth Plato in Timaeo. But that this calamitie happened about Salo∣mons time, or that thereby the Straights of Gades were filled with mud and made vnpassable, that there could be no comming to Gades by the Mediterran sea: or that this indraught where the sea runneth most violently, and most easily scowreth his channell, should be filled with mud, and not also the great Ocean in like manner, where this huge Island is supposed to haue stoode: or that Salomons ships being in the red sea, should neglect the golden mines of the East Indies (which were infinitly better and to the red sea, than any in Spain) to seeke gold at Cadyz by the way of compassing Affrica, it is most ridiculous to imagine. For the Spaniard himselfe that hath also the rich Peru in the West, in the East Indies, and inhabites some part thereof, as in Manilia, finding in those parts no lesse of gold (the small territorie which he there possesseth considered) than in Peru. The same Pineda hath another strange passage round about all Africa, which els∣where Sal. l. 4. c. 12. 11. he dreames of: supposing whereas Ionas sailing to Tharsis the Citie of Cilicia, As it appeares he ship at or . c. 1. v. 3. was cast out in the Mediterran sea, and taken vp there by a Whale, that this Whale in three dayes swimming aboue twelue thousand English miles, along the Mediterran seas, and so through the streights of Gades, and along all the huge seas round about Africa, cast vp vpon the shore of the red sea, that so hee might haue perhaps some sixe miles the shorter (though much the worse) way to Niniuie. This conceipt hee grounds onely vpon the ambiguitie of the word Suph, which oftentimes is an Epitheton of the red sea (as if wee should call it mare algosum, the sea full of weeds) for the red sea. But in Ionas 2. 5. it is generally taken in the proper signification for weeds, and not as Pineda would haue it, who in this place against his owne rule (which elsewhere he giueth vs) supposeth strange miracles without any neede. For this long voyage of the Whale finished in three daies, is a greater miracle, than the very preseruation of Ionas in the bellie of the Whale: and therefore seeing there is no necessitie of this miracle, we send it backe vnto him, keeping his owne rule which in this place he forgets; Miracula non sunt multiplicanda. And againe, Non sunt Ing. F. danda, nec pro arbitrio , Miracles are not to be multiplied without , nor deliuered without cause, nor fained at pleasure. Therefore to leaue this man in his dreames, which (were he not otherwise very learned and iudicious) might bee thought vnworthie the mentioning. But to proceede with our Storie of Salomon. The Queene of Sabaes comming from farre to Salomon, (as it seemes from Ara∣bia foelix, and not as some thinke from Aethiopia) and her rich presents, and Salomons reciprocall magnificence, and his resoluing of her difficult , those are set downe at large in the text. But herein Iosephus is greatly mistaken, who calls this Queene of Saba Nicaules, the successour (saith hee out of Herodotus) of those thirtie and eight Aegyptian Kings which succeeded Mineus the founder of Memphis; adding that after Aegyptian, and the father in Law of Salomon, the name of Pharaoh was Ios. ant. 8. 1. 2. left off in Aegypt. For as it is elsewhere proued that the Queene was of Arabia, not of Aegypt and Aethiopia; so were there other Pharaohs after the father in Law of Salo∣mon. 2. King. c. 23. & 2. Chron. c. 25. Yea, aboue three hundred yeeres after Salomon, Pharao slew Iosias King of Iuda. . c. 46. v. 2. It is also written of Salomon, that hee kept in garrisons thousand Chariots, and twelue thousand horsemen, that he spent in Court euery day thirtie measures of fine flower, threescore measures of wheat, one hundred sheepe, be∣sides stags and fallow deare, bugles and fowle; foure thousand stals of horses he had for his chariots and other vses, and for the twelue thousand horsemen of his guard. For, the ten thousand stals in the first of Kings the fourth, are to be taken but for so many horses, whence in the second of Chronicles the ninth, it is written but foure thousand stals or teemes, and in euery teeme ten horses, as Iunius and the Geneua vn∣derstand 1. King. 4. 31. it. He was said to be wiser than any man, yea than were Ethan the Ezra∣hite, than Heman, Chalcal, or than Darda, to which Iunius addeth a fift, to wit, Ezrak. For the Geneua maketh Ethan an Ezrahite by Nation. Iosephus writes them Athan, Aeman, Chalceus and Donan the sonnes of Hemon. Hee spake three thousand Pro∣uerbes, and his songs were one thousand and fiue, whereof either the most part perished in the of Babylon, or else because many actes of Salomons were written and kept among the publique Records of Ciuill causes and not Ecclesia∣sticall, therefore they were not thought necessarie to bee inserted into Gods booke. §. IIII. Of the fall of SALOMON, and how long he liued. NOw as hee had plentie of all other things, so had he no scarcitie of women. For besides his seuen hundred Wiues, hee kept three hun∣dred Concubines, and (forgetting that God had commaunded that none of his people should accompanie the daughters of Idolators) hee tooke Wiues out of Aegypt, Edom, Moab, Ammon, Zidon and Heth: and when hee fell a doting, his Wiues turned his heart after other Gods, as Asteroth of the Zidonians, Milcom or Molech of the Ammonites, and Chemosh of Moab. These things God punished by Adad of Idumaea, Rezin of Damascus, and by his owne seruant, and one of the masters of his workes, who by the ordinance of God tare from his sonne Roboam, ten of the twelue parts of all the territorie hee had. Deus dum in peccatores animaduertit, aliorum peccatis vtitur, quae ipse non fecit. God in punishing sinners, vseth the sinnes of others, which hee himselfe wrought P. . not. In the reigne of Salomon (as in times of long peace) were memorable acti∣ons by him performed, excepting his buildings with other workes of magnificence and that great Indian voyage alreadie mentioned. Fourtie yeeres hee reigned: how many he liued, it is not written, and must therefore bee found onely by coniecture. The most likelie way to guesse at the truth in this case, is by considering the actions of Dauid before and after Salomons birth, whereby wee may best make estimation of the yeeres which they consumed, and consequently learne the true, or most like∣ly yeere of his natiuitie. Seuen yeeres Dauid reigned in Hebron: in his eighth yeere hee tooke Ierusalem, and warred with the Philistims, who also troubled him the yeere following. The bringing home of the Arke seemes to haue beene in the tenth yeere of Dauid, and his intention to build the Temple in the yeere ensuing, at which time 1. . c. 7. v. 1. he had sufficient leysure, liuing in rest. After this he had warres with the Phili∣stims, , Aramites and Edomites, which must needs haue held him fiue yeeres, considered that the Aramites of Damasco raised warre against him, after such time as he had Hadadezer; and that in euery of these warres he had the entire . Neither is it likely that these seruices occupied any longer time, because 2. . c. 11. v. 1. in those dayes and places there were no wintering campes in vse, but at conuenient seasons of the yeere Kings went forth to warre, dispatching all with violence, rather than with temporizing; as maintaining their armies, partly vpon the spoyle of the enemies countrie, partly vpon the priuate prouision which euery souldier made for himselfe. The 17. yeere of Dauid, in which he tooke Mephiboseth the sonne of 1. Sam. c. 17. v. 17. & 18. Ionathan into his Court, appeareth to haue passed away in quiet; and the yeere following to haue begun the warre with Ammon; but somewhat late in the end of Summer perhaps, it came to triall of a battaile (for Ioab after the victorie, retur∣ned immediatly to Ierusalem) the causes and preparations for that warre haue taken vp all the Summer. Dauids personall expedition against the Aramites wherein hee brought all the tributaries of Hadadezer vnder his owne allegiance, appeares mani∣festly to haue beene the next yeeres worke, wherein he did cut off all meanes of from the Ammonites; all Syria, Moab and being now at his owne de∣uotion. By this reckoning it must haue beene the 20. yeere of Dauids reigne, and about the fiftieth of his life, in which he sent forth Ioab to besiege Rabba, and finished the warre of Ammon: wherein also fell out the matter of Vriahs wife. So one halfe of Dauids reigne was very prosperous: in the other halfe he felt great sorrow by the expectation, execution, and sad remembrance of that heauie iudgement laid vpon by God for his foule and bloudie offence. Now very manifest it is, that in the yeere after the death of that childe which was begotten in , Salomon was borne, who must needs therefore haue beene yeeres old or thereabout, when hee began to reigne at the decease of his father, as being begotten in the 21. yeere of his fathers reigne, who reigned in all fortie. This account hath also good coherence with the following times of Dauid, as may be collected out of ensuing actions: for two yeeres passed Absalom slew his brother Ammon; three yeeres his father pardoned him; and two yeeres more he came into the Kings presence. After this he prepared horses and men, and laid the foundation of his rebellion, which seemes to haue beene one yeeres worke. So the rebellion it selfe with all that happened thereupon, as the made by Sheba, the death of Amasa and the rest, may well seeme to haue beene in the 30. yeere of Dauids reigne. Whether the three yeeres of famine should be reckoned apart from the last yeeres of warre with the Philistims, or confounded with them, it were more hard than needfull to coniecture. Plaine enough it is, that in the tenne remaining yeeres of Dauid there was time sufficient, and to spare, both for three yeeres of famine, for foure yeeres of warre, and for numbring the people, with the ensuing; as also for his owne last infirmitie, and disposing of the Kingdome. Yet indeed it seemes that the warre with the Philistims, was but one yeeres worke, and ended in three or foure fights, of which the two or three former were at Gob or Nob neere vnto Ge∣zer, and the last at Gath. This warre the Philistims vndertooke, as it seemeth, vpon confidence gathered out of the in Israel, and perhaps emboldened by Dauids old age, for hee fainted now in the battaile, and was afterwardes hin∣dered by his men from exposing himselfe vnto danger any more. So Dauid had sixe or seuen yeeres of rest, in which time it is likely, that many of his great men of Warre died (being of his owne age) whereby the stirring spirit of Adonijah found little succour in the broken partie of Ioab the sonne of Zeruta. At this time it might both truly be said by Dauid to Salomon, Thou art a wise man, 1. . c. 2. v. 9. &c. 3. v. 7. and by Salomon to God, I am but a child; for nineteene yeeres of age might well agree with either of these two speeches. Neuerthelesse there some that gather out of Salomons professing himselfe a child, that he was but eleuen old when he beganne to raigne. Of these Rabbi Salomon seemes the first Authour, whom other of great learning and iudgement haue herein followed: grounding themselues perhaps vpon that which is saide of Absolons rebellion, that it was after yeeres, which they vnderstand as yeeres 2. Sam. 15. 7. of Dauids raigne. But whereas Rehoboam the sonne of was 41. yeeres old when hee beganne to raigne, it would follow hereby that his had begotten him, being but a child of nine or ten yeeres old; the difference their ages being no greater, if Salomon (who raigned fortie yeeres) were but eleuen yeeres old when his raigne began. To this inconuenience, Iosephus allowes 80. yeeres raigne to Salomon; a report so disagreeing with the Scriptures, that it needes no . Some indeede in of this opinion construed the wordes of , as if they included all the yeeres of Salomons life. But by such reckoning hee should haue beene 40. yeeres old at his Fathers death; and should haue beene borne long before his Father had wonne Ierusalem; which is a manifest vntruth. Wherefore the 40. yeares remembred in Absolons rebellion, may either seeme to haue reference to the space betweene Dauids first an∣ointment, and the trouble which God brought vpon him for his wickednesse, or perhaps be read (according Iosephus, Theodoret, and the Latine translation) foure yeeres; which passed betweene the returne of Absolon to Ierusalem, and his brea∣king out. §. V. Of SALOMONS . THere remaine of Salomons workes, the Prouerbs, the Preacher, and the Song of Salomon. In the first he good life and correcteth man∣ners, in the second, the vanitie of humane nature, in the third hee sin∣geth as it were the Epithalamion of Christ and his Church. For the Booke intituled The wisedome of Salomon, (which some giue vnto Sa∣lomon, and some make the elder Philo the Author thereof) Hierome and many others of the best make vs thinke it was not Salomon that wrote it. Hier. ad Croma∣sium. (saith HIEROME) qui SALOMONIS inscribitur, redolet eloquentiam; The of the booke of wisedome, which is ascribed to SALOMON, of the ; and of the same opinion was S. Augustine, and yet hee confesseth in the Booke and twentieth Chapter of the Citie of God, that the Author of that Booke hath a direct fore-telling of the Passion of Christ in these wordes: Circumueniamus iustum quoniam est nobis, &c. Let vs circumuent the righteous, . 2. for he is to vs, he is contrarie to our doings, he checketh vs for offending against the Law, he makes his boast to haue the knowledge of God, and he calleth himselfe the Sonne of the Lord, &c. and so doth the course of all the following wordes point directly at Christ. The Bookes of Ecclesiastes, Prouerbs, and Canticorum, Rabbi Moses S. Sen. fol. 62. Kimchi ascribeth to Isay the Prophet. Suidas and Cedrenus report that Salomon wrote of the remedies of all diseases, and graued the same on the sides of the of the Reinecc. in Iul. . Temple, which they say Ezechias pulled downe, because the people helpe from God by prayer, repaired thither for their recoucries. Of Salomons bookes of Inuocations and Inchantments to cure diseases, and expell euill spirits, Iosephus hath written at large, though as I conceiue, rather out of his owne inuention, or from some vncertaine report, than truely. He also speaketh of one Eliazarus, who by the roote in Salomons ring dispossest diuers persons of euill spirits in the presence of , and many others, which I will not stand to examine. Certainly so strange an example of humane frailty hath neuer been read of as this King: who hauing receiued wisedome from God himselfe, in honour of whom, and for his onely seruice, hee built the first and most glorious Temple of the world: he that was made King of Israel and , not by the law of Nature, but by the loue of God, and became the , richest, and happiest of all Kings, did in the end, by the perswasion of a few weake and wretched Idolatrous Women, forget and for∣sake the Lord of all the world, and the giuer of all goodnesse, of which he was more liberall to this King, than to any that euer the world had. Of whom Siracides wri∣teth in this manner: SALOMON raigned in a peaceable time and was glorious, for God made all quiet round about, that hee might build a house to his name, and prepare the San∣ctuarie for euer; How wise wast thou in thy youth, and wast filled with vnderstanding, as with a floud: Thy minde couered the whole earth, and hath filled it with graue and darke sentences. Thy name went abroadin the Iles, and for thy peace thou wast beloued, &c. but thus he concludeth: Thou didst bow thy loynes to Women, and wast ouer-come by thy bo∣dy, thou didst staine thine honour, and defiled thy posteritie, and hast brought wrath vpon thy children, and felt sorrow for thy folly. cap. 27. §. VI. Of the Contemporaries of SALOMON. the beginning of Salomons raigne, the third of the He∣raclidae in Corinth; Labotes in Lacedaemon; and soone after Syluius Alba the fourth of the , swayed those Kingdomes: Laosthenes then go∣uerning Assyria: Agastus and the second and third Princes after Codrus ruling the Athenians. In the sixe and twentieth of Salomons raigne Hiram of Tyre died, to whom Balia∣strus succeeded, and raigned seuenteene yeeres, after Mercators account, who rec∣kons the time of his rule by the age of his sonnes. Iosephus giues him fewer yeeres. . 3. Theophilus Antiochenus against Autolicus findcs Bozorius the next after Hiram, if there bee not some Kings omitted beweene the death of Hiram, and the raigne of Bozorius. Vaphres being dead, about the twentieth of Salomon, Sesac or Shisak (as our En∣glish termes him) beganne to gouerne in Aegypt, being the same with him whom Diodorus calleth ; Iosephus, ; Cedrenus, Susesinus; Euscbius in the columne of the Aegyptian Kings Smendes, and in that of the Hebrewes Susac. Iosephus in the eight of his Antiquities reproueth it as an errour in Herodotus, that hee ascribeth the acts of Susac to Sesostris, which perchance Herodotiss might haue done by comparison, accounting Sesac another Sesostris, for the great things hee did. Of the great acts and vertues of King Sesostris I haue spoken already in the of the Aegyptian Princes: only in this hee was reproued, that hee caused foure of his captiue Kings to draw his Caroch, when hee was disposed to bee seene, and to ride in trumph: one of which foure, saith Eutropius, at such time as Sesostris was carried out to take the aire, cast his head continually backe vpon the two fore-most wheeles next him; which Sesostris perceiuing, asked him what hee found worthy the admiration in that motion? to whom the captiue King answe∣red, that in those hee beheld the instabilitie of all worldly things; for that both the lowest part of the wheele was suddainly carried about, and became the highest, and the vpmost part was as suddainly turned downe-ward and vnder all: which when Hist. . l. 17 Sesostris had iudiciously weighed, he dismissed those Princes, and all other from the like seruitude in the future. Of this Sesostris, and that he could not be taken for Se∣sac, I haue spoken at large in that part of the Aegyptian Kings preceding. CHAP. XIX. Of SALOMONS Successors vntill the end of IEHOSAPHAT. §. I. Of REHOBOAM his beginnings: the defection of the ten Tribes, and . REHOBOAM the Sonne of Salomon by an Am∣monitesse, now fortie yeeres olde, succeeded his Fa∣ther Salomon, and was anointed at Sichem, where the ten Tribes of Israel were assembled: who attended a while the returne of as yet in Aegypt, since hee fled thither fearing Salomon. After his arriuall the people presented a Petition to Rehoboam, to bee eased of those great Tributes laid on them by his Father. Sic firmius ci fore Imperium, si mallet quàm Ant. l. 8. c. 3. metui; So should his Empire (saith IOSEPHVS) be more assured, if hee desired rather to bee beloued than feared: whereof hee tooke three dayes to deliberate before his answere, of whom therefore it could not be said as of Dauid, that he was wiser than all his Teachers. For as of himselfe hee knew not how to resolue, so had hee not the iudgement to discerne of counsells, which is the very test of wisedome in Princes, and in all men else. But notwithstanding that he had consulted with those graue and aduised men, that ser∣ued his Father, who perswaded him by all meanes to satisfie the multitude: he was transported by his familiars and fauourites, not only to continue on the backs of his subiects those burdens which greatly crusht them; but (vaunting falsly of great∣nesse exceeding his Fathers) he threatned in sharpe, or rather in terrible termes, to lay yet heauier, and more vnsupportable loades on them. But as it appeared by the successe, those yonger aduisors greatly mistooke the nature of seueritic, which without the temper of clemencie is no other than crueltie it selfe: they also were ignorant that it ought to be vsed for the helpe, and not for the harme of subiects. For what is the strength of a King left by his people? and what cordes or fetters haue euer lasted long, but those which haue beene twisted and forged by loue only? His witlesse parasites could well iudge of the Kings disposition: and being well learned therein, though ignorant in all things else, it sufficed and inabled them suf∣ficiently for the places they held. But this answere of Rehoboam did nor a little ad∣uance Ieroboams designes. For being fore-told by the Prophet Achiah of his future aduancement, these the Kings threats (changing the peoples loue into furie) con∣firmed and gaue courage to his hopes. For he was no sooner arriued, than elected King of Israel: the people crying out, What portion haue wee in Dauid? we haue no inheritance in the Sonne of Ishai. Now though themselues, euen all the Tribes of Israel, had consented to Dauids anointing at Hebron the second time, acknowledge∣ing 2. . c. 5. 1. that they were his bones and his flesh: yet now after the manner of rebells, they forgat both the bonds of nature, and their dutie to God, and, as all alienated resolued hearts doe, they serued themselues for the present with impudent excuses. And now ouer-late, and after time, Rehoboam sent Adoram, one of the Taxers of the people, a man most hatefull to all his Subiects, to pacifie them: whom they in∣stantly beat to death with stones. Whereupon the King affrighted, got him from Sichem with all speede, and recouered Ierusalem, where preparing to inuade Israel, 1. King. 12. 21. with an hundred and foure-score thousand chosen men, Shemai in the person of God commanding to the contrarie, all was stayed for the present. In the meane time Ieroboam the new King fortified Sechem on this side, and on the other side of Iordan; and fearing that the Vnion and exercise of one Religion would also ioyne the peoples hearts againe to the House of Dauid; and hauing in all likelihood also promised the Aegyptians to follow their Idolatrie: hee set vp two Calues of gold for the Children of Israel to worship, impiously perswading them that those were the Gods, or at least by these hee represented those Gods, which deliuered them out of Aegypt: and refusing the seruice of the Leuites, hee made Pricsts fit for such Gods. It must needes be that by banishing the Leuites which serued Dauid and Salo∣mon through all Israel, Ieroboam greatly inriched himselfe: as taking into his hands all those Cities which were giuen them by Moses and Iosua, for as it is written, The Leuites left their suburbs, and their possession, and came to Iuda, &c. This irreli∣gious policie of Ieroboam (which was the foundation of an Idolatrie that neuer could be rooted out, vntill Israel for it was rooted out of the Land) was by prophe∣cie and miracles impugned sufficiently when it first beganne; but the affections maintaining it, were so strong, that neither Prophecie nor Miracle could make them yeeld. could not bee moued now by the authoritie of Ahia, who 1. King. 13. v. 4. from the Lord had first promised vnto him the Kingdome; nor by the withering of his owne hand as hee stretched it ouer the Altar, which also claue a-sunder, ac∣cording to the signe, which the man of God had giuen by the commandement of V. 5. God, who againe recouered and cured him of that defect; yet hee continued as ob∣stinate V. 6. an Idolater as before, for hee held it the safest course in policie to proceede as he had begunne. This impious inuention of Ieroboam, who forsooke God, and the Religion of his forefathers, by God and his Ministers taught them, was by a moderne Historian compared with the policies of late Ages, obseruing well the practice of his Nation, being an Italian borne. Sic qui hodiè (saith hee) politici vo∣cantur, & propria commoda, vtilitates sibi tanquàm vltimum finem consti∣tuunt, causam quam vocant status in capite omnium ponunt: pro ipsatuenda, promonenda, conseruanda, amplianda, nihil non putant. Si iniuriaproximoirroganda, si leges subuertendae, si religio ipsa pessundanda, si omnia iura diuina, & humana violanda, nihilintentatum, nihil per fas relinquendum censent, ruant, omnia pereant, nihil adipsos, modòid, quod è re sua esse sibi , obtineant, ac si nullus sit curet, castigareuè possit Deus; So they who are now called Politi∣tians, propounding to themselues, as their vtmost end and scope, their owne commoditie and present profit; are wont to alleage the case of state forsooth, as the principall point to bee regarded: for the good of the state, for aduancing, preseruing, or encreasing of the state, they thinke that they may doe any thing. If they meane to oppresse their neighbour, to ouer∣turne all lawes of iustice and honestie, if religion it selfe must goe to wracke, yea if all rights of God and Man must be violated, they will trie all courses, be it right, be it wrong, they will doe any thing; let all goe to ruine, what care they, so long as they may haue what they would; as who should say, there were no God that would offer to meddle in such matters, or had power to correct them. Indeed this allegation of raggione del stato, did serue as well to vp-hold, as at the first it had done to bring in this vile Idolatrie of the ten Tribes. Vpon this ground Amazia the Priest of Bethel, counsailed the Prophet Amos, not to prophecie at Be∣thel; Amot. 7. 13. For (said he) it is the Kings Court. Vpon this ground euen that had massa∣cred 2. Kings 10. 16. the Priests of Baal, in zeale for the Lord, yet would not in any wise depart from that politique sinne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to sinne. It 2. Kings 10. 20. was reason of state that perswaded the last famous French King Henrie the fourth to change his Religion, yet the Protestants whom hee for sooke, obeyed him, but some of the Papists whom hee followed, murdered him. So strongly doth the painted vizzor of wise proceeding delude euen those that know the foule face of impietie lurking vnder it, and behold the wretched endes that haue euer followed it; where∣of Iehu and all the Kings of Israel had, and were themselues very great examples. §. II. Of REHOBOAM his impietie; for which hee was punished by SESAC: of his end and Contemporaries. WHile Ieroboam was occupied in setting vp his new Religion, Rehoboam on the other side, hauing now little hope to recouer the Prouinces lost, strengthened the principall places remaining with all endeuour: for hee fortified and victualled fifteene Cities of and Bcniamin: 2. Cbron. 21. not that hee feared Ieroboam alone, but the Aegyptians, to whom Ie∣roboam had not onely fastned himselfe, but withall inuited them to inuade Iudaea: laying perchance before them the incountable riches of Dauid and Salomon, which might now easily bee had, seeing ten of the twelue Tribes were reuolted, and be∣come enemies to the Iudaeans. So as by those two wayes (of late yeeres often tro∣den) to wit, change of Religion, and inuitation of forraine force, Ieroboam hoped to settle himselfe in the seate of Israel, whom yet the powerfull God for his Idolatrie in a few yeeres after rooted out, with all his. Rehoboam also, hauing as hee thought, by fortifying diuers places, assured his estate, forsooke the Law of the liuing God, 1. Kings 14. 13. and made high Places, and Images, and Groues on euerie high Hill, and vnder eue∣rie greene Tree. And therefore in the fifth yeere of his raigne, Sesac or Shishac before spoken of, being now King of Aegypt, and with whom as well Adad of , as Ieroboam, were familiar, and his instruments, entred Iudaea with twelue thousand Chariots, and 2. Chron. 12. 3. three score thousand Horse, besides foote-men, which Iosephus numbers at foure Ios. Ant. 8. c. 4. hundred thousand. This Armie was compounded of foure Nations; Aegyptians, Lubaeans, Succaeans, and . The Lubaeans were Lybaeans, the next bordering Re∣gion to Aegypt, on the West side. The were of Petraea, and of the Desart A∣rabia, which afterward followed Zerah against King of Iuda. The Succaeans ac∣cording 2. Chron. 12. to Iunius his opinion, were of Succoth, which signifieth Tents: hee doth sup∣pose 2. Kings 14. Annot. in 12. Cbron. that they were the Trogloditae, mentioned often in , Ptolomie, and other Authors. The Troglodites inhabited not farre from the bankes of the red Sea, in 22. Plin. l. 6. c. 29. Ptol. . 3. degrees from the line Northward, about sixe hundred English mile from the best and Maritimate part of Aegypt: and therefore I doe not thinke that the Succims, or were those Trogloditae, but rather those Arabians which Ptolomie calles Arabes , or, Ichthyophagi, which possesse that part of Aegypt betweene the mountaines called Alabastrini, and the red Sea farre neerer Aegypt, and readier to be leuied then Cap. 47. v. 13. those remoued Sauages of the Troglodytae. With this great and powerfull Armic, Sesac inuaded Iudaea, and (besides many other strong Cities) wanne Ierusalem it selfe; of which, and of the Temple, and Kings house, he tooke the spoile, carrying away (besides other treasures) the gol∣den shields which Salomon had made, imitation of those which Dauid recouered from Adidezer, in the Syrian warre: these Rehoboam supplied with Targets of brasse, which were fit enough to guard a King of his qualitie: whom Syracides calleth, The foolishnesse of the people. From this time forward the Kings of Aegypt claimed the soueraigntie of Iudaea, and held the Iewes as their Tributaries: Sesac, as it seemes, rendring vp to Rehoboam his places on that condition. So much may bee gathered out of the wordes of God, where promising the deliuerance of Iuda after their humiliation, hee doth notwith∣standing leaue them vnder the yoke of Aegypt, in these wordes: Neuerthelesse, they (to wit, the ) shall be his seruants, that is, the seruants of SESAC. After this ouerthrow and dishonour, Rehoboam raigned twelue yeeres, and his losses receiued by Sesac notwithstanding, hee continued the warre against Ieroboam all his life time. After his death Ieroboam gouerned Israel foure yeeres. Rehoboam liued 58. yeeres, and raigned 17. his storie was written at large by She∣meiah and Hiddon the Prophets, but the same perished with that of Nathan & the rest. With Rehoboam, Archippus, and Tersippus, the third and fourth Archontes or Go∣uernours for life after Codrus, gouerned in Athens. Abdastrartus, or Abstrartus, in Tyre. Doristhus the fift of the Heraclidae in Sparta, according to Eusebius (others make Euseb. Chron. him the sixth) and Priminas the fourth in Corinth. Ouer the Latines reigned Syluius Alba, and Syluius Atys, the fourth and fifth of the Syluij. About the 12. of Rehoboam, Abdastrartus King of Tyre was murthered by his Nur∣ses sons, or foster brethren, the elder of which vsurped the Kingdom twelue yeeres. Towards his latter times Periciades, or Pyrithiades, beganne to gouerne Assyria, the 34. King thereof: and not long after Astartus, the sonne of Baleastartus recouered the Kingdome of Tyre from the Vsurpers. §. III. Of the great battaile betweene IEROBOAM and ABIA, with a Corolarie of the examples of Gods iudgements. ABIJAH the Sonne of Rehoboam, inherited his Fathers Kingdome, and his vices. Hee raised an Armie of foure hundred thousand, with which hee inuaded Ieroboam, who encountred him with a double number of eight hundred thousand, both Armies ioyned neere to the Mount Ephraim, where Ieroboam was vtterly ouerthrowne, and the strength of Israel broken; for there fell of that side fiue hundred thousand, the greatest o∣uerthrow that euer was giuen or receiued of those Nations. Abijah being now ma∣ster of the field, recouered Bethel, Ieshanah, and Ephron, soone after which discomfi∣ture, Ieroboam died: who reigned in all 22. yeeres. Abijah, the better to strengthen himselfe, entred into league with Hesion, the third of the Adads of Syria; as may bee gathered out of the 2. of Chron. he reigned but three yeeres, and then died: the parti∣culars . Chron. 16. 23. of his acts were written by Iddo the Prophet, as some part of his Fathers were. Heere wee see how it pleased God to punish the sinnes of Salomon in his Sonne Rehoboam: first, by an Idolator and a Traitor: and then by the successor of that Ae∣gyptian, whose daughter Salomon had married, thereby the better to assure his estate, which while he serued God, was by God assured against all and the greatest neigh∣bouring Kings, and when hee forsooke him, it was torne asunder by his meanest Vassals; Not that the Father wanted strength to defend him from the Aegyptian Sesac. For the sonne Abijah was able to leuie foure hundred thousand men, and with the same number he ouerthrew eight hundred thousand Israelites, and slew of them fiue hundred thousand, God giuing spirit, courage, and inuention, when, and where it pleaseth him. And as in those times the causes were exprest, why it pleased God to punish both Kings and their People: the same being both before, and at the instant deliuered by Prophets; so the same iust God, who liueth and gouerneth all things for euer, doeth in these our times giue victorie, courage, and discourage, raise, and throw downe Kings, , Cities, and Na∣tions, for the same offences which were committed of old, and are committed in the present: for which reason, in these and other the afflictions of Israel, alwayes 2. Sam. 27. 1. the causes are set downe, that they might bee as precedents to succeeding ages. They were punished with famine in Dauids time for three yeeres, For Saul and his bloudie house, &c. And Dauid towards his latter end suffred all sorts of afflictions, and sorrowes in effect, for Vriah. Salomon had tenne tribes of twelue from his sonne for his idolatrie. Rehoboam was spoyled of his riches and honour by Sesac of Aegypt, because the people of Iuda made images, high places, and groues, &c. And because they suffered Sodomites in the land. Ieroboam was punished in himselfe & his posteritie, for the golden Calues that he erected. Ioram had all his sonnes slaine by the Philistims, and his very bowels torne out of his bodie by an flix, for mur∣thering his brethren. Ahab and Iezebel were slaine, the bloud of the one, the bodie of the other eaten with dogs: for the false accusing and killing of Naboth. So also hath God punished the same and the like sinnes in all after-times, and in these our dayes by the same famine, plagues, warre, losse, vexation, death, sicknesse, and cala∣mities, howsoeuer the wise men of the world raise these effects no higher than to second causes, and such other accidents; which, as being next their eyes and eares, seeme to them to worke euery alteration that happeneth. §. IIII. Of ASA and his Contemporaries. TO Abijah succeeded Asa, who enioyed peace for his first ten yeeres, 2. Chron. 14. in which time hee established the Church of God, breaking downe the altars dedicated to strange gods, with their images, cutting downe their groues, and taking away their high places. Hee also spa∣red not his owne mother, who was an Idolatresse, but deposing her 2. Chron. 15. 16. from her regencie, brake her Idoll, stampt it, and burnt it. Hee also fortified many Cities, and other places, prouiding (as prouident Kings doe) for the of war in the leasure of peace. For not long after hee was inuaded by Zerah, who then commanded all the Arabians bordering , and with such a multitude entred the territorie of Asa, as (for any thing that I haue read) were neuer assembled of that Nation, either before or since. For it is written, that there came against the Iu∣deans Zerah of Aethiopia, with an hoste of tenne hundred thousand, and three 2. Chron. 14. 9. Chariots; which Asa encountred with an armie of hundred and soure∣score thousand, leuied out of those two tribes of Iudae and Beniamin, which obeyed him, and with which hee ouerthrew this fearefull multitude, and had the spoyle both of their Cities and Campe. That this Zerah was not an Aethiopian, I haue In the for∣met booke c. 4. §. 14. item c. 8. §. 10. *6. proued alreadie, & were it but the length betweene Aethiopia and Iudaea, & the strong flourishing Regions of Egypt in∣teriacent (who would not suffer a million of strangers to passe through them) it were sufficient to make it appear how foolish the opinion is, that these inuaders were Aethiopians. But in that the Scriptures acknowledge that Gerar was belonging to Ze∣rah, and the Cities thereabouts were spoyled by the Iudaeans, in following their vi∣ctorie, as places belonging to Zerah, and that all men know that Gerar standeth vpon the torrent of Besor, which Dauid past ouer when he surprized Amalekites or A∣rabians; 2. Chron. 14. this prooueth sufficiently, that Zerah was leader of the Arabians, and that Ge∣rar was a frontier towne, on the vttermost South-border of all Iudea, from all parts of Aethiopia sixe hundred miles. Also the spoyles which Asa tooke, as the cattell, Camels, and sheepe, whereof hee sacrisiced fiue thousand, shew them to bee Arabians adioyning and not far off, and not vnknowne Aethiopians. And if it be ob∣iected that these desart countries can hardly yeeld a million of men fit for the wars, I answere, that it is as like that Arabia Petraea, and the Desart which compasse two parts of the holy Land, should yeeld ten hundred thousand, as that two tribes of the twelue, should arme fiue hundred and foure score thousand. Besides, it answe∣reth to the promise of God to Abraham, that these nations should exceed in number; for God spake it of Israel, that hee would make him fruitfull, and multiply him excee∣dingly, that he should beget twelue Princes, &c. Baasha a king of Israel began to reigne in the third of Asa, and fearing the great∣nesse of Asa his great victorie, entertained Benhadad King of Syria, of the race of Adadezer, to ioyne with him against Asa; and to the end to blocke him vp, hee fortified Rama, which lieth in the way from Ierusalem towardes Sa∣maria. This warre began according to the letter of the Scriptures in the 36. yeere of A∣sa his reigne: but because in the first of Kings the 16. it is said that Baasha died in the 2. Chron. 16. v. 1. 26. yeere of Asa; therefore could not Baasha begin this warre in the 35. of Asa his reigne, but in the 35. yeere of the diuision of Iuda and Israel: for so many yeeres it was from the first of Rehoboam, who reigned 17. yeeres, to the 16. of Asa. It may seeme strange, that Asa being able to bring into the field an Armie of fiue hundred and foure score thousand good Souldiers, did not easily driue away Baasha, and de∣feat him of his purposes, the victories of Abia against Ieroboam, and of Asa him∣selfe Zerah, being yet fresh in minde, which might well haue emboldened the men of Iuda, and as much disheartened the enemies. Questionlesse there were some important Circumstances, omitted in the text, which caused Asa to fight at this time with money. It may be that the imployment of so many hundred thousands of hands, in the late seruice against Zerah, had caused many mens priuate businesses to lie vndispatched, whereby the people being now intentiue to the culture of their lands and other trades, might be vnwilling to stirre against the Israelites, choosing ra∣ther to winke at apparant inconuenience, which the building of Rama would bring vpon them in after-times. Such backwardnesse of the people might haue deterred Asa from aduenturing himselfe with the least part of his forces, and committing the successe into the hands of God. Howsoeuer it were, hee tooke the treasures remai∣ning in the Temple, with which hee waged Benhadad the Syrian against Baasha, whose imployments Benhadad readily accepted, and brake off confederacie with Baasha. For the Israelites were his borderers, and next neighbours, whom neither (after his inuasion) nor his successors after him euer gaue ouer, till they had made them∣selues masters of that Kingdome. So Benhadad being now entred into Nephthalim, 2. Chron. 16. 4. without resistance, he spoyled diuers principall Cities thereof, and inforced Baasha to quit , and to leaue the same to Asa, with all the materials which he had brought 1. Kings 15. thither, to fortifie the same: which done, Benhadad, who loued neither partie, being with the spoiles of Israel, and the treasures of Iuda, returned to Damascus. Af∣ter this, when Hanani the Prophet reprehended Asa, in that hee now relyed on the strength of Syria, and did not rest himselfe on the fauour and assistance of God, hee not onely caused Hanani to bee imprisoned, but hee began to burden and oppresse his people, and was therefore strooken with the grieuous paines of the gout in his 2. Chron. 16. feete, wherewith after he had beene two yeeres continually tormented, hee gaue vp the ghost when he had reigned 41. yeeres. There liued with Asa, Agesilaus the sixt of the Heraclidae, and Bacis the fift King of the same race in Corinth, of whom his successors were afterward called Bacidae. A∣startus, Euseb. in Chron. and Astarimus were Kings in Tyre. Astarimus tooke reuenge on his brother Phelletes, for the murther of Ithobalus Priest of the goddesse Astarta, whom Salomon in dotage worshipped. Atys and Capys ruled the Latines. Pirithiades and Ophrateus the Assyrians: Tersippus and Phorbas the Athenians: Chemmis reigned in Aegypt; who dy∣ing in the 36. yeere of Asa, left Cheops his successor, that reigned fiftie sixe yeeres, e∣uen to the 16. of Ioas. §. V. Of the great alteration falling out in the ten Tribes during the raigne of ASA. IN the raigne of Asa, the Kingdome of Israel felt great and violent commotions, which might haue reduced the ten Tribes vnto their former allegeance to the house of Dauid, if the wisedome of God had not otherwise determined. The wickednesse of Ieroboam had in his latter dayes, the sentence of heauie vengeance layd vpon it, by the mouth Ahia, the same Prophet which had foretold the diuision of Israel, for the sinne of Salomon, and his raigne ouer the ten Tribes. One sonne Ieroboam had a∣mong others, in whom onely God found so much pietie, as (though it sufficed not to with-hold his wrath from that Family) it procured vnto him a peaceable end; an testimony of the peoples loue, by their generall mourning and lamenta∣tion at his death, and (wherein he was most happie) the fauourable approbation of God himselfe. After the losse of this good sonne, the vngodly father was soone taken away: a miserable creature, so conscious of his vile vnthankefulnesse to God, that hee durst not suffer his owne name to be vsed in consulting with an holy Prophet, assured of the ruine hanging ouer him and his, yea, Gods extreme hatred; yet sorbearing to destroy those accursed Idoles that wrought his confusion. So loth hee was to for∣sake his worldly wisedome, when the world was ready to forsake him, and all be∣longing to him, his hatefull memory excepted. Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam, raigned in the second and third yeeres of Asa, which are reckoned as two yeeres, though indeede his fathers last yeere of two and twen∣tie did runne along (how farre is vncertaine) with the second of Asa, whose third 1. King. 15. 25. yeere was the first of Baasha, so that perhaps this Nadab inioyed not his Kingdome one whole yeere. He did not alter his fathers courses, neither did God alter his sen∣tence. It seemes that he little feared the iudgements denounced against his fathers house: for as a Prince that was secure of his owne estate, hee armed all Israel against the Philistims, and besieged one of their Townes. There (whether it were so, that the people were offended with his ill successe, and recalled to minde their grieuous losse of fiue hundred thousand vnder Ieroboam, counting it an vnluckie familie to the Nation; or whether by some particular indiscretion, hee exasperated them) slaine hee was by Baasha, whom the Armie did willingly accept for King in his stead. Baasha was no sooner proclaimed King, than he began to take order with the house of Ieroboam, that none of them might molest him, putting all of them, without mer∣cie, to the sword. That he did this for priuate respects, and not in regard of Gods will to haue it so, it is euident by his continuing in the same forme of Idolatrie which Ieroboam had begunne. Wherefore hee receiued the same sentence from God that had been layd vpon Ieroboam; which was executed vpon him also in the same sort. Hee beganne to infeft Asa, by fortifying Ramah; but was diuerted from thence by the Syrian Benhadad, who did waste his Countrey, destroying all the Land of Neph∣thalim. Foure and twentie yeeres hee reigned: and then dying, left the Crowne to Ela his sonne; who enioyed it, as Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam had done, two yeeres currant, perhaps not one compleat. Ela was as much an idolater as his father: and withall a riotous person. Hee sent an Armie against Gibbethon, the same Towne of the , before which Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam perished; but he sate at home the whilest, feasting and drinking with his Minions, whereby hee gaue such aduantage against himselfe, as was not neglected. Zimri, an ambitious man, remaining with the King at Tirza, finding his Master so dissolute, and his behauiour so contemptible, conceiued hope of the like fortune as Baasha had found, by doing as Baasha had done. Wherefore he did set vp∣on Ela in his drunkennesse, and slue him. Presently vpon which fact, he stiled him∣selfe King of Israel: and began his raigne with massacring all the house of Baasha; ex∣tending his crueltie not onely to his children, and kinsfolke, but vnto all his friends in Tirza. These newes were quickly blowne to the Campe at Gibbethon, where they were not welcommed according to Zimri his expectation. For the Souldiers in stead of proclaiming him King, proclaimed him Traitour: and being led by Omri, whom they saluted King, they (quitting the siege of Gibbethon ) presented themselues be∣fore Tirza; which in short space they may seeme to haue forced. Zimri wanting strength to desend the Citie, not courage to keepe himselfe from falling aliue into his enemies hands, did set fire on the Palace, consuming it and himselfe together to ashes. Seuen dayes he is said to haue raigned: accounting (as is most likely) to the time that Omri was proclaimed in the Campe. For Zimri was also an idolater, Wal∣king 1. Kin. 16. 19. in the way of IEROBOAM; and therfore is likely to haue had more time wher∣in to declare himselfe, than the raigne of seuen dayes, and those consumed partly in the friends of Baasha, partly in seeking to haue defended his owne life. After the death of Ela, there arose another King to oppose the faction of Omri; wher∣by it may seeme, that Zimri had made his party strong, as being able to set vp a new head, who doubtlesse would neuer haue appeared, if there had not been ready to his hand, some strength, not vnlikely to resist and vanquish the Armie which maintai∣ned Omri. How long this Tibni, the new Competitor of Omri, held out, I doe not finde; onely it appeares that his side was decayed, and so he died, leauing no other Successor than his concurrent. §. VI. A coniecture of the causes hindering the reunion of Israel with Iuda, which might haue been effected by these troubles. ANy man that shall consider the state of Israel in those times, may iust∣ly wonder how it came to passe, that either the whole Nation, with the calamities already suffered vnder these vnfortunate Princes, and with the present ciuill warres, did not returne to their an∣cient Kings, and reunite themselues with the mighty Tribes of Iuda and Beniamin; or that Zimri and Tibni, with their oppressed factions, did not call in Asa, but rather chese the one to endure a desperate necessitie of yeelding, or bur∣ning himselfe, the other to languish away, a man forsaken: than to haue recourse vn∣to a remedie, so sure, so ready, and so honourable. To say that God was pleased to haue it so, were a true, but an idle answere (for his secret will is the cause of all things) vnlesse it could be prooued, that he had forbidden Asa to deale in that busi∣nesse, as he forbade to force the rebellious people to obedience. That the restraint laid by God vpon , did only binde his hands from attempting the suppression of that present insurrection, it appeares by the Warre continued be∣tweene Israel and Iuda, so many yeeres following: wherein Abia so farre preuailed, that he wanne a great battaile, and recouered some Townes belonging to the other Tribes, which he annexed to his owne Dominion. Wherefore we may boldly looke into the second causes, moouing the People and Leaders of the ten Tribes, to suffer any thing vnder new vpstarts, rather than to cast their eyes vpon that Royall house of Dauid, from which the succession of fiue Kings in lineall descent, had taken away all imputation, that might formerly haue been layd vpon the meane beginnings thereof: To thinke that Omri had preuented his Competitors, in making peace with Asa, were a coniecture more bold than probable. For Omri was not onely an 1. King. 16. 25. Idolater, but did worse than all that were before him, which as it might serue alone to proue, that Asa, being a godly King, would not adhere to him, so the course which hee professed to take at the very first, of reuenging the massacre committed vpon the familie and friends of Baasha, ( Asa his mortall enemie) giues manifest reason, why Zimri, who had wrought that great execution, should more iustly than he, haue expected the friendship of Iuda in that quarrell. Wherefore, in searching out the reason of this back wardnesse in the ten tribes (which was such that they may seeme to haue neuer thought vpon the matter) to submit themselues to their true Princes; it were not amisse to examine the causes, mouing the people to reuenge the death of Ela, an idle drunkard, rather than of the sonne of Ieroboam, who followed the warres in person, as a man of spirit and courage. Surely it is apparant, that the very first defection of the ten Tribes, was (if wee looke vpon humane reason) occa∣sioned by desire of breaking that yoke of bondage wherewith Salomon had galled their neckes. Their desire was to haue a King that should not oppresse them; not to haue no King at all. And therefore when the arrogant folly of had caused them to renounce him, they did immediatly choose Ieroboam in his stead, as a man likely to affoord that libertie vnto them, for which hee had in their behalfe. Neither were they (as it seemes) herein altogether deceiued. For his affectation of popularitie appeares in his building of decayed townes, and in the in∣stitution of his new deuised idolatry; where hee tolde the people, that it was too much for them, to trauaile so farre as to Ierusalem. But whether it were so, that his moderation, being voluntarie, began to cease, towards the latter end of his reigne, and in the reigne of his sonne, when long time of possession had confirmed his title, which at the first was onely good by courtesie of the people: or whether the peo∣ple (as often happens in such cases) were more offended by some prerogatiues of a King that he still retained in his owne hands, than pleased with his remission of o∣ther burdens: it is cleerely apparant, that the whole armie of all Israel ioyned with Baasha, taking in good part the death of Nadab, and cradication of Ieroboams house. Now the reigne of Baasha himselfe, was (for ought that remaineth in writing of it) euery way vnfortunate; his labour and cost at Rama was cast away; the other side of his Kingdome harried by the Syrians; neither did hee winne that one towne of Gibbethon from the Philistims, but left that businesse to his sonne, who likewise appeares an vnprofitable . Wherefore it must needes be, that the fauour of the people toward the house of Baasha grew from his good forme of Ciuill go∣uernment, which happily he reduced to a more temperate method than Ieroboam euer meant to . And surely hee that shall take paines to looke into those exam∣ples, which are extant of the different courses, held by the Kings of Israel and Iuda, in administration of iustice, will finde it most probable, that vpon this ground it was that the ten Tribes continued so aucrse from the line of Dauid; as to thinke all ad∣uersitie more tolerable, than the weightie Scepter of that house. For the death of Ioab and Shimei was indeed by them deserued; yet in that they suffered it without forme of iudgement, they suffered like vnto men innocent. The death of Adonijah was both without iudgement, and without any crime obiected, other than the Kings iealousie: out of which by the same rule of arbitrarie iustice (vnder which it may be supposed that many were cast away) he would haue Ieroboam (if hee could haue caught him) before hee had yet committed any offence, as appeares by his confident returne out of Aegypt, like one that was knowne to haue endured wrong, hauing not offered any. The like and much more barbarous execution, to wit, without law, Iehoram did vpon his brethren, and vpon sundry of his greatest men; as also Ioash did so put to death Zachariah, the sonne of , who had made him King, euen in the court of 2. . 24. 21. the house of the Lord: and MANASSES did shedinnocent bloud exceeding much, till here∣plenished Ierusalem from corner to corner: and this was imputed to him as another fault; 2. King. 21. 16. besides his sinne, wherewith hee made Iuda to sinne. Contrariwise, among the kings of Israel wee finde no monument of such arbitrarie proceeding, vnlesse perhaps the words of Iehoram the sonne of Ahab (which were but words) may bee taken for an instance, when hee said, God doe so to mee, and more also, if the head of ELISHA the King. 6. 31. sonne of SHAPHAT shall stand on him this day: whereby it is not plaine whether he meant to kill him without more adoe, or to haue him condemned as a false prophet, that had made them hold out against the Aramites, till they were faine to eate their owne children, which he thought a sufficient argument to proue, that it was not Gods purpose to deliuer them. The death of Naboth sheweth rather the liber∣tie which the Israelites enioyed, than any peremptorie execution of the Kings will. For Naboth did not to stand vpon his owne right, though Ahab were euen sicke for anger, neither was hee for that cause put to death, as vpon commaundement, but made away by conspiracie, the matter being handled after a iudiciall forme, which might giue satisfaction to the people, ignorant of the deuice, though to God it could not. The murther of the Prophets is continually ascribed to Iezabel, an impudent woman, and not vnto the King her husband. Neither is it certaine, that there was no Law made whereby their liues were taken from them; but certaine it is, that the . King. 19. 10. people, being idolaters were both pleased with their death, and laboured in the exe∣cution. So that the doings of the Kings of Iuda (such as are registred) prooue them to haue vsed a more absolute manner of commaund, than the Kings of the tenne Tribes. Neither doe their sufferings witnesse the contrary. For of those which reig∣ned ouer Iuda, from the diuision of the Kingdome, to the captiuity of the ten tribes, three were slaine by the people, and two were denied a place of buriall amongst their ancestors. Yea, the death of Ahazia and his brethren, slaine by Iehu, with the destruction of all the Royall seed by Athalia, did not (for ought that we can reade) stirre vp in the people any such thirst of reuenge, as might by the suddennesse and v∣niformitie testifie the affection to be generall, and proceeding from a louing remem∣brance of their Princes; vnlesse we should thinke that the death of Athalia, after seuen yeeres reigne, were occasioned rather by the memory of her ill purchasing, than by the present sence of her tyrannicall abusing the gouernement, whereon shee had seised. On the other side, such of the Kings of Israel as perished by treason (which were seuen of the twentie) were all slaine by conspiracie of the great men, who as∣pired by treason to the Crowne: the people beeing so farre from embruing their hands in the bloud of their Soueraignes, that (after Nadab ) they did neuer forbeare to reuenge the death of their Kings, when it lay in their power; nor approoue the good successe of treason, vnlesse feare compelled them. So that the death of two Kings, being throughly reuenged vpon other two, namely the death of Ela and Za∣charia, vpon and Shallum, who traiterously got and vsurped, for a little while, their places; onely three of the seuen remaine, whose endes how the people tooke, it may be doubtfull. Though indeede it is precisely said of the slaughter, commit∣ted on Ahabs children by , that the people durst not fight with him that did it, . 10. 4. because they were exceedingly afraid: and the same feare might be in them at the death of Peka, whose history (as others of that time) is cursorily passed ouer. The like may be pronounced, and more absolutely, of the Kings of England, that neuer any of them perished by of the people, but by treason of such as did succeed them, neither was there any motiue vrging so forcibly the death of King Edward and King Richard when they were in prison, as feare lest the people should stirre in their quar∣rell. And certainely (how soeuer all that the law cals treason, be interpreted, as ten∣ding finally to the Kings destruction) in those treasonable insurrections of the vul∣gar, which haue here most preuailed, the fury of the multitude hath quenched it selfe with the bloud of some great Officers; no such rebellions, howsoeuer wicked and barbarous otherwise, thirsting after the ruine of their naturall Soueraigne, but rather forbearing the aduantages gotten vpon his Royall person: which if any man impute vnto grose ignorance, another may more charitably, and I thinke, more truely, ascribe to a reuerent affection. Wherefore that fable of Briareus, who, bee∣ing loosened by Pallas, did with his hundred hands giue assistance to Iupiter, when all the rest of the Gods conspired against him, is very fitly expounded by Sir Francis Bacon, as signifying, that Monarches neede not to feare any courbing of their abso∣lutenesse by mightie subiects, as long as by wisedome they keepe the hearts of the people, who will bee sure to come in on their side. Though indeede the Storie might very well haue borne the same interpretation, as it is rehearsed by Ho∣mer, who tels vs that Pallas was one of the conspiracie, and that Thetis alone did marre all their practice, by loosening Briarcus. For a good forme of gouernment suf∣ficeth by it selfe to retaine the people, not onely without assistance of a laborious Wit, but euen against all deuices of the greatest and shrewdest politicians: e∣uery Sherife and Constable, being sooner able to arme the multitude, in the Kings behalfe, than any -weening Rebell how mightie soeuer, can against him. This declaration of the peoples loue, being seldome found in Iuda, makes it very likely, that the rule it selfe of gouernment there was such, as neither gaue occasion of contentment vnto the subiects, nor of confidence in their good affection, to the Kings. Vpon which reasons it may seeme that the multitude was kept vsually dis∣armed. For otherwise it would haue beene almost impossible, that Athalia the si∣ster of Ahab, a stranger to the royall bloud of Iuda, should by the onely authoritie of a Queene mother haue destroyed all the seede of Dauid, and vsurped the King∣dome very neere seuen yeeres without finding any resistance. Yea when Iehoiada the high Priest had agreed with the Captaines and principall men of the land to set vp Io∣ash their lawfull King, whereunto the whole nation were generally well affected; hee was faine to giue to these Captaines and their men, the speares and the shields that were King DAVIDS, and were in the house of the Lord. But we neede not enter into such particulars. Questionlesse, the Tribes which thought obedience to their Princes to be a part of their dutie toward God, would endure much more with patience, than they which had Kings of their owne choice or admission, holding the Crowne by a more vncertaine tenure. And this, in my opinion, was the reason, why the tenne tribes did neuer seeke to returne to their ancient Lords: but after the destruction of their sixe first Kings, which died in the reigne of Asa, admitted a seuenth of a new family, rather than they would consubiect themselues, with those of Iuda and , vnder a more honourable, but more heauie yoke. So, Asa hauing seene the death of seuen kings of Israel, died himselfe after one and fourtie yeeres reigne, leauing Iehosaphat his sonne to deale with Ahab the son of Omri, who was the eight King ouer the tenne tribes. §. VII. Of IEHOSAPHAT and his contem∣poraries. IEHOSAPHAT, who succeeded Asa, was a Prince religious and happie; hee destroyed all the Groues, Altars, and high places dedicated to idolatrie, and sent searchers to all places and people wanting instruction; hee recouered the Tribute due vnto him by the Arabians and Philistims: from the one hee had siluer, from the other sheepe and goates to the number of fifteene thousand and foure hundred. The numbers of his men of warre were more than ad∣mirable: for it is written that Adnah had the commaund of three hun∣dred 2. . 17. thousand, Iehohanam of two hundred and fourescore thousand, and A∣masia of two hundred thousand; also that hee had, besides these, in Beniamin of those that bare shields, which wee call Targetiers, and of Archers vnder Eliada two hundred thousand, and vnder the commaundement of Iehozabad a hundred and fourescore thousand: which numbred together, make eleuen hundred and sixtie thousand, all which are saide to haue waited vpon the King, besides his garrisons. That Iuda and Beniamin, a territorie not much exceeding the Countie of Kent, should muster eleuen hundred and sixtie thousand fighting men, it is very strange, 2. . 14. 4. and the number farre greater than it was found vpon any other view. Ioab in Da∣uids time found fiue hundred thousand: Rehoboam found but an hundred and foure∣score thousand: Abia foure hundred and eight thousand: Asa fiue hundred and foure-score thousand: inrolled all that could beare armes, and they a∣mounted to three hundred thousand: Vzziah three hundred and seuen thousand and fiue hundred. Surely, whereas it is written that when newes was brought to Iehosaphat that Moab and Ammon were entred his territorie to the West of Iordan, and that their numbers were many, hee feared (to wit) the multitude, it is not likely that hee would haue feared euen the armie of Xerxes, if hee could haue brought into the field eleuen hundred and three-score thousand fighting men, lea∣uing all his strong Cities manned. I am therefore of opinion (referring my selfe to better iudgement) that these numbers specified in the second of Chronicles the seuenteenth, distributed to seuerall leaders, were not all at one time, but that the three hundred thousand vnder Adnah, and the two hundred and foure-score thousand vnder Iehohanam, were afterward commaunded and mustered by Amasiah, Eliada, and Iehosabad: for the grosse and totall is not in that place set downe, as it was vnder the other Kings formerly named. Againe as the aydes which Iehosaphat brought to Ahab did not shew that he was a Prince of extraordinarie power, so the Moabites and which hee feared could neuer make the one halfe of those numbers, which hee that commaunded least among Iehoshaphats leaders had vnder him. This mightie Prince notwithstanding his greatnesse, yet he ioyned in friendship with Ahab King of Israel, who had married that wicked woman Iezabel. Him Iosa∣phat visited at Samaria, and caused his sonne Ioram to marrie Athalia, this Achabs daughter. Ahab perswaded Iosaphat to assift him in the warre against the Syrians, who held the Citie of Ramoth Gilead from him, and called together foure hundred of his Prophets, or Baalites to foretell the successe: who promised him victorie. But Iehosaphat nothing at all in those diuiners, but resolued first of all to con∣ferre with some one Prophet of the Lord God of Israel. Heereupon Achab made answere that hee had one called Michaiah, but hee hated that Prophet, because hee alwayes foretolde of euill, and neuer of any good towards him. Yet sent for Michaiah was to the King but by the way the messenger prayed him to consent with the rest of the Prophets: and to promise victorie vnto them as they did. But Michaiah spake the truth, and repeated his vision to both Kings, which was that God asked who shall perswade AHAB, that hee may goe vp and fall at Ramoth Gilead? to whom a spirit that stood before the Lord answered, that hee would enter into his prophets, and bee in them a false spirit to delude. For as it is said by Christ: Non vos estis qui loquimini, sed spiritus patris vestri loquitur in vobis: It is not you that speake, but the spirit of your father speakes in you: so in a contra∣rie kinde did the deuill in the prophets of Baal, or Satan, incourage Achab to his de∣struction. And as P. Martir vpon this place well obserueth, these euill spirits are the ministers of Gods vengeance, and are vsed as the hangmen and tormentors, which Princes sometime imploy. For as it pleaseth God by his good Angels, to saue and deliuer from destruction, of which the Scriptures haue many examples: so on the contrarie, it is by the euill that he punisheth and destroyeth, both which are said to performe the will of their Creator licet non eodem animo. Ecclesiasticus remembreth a second sort of malignant natures, but they are euery-where visible. There are spi∣rits, saith he, created for vengeance, which in their rigour lay on sure strokes. In the time of destruction they shew foorth their power, and accomplish the wrath of him that made them. Now Michaias hauing by this his reuelation greatly displeased the King, and the Prophets whose spirit hee discouered, was strooken by Zidkiah one of Baals pro∣phets, and by Achab himselfe committed to prison: where he appointed him to be reserued and fed with bread of affliction till he returned in peace. But Michaiah, not fearing to reply, answered, If thou returns in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me. Neuerthelesse Achab went on in that warre, and was wounded to death. Ieho∣saphat returned to Ierusalem, where he was reprehended by Iehu the Prophet for assist∣ing an idolatrous Prince, and one that hated God. 2. . After this the Aramites or Damascens, ioyned with the Moabites, Ammonites and Idumaeans to inuade Iudaea: who passe Iordan and encampe at Engaddi, and when Ie∣hosaphat gathered his armie, the Prophet forctolde him of the victorie, which should bee obtained without any bloud-shed of his part: and so when Ie∣hosaphat approached, this assembly of nations, the Ammonites and Moabites, disagree∣ing with the Idumaeans, and quarrelling for some causes among themselues, those of Ammon and Moab set vpon the Idumaeans, and brake them vtterly: which done they also inuaded each other; in which broile Iehosaphat arriuing tooke the spoile of 2. Chron. 10, them all without any losse of his part, as it was foretold and promised by God. Notwithstanding this victorie, Iehosaphat forgetting that hee was formerly repre∣hended for assisting an Idolatrous King, did notwithstanding ioyne with Ochazias, the sonne of Achab, in preparing a Fleet to send to Ophir, hoping of the like returne which Salomon had: but as Eliezor the Prophet foretold him, his shippes perished and were broken in the port of Ezion , and so that enterprize was ouer∣throwne. 2. Chron. 20. Yet hee taketh part with Iehoram the brother of Ochazias, against the Moabites, with which Kings of Iuda and Israel the ioyne their forces, not forgetting, it seemes, that the Moabites, assisted by the Ammonites, had not long before destroyed their armie. The Moabites, subiects to Dauid and Salomon, forsaking the Kings of Iuda, gaue themselues for vassals to Ieroboam, and so they continued to his successors till the death of Achab: but Iehosaphat, notwithstanding the Idolatrie of his Colleague, as it seemeth, he was drawne into this warre both to bee auenged of the Moabites for their defection from Iuda to Israel, as also because they had lately ioyned them∣selues with the Syrians against Iosaphat, and thirdly, to punish their double who first forsooke Iuda and now Israel. Both Kings resolued to passe by the way of Idumaea, thereby the better to assure that nation, for wee finde that both Moab, Ammon and Edom were all in the field together at Engaddi against Iehosaphat: But whether they had then declared them∣selues against Iehosaphat, it is not certaine, for in the 2. of Chronicles. II. vers. 8. it is written that in the time of Iehoram, the sonne of Iehosaphat, Edom rebelled, and therefore it seemeth to mee that the Edomites, when they were slaine by Moab and Ammon, not finding themselues satisfied in such conditions as they required, of∣fered to turne from them, and to ioyne themselues with the armie of Iuda. For that they were numbred among the enemies of Iosaphat, it is plaine in the 2. of Chron. the 20. and as plaine c. 2. v. 8. that they were not declared, nor had made them a King, till Iehosaphats death. Now in the passage of these Kings towards Moab, whe∣ther it were by the extraordinarie heat of the yeere, or whether the Idumaeans ha∣uing a purpose to rebell, misled the armie of Iuda and Israel with intent to infeeble them for want of water; true it is, that they suffered the same, if not a greater thirst than the armies of Crassus and M. Antonius did in their Parthian expeditions; and had, in all likelihood, vtterly perished, had not Elisha taught them to cut trenches whereinto the water sprang, by which not onely Ichosaphat and his arme, but Iehoram King of Israel an Idolator was relieued: the great mercie and goodnesse of God, hauing euer beene prone to saue the euill for the good, whereas hee neuer destroyed the good for the euill. The miserable issue of this warre, and how Moab burnt his sonne, or the sonne 2. Kin. 3. of the King of Edom, for sacrifice on the rampire of his owne Citie, I haue alreadie written in the life of Iehoram among the Kings of Israel. Iehosaphat reigned twentie 2. Chron. 20. fiue yeeres and died, he was buried in the valley of Iehosaphat, and a part of the Py∣ramis . ter. sanct. set ouer his graue is yet to be seene, saith Brochard. His acts are written at large by Iehu the sonne of Hanani. There liued with Iehosaphat, Ophratenes in Assyria, Capetus and Tiberinus Kings of the Albans in Italie; of the latter the riuer Tiber (formerly Albula ) tooke name. In Iehosaphats time also ruled Mecades or Mezades in Athens: Agelas or Agesilaus in Corinth; and Archilaus of the same race, of the Heraclidae the seuenth in Lacedae∣mon. Badesorus ruled the Tyrians; Achab, Ochazias and Iehoram the Israelites. CHAP. XX. Of IEHORAM the sonne of IEHOSAPHAT, and AHAZIA. §. I. That IEHORAM was made King sundry times. IEHORAM the sonne of Iehosaphat King of Iuda began to reigne at thirtie two yeeres of age, and liued vntill hee was fourtie yeeres olde, being eight yeeres a King: but of these eight yeeres, which Iehoram is saide to haue reigned, foure are to bee reckoned in the life of his father, who going to the Syrian warre with Ahab, left this Iehoram King in his stead, as Ahab did his sonne Ahazia. This appeares by the seuerall beginnings, 1. . 22. v. 51. which are giuen in Scripture to the two Iehorams kings of Israel and Iuda, and to Ahazia the eldest sonne of A∣hab. For Ahazia is saide to haue begun his reigne, in the seuenteenth yeere of Iehosaphat. Iehoram the brother of Ahazia succeeded him in the second yeere of IEHORAM the sonne of IEHOSAPHAT King of Iuda, that is, in 2. Kin. 1. 17. the next yeere after that Iehoram of Iuda was designed king by his father; it being (as wee finde elsewhere) the eighteenth yeere of IEHOSAPHAT himselfe, who went 2. Kin. 3. v. 1. and 9. with the Israelite against Moab. Heereby it appeares that the full power and execu∣tion of the royall office was retained still by Iehosaphat, who gouerned absolutely by himselfe, not communicating the rule with his sonne. But in the fist yeere of IE∣HORAM King of Israel, which was the two and twentieth of , the olde 2. Kin. 8 16. King tooke vnto him, as partner in the Gouernement, this his eldest sonne, who was at that time thirtie two yeeres olde, his Father being fiftie seuen. Now for∣asmuch as IEHOSAPHAT reigned twentie fiue yeeres, it is cuident that his sonne did not reigne alone till the eighth of King of Israel. The like regard is to bee 1. Kin. 32. 42. had in accounting the times of other Kings of Iuda and Israel, who did not alwayes reigne precisely so long as the bare letter of the text may seeme at first to affirme: but their yeeres were sometimes compleat, sometimes onely current, sometimes con∣founded with the yeeres of their successors or foregoers, and must therefore be sound by comparing their times with the yeeres of those others, with whom they did be∣gin and end. It were perhaps a thing lesse needfull than curious, to enquire into the reasons moouing Iehosaphat either to assume vnto him his sonne as partner in the Kingdome, whilest he was able himselfe to command both in peace and in warre, the like hauing neuer beene done by any of his progenitors, or hauing once (in the seuenteenth of his reigne) vouchsated vnto him that honour, to resume it vnto himselfe, or at least∣wise to deferre the confirmation of it, vntill foure or fiue yeeres were passed. Yet forasmuch as to enter into the examination of these passages, may be a meane to find some light, whereby we may more cleerely discouer the causes of much extraordi∣nary businesse ensuing, I hold it not amisse to make such coniecture, as the circum∣stances of the Storie briefly handled in the Scriptures may seeme to approoue. Wee are therefore to consider, that this King Iehosaphat was the first of Rehoboams issue that euer entred into any streight league with the Kings of the ten Tribes. All that reigned in Iuda before him, had with much labour and long warre, tired them∣selues in vaine, making small profit of the greatest aduantages that could be wished. Wherefore Iehosaphat thought it the wisest way, to make a league offensiue and de∣fensiue betweene Israel and Iuda, whereby each might enioy their owne in quiet. This confederacie made by a religious King, with one that did hate the Lord, 2. Chro. 19. v. 2. and 3. could not long prosper, as not issuing from the true roote and fountaine of all wisedome: yet as a piece of sound policie, doubtlesse it wanted not faire pretences of much common good thereby likely to arise, with mutuall fortification of both those king∣domes, against the vncircumcised nations their ancient enemies. This apparant bene∣fit, being so inestimable a iewell, that it might not easily be lost, but continue as here∣ditarie from father to sonne, it was thought a very good course to haue it confirmed by some sure bond of affinitie, and thereupon was Athalia the daughter of Omri and sister of King of Israel, giuen in marriage to Iehoram, who was sonne and heire apparant to the King of Iuda. This Ladie was of a masculine spirit, and had learned so much of Queene Iezabel her brothers wife, that she durst vndertake, and could throughly perform a great deale more in Ierusalem, than the other knew how to com∣passe in Samaria. Shee was indeede a fire-brand, ordained by God to consume a great part of the noblest houses in Iuda, and perhaps of those men or their children, whose worldly wisedome, regardlesse of Gods pleasure, had brought her in. The first fruits of this great league, was the Syrian warre at Ramoth Gilead, where∣in Iuda and Israel did aduenture equally, but the profit of the victorie should haue redounded wholly to Ahab: as godly Princes very seldome thriue by matching with Idolators, but rather serue the turnes of those false friends, who being ill af∣fected to God himselfe, cannot be well affected to his seruants. Before their setting foorth Ahab designed, as King, his sonne Ahazia; not so much perhaps in regard of the vncertaine euents of warre (for none of his predecessors had cuer done the like vpon the like occasions) nor as fearing the threatnings of the Prophet Micaia (for he despised them) as inuiting Iehosaphat by his owne example, to take the same course, wherein he preuailed. §. II. Probable coniectures of the motiues inducing the old King IEHO∣SAPHAT to change his purpose often, in making his sonne IEHORAM King. MAny arguments doe very strongly prooue Iehoram to haue beene who∣ly ouer-ruled by his wife; especially for his forsaking the religion of his godly Ancestors, and following the abominable superstitions of the house of Achab. That she was a woman of intolerable pride, and abhorring to liue a priuate life, the whole course of her actions witnesseth at large. Much vaine mat∣ter shee was able to produce, whereby to make her husband thinke that his bre∣thren and kindred were but meane and vnworthy persons in comparison of him, and of his children, which were begotten vpon the daughter and sister of two great Kings, not vpon base women and meere subiccts. The Court of Ahab, and his fa∣mous victories obtained against the Syrian Benhadad, were matter sufficient to make an insolent man thinke highly of himselfe, as being allied so honorably; who could otherwise haue found in his heart well enough, to despise all his brethren, as be∣ing the eldest, and heire apparent to the Crowne, whereof alreadie he had, in a man∣ner, the possession. How soone his vices brake out, or how long hee dissembled them and his idola∣trous religion, it cannot certainely be knowne. Like enough it is, that some smoke, out of the hidden fire, did very soone make his fathers eyes to water; who thereup∣on caused the young man to know himselfe better, by making him fall backe into ranke among his younger brethren. And surely the doings of Iehosaphat about the same time, argue no small distemper of the whole country, through the misgouern∣ment of his vngodly sonne. For the good old King was faine to make his progresse round about the land, the people vnto the seruice of God, and appointing Iudges throughout all the strong Cities of Iuda Citie by Citie. This had beene a needlesse . v. 4. 5, &c. labour, if the religion taught and strongly maintained by Asa, and by himselfe, had not suffered alteration, and the course of Iustice beene peruerted, by the power of such as had borne authoritie. But the necessitie that then was of reformation, ap∣peares by the charge which the King did giue to the Iudges; and by his commission giuen to one of the in spirituall causes, and to the steward of his house in tem∣porall matters, to be generall ouerseers. This was not till after the death of Ahazia the sonne of Ahab; but how long after it is vncertaine. For Iehoram the brother of Ahazia beganne his reigne (as hath beene alreadie noted) in the eighteenth of Iehosaphat, which was then ac∣counted the second of Iehoram, Iehosaphats sonne, though afterward this Iehoram of Iuda had another first and second yeere, euen in his fathers time, before hee reigned alone, as the best Chronologers and expositors of the holy text agree. So hee continued in priuate estate, vntill the two and twentieth of his fathers reigne, at which time, though the occasions inducing his restitution to former dignitie are not set downe, yet wee may not thinke, that motiues thereto, appearing substan∣tiall, were wanting. Iehoram of Israel held the same correspondencie with Ieho∣saphat that his father had ; and made vse of it. Hee drewe the Iudaean into the warre of Moab, at which time it might well bee, that the young Prince of Iuda was againe ordained King by his father, as in the expedition hee had beene. Or if wee ought rather to thinke, that the preparations for the enter∣prize against Moab did not occupie so much time, as from the eighteenth of Ie∣hosaphat, in which yeere that nation rebelled against Israel, vnto his two and twentieth; yet the dailie negotiations betweene the two Kings of Iuda and Israel, and the affinitie betweene them contracted in the person of Iehoram, might offer some good occasions thereunto. Neither is it certaine how the beha∣uiour of the yonger sonnes, in their elder brothers disgrace, might cause their Father to put him in possession for feare of tumult after his death; or the dissimulati∣on of Iehoram himselfe might winne the good opinion both of his Father and Bre∣thren; it being a thing vsuall in mischieuous fell natures, to be as abiect and seruile in time of aduersitie, as insolent and bloudy vpon aduantage. This is manifest, that being repossessed of his former estate, hee demeaned himselfe in such wise towards his brethren, as caused their Father to enable them, not onely with store of siluer, and of gold, and of precious things, (which kinde of liberality other Kings doubtlesse had . 3. vsed vnto their yonger sonnes) but with the custody of strong Cities in Iuda, to assure them, if it might haue been by vnwonted means, against vnwonted . §. III. The doings of IEHORAM when he reigned alone; and the rebellion of Edom and Libna. BVt all this prouidence auailed nothing; for an higher prouidence had otherwise determined of the sequele. When once the good old man, their Father, was dead, the yonger sonnes of Iehosaphat found strong Cities, a weake defence, against the power of him to whom the Citi∣zens were obedient. If they came in vpon the summons of the King their brother, then had them without more adoe; if they stood vpon their guard, then were they Traitors, and so vnable to hold out against him, who besides his owne power, was able to bring the forces of the Israelitish Kingdome against them, so that the apparant likelyhood of their finall ouerthrow, sufficed to make all forsake them in the very beginning. Howsoeuer it was, they were all taken and slain, and with them for company many great men of the Land; such belike, as either had taken their part, when the Tyrant sought their liues, or had been appointed Rulers of the Countrie, when Iehoram was deposed from his Gouernment; in which Office they, without forbearing to doe iustice, could hardly auoide the doing of many things, derogatory to their yong Master, which if he would now call treason, saying that he was then King, who durst say the contrary? After this, Iehoram tooke vpon him, as being now Lord alone, to make innouati∣ons in Religion: wherein he was not contented as other sdolatrous Princes, to way and safe conduct vnto Superstition and Idolatrie, to prouoke and encourage the people to that sinne, whereto it is wonderfull that they were so much , hauing such knowledge of God, and of his that aboue all other sinnes; but he vsed compulsion, and was (if not the very first) the first that is registred, to haue set vp Irreligion by force. Whilest he was thus busied at home, in doing what hee listed, the Edomites his Tributaries rebelled against him abroad; and hauing since time, been gouerned by a Viceroy, did now make vnto themselues a King. Against these Iehoram in person made an expedition, taking along with him his Princes, and all his Chariots, with which hee obtained victory in the field compelling the Rebels to flie into their places of aduantage, whereof he no one, but went away con∣tented with the honour that hee had gotten in beating and killing some of those whom hee should haue subdued, and kept his seruants. Now began the prophecie of Isaac to take effect, wherein hee fore-told, that Esau in of time should breake the yoke of Iacob. For after this the Edomites could neuer be reclaimed by a∣ny of the Kings of Iuda, but held their owne so well, that when, after many ciuill and forraine warres, the Iewes by sundry Nations had beene brought low; Antipa∣ter the Edomite, with Herod his Sonne, and others of that race following them, be∣came Lords of the , in the decrepit age of Israel, and raigned as Kings, euen in Ierusalem it selfe. The freedome of the Edomites, though purchased somewhat dearly, encouraged Libna, a great Citie within Iuda, which in the time of Iosua had a peculiar King, to rebell against Iehoram, and set it selfe at libertie. Libna stood in the confines of Ben∣iamin and of Dan, farre from the assistance of any bordering enemies to Iuda, and therefore so vnlikely it was to haue maintained it selfe in libertie, that it may seeme strange how it could escape from vtter destruction, or at the least from some terrible vengeance, most likely to haue been taken, by their powerfull, cruell, and through∣ly incensed Lord. The Israelite held such good intelligence at that time with Iuda, that he would not haue accepted the Towne, had it offered it selfe vnto him: nei∣ther doe we reade that it sought how to cast it selfe into a new subiection, but con∣tinued a free estate. The rebellion of it against Iehoram, was, Because he had forsaken 2. 1. 10. the Lord God of his Fathers; which I take to haue not onely beene the first and remote cause, but euen the next and immediate reason, moouing the inhabitants to doe as they did: for it was a Towne of the Leuites: who must needs be driuen into great extremities, when a religion contrary to Gods Law, had not onely some allowance to countenance it by the King, but compulsiue authority to force vnto it all that were vnwilling. As for the vse of the Temple at Ierusalem (which being deuout men they might feare to lose by this rebellion) it was neuer denied to those of the ten reuolted Tribes by any of the Religious Kings, who rather inuited the Israelites thither, and gaue them kinde entertainement: vnder Idolaters they must haue beene without . 30. it whether they liued free or in subiection. Yet it seemes that priuate reasons were not wanting, which might moue them rather to doe than to suffer that which was vnwarrantable. For in the generall visitation before remembred, wherein reformed his Kingdome, the good old King appointing new Gouernours, and giuing them especiall charge to doe iustice without respect of persons, vsed these wordes, The Leuites shall bee Officers before you; Bee of good courage, and doe it, and the Lord shall be with the good. By these phrases, it seemes, that hee encouraged them a∣gainst the more powerfull, than iust proceedings of his sonne; whom if the Leuites did (according to the trust reposed in them) neglect in discharging their dueties, like∣ly it is that he meant to be euen with them, and make them now to feele, as many Princes of the Land had done, his heauie indignation. How it happened that Libna was not hereupon destroyed, yea, that it was not (for ought that wee can reade) so much as or molested, may iustly seeme very strange. And the more strange it is in regard of the mighty Armies which Iehosaphat was able to raise, being suffi∣cient to haue ouer-whelmed any one Towne, and buried it vnder the earth, which they might in one moneth haue cast into it with shouells, by ordinary approches. But it seemes that of these great numbers which his Father could haue leuied, there were not many whom Iehoram could well trust; and therefore perhaps hee thought it an easier losse, to let one Towne goe, then to put weapons into their handes, who were more likely to follow the example of Libna, than to punish it. So desperate is the condition of Tyrants, who thinking it a greater happinesse to be feared, than to be loued; are faine themselues to stand in feare of those, by whom they might haue been dreadfull vnto others. §. IIII. Of the miseries falling vpon IEHORAM, and of his death. THese afflictions not sufficing to make any impression of Gods displea∣sure in the minde of the wicked Prince; a Prophecie in writing was deliuered vnto him, which threatned both his people, his children, his wiues, and his owne body. Hereby likewise it appeares that hee was a cruell Persecutor of Gods seruants; in as much as the Prophets durst not reproue him to his face, as they had done many of his Predecessors, both good and euill Kings, but were faine to denounce Gods iudgements against him by letters, keeping themselues close and farre from him. This Epistle is saide to haue 2. Chron. 21. 12. beene sent vnto him from Elias the Prophet. But Elias was translated, and Elizeus prophecied in his stead before this time, euen in the dayes of Iehosaphat. Wherefore 2. Kin. c. 2. and c. 3. v. 11. it may be that Elias left this prophecie in writing behinde him, or that (as some con∣iecture) the errour of one letter in writing, was the occasion that wee reade Elias for Elizeus. Indeede any thing may bee beleeued than the Tradition held by some of the Iewish Rabbins, that Elias from heauen did send this Epistle; a tale some∣what like to the fable of our Ladies letters, deuised by Erasmus, or of the Verse that was sent from heauen to S. Giles. But whosoeuer was the Author of this threatning Epistle, the accomplishment of the prophecie was as terrible, as the sentence. For the and Arabians brake into Iudaea, and tooke the Kings house, wherein they found all, or many of his children, and wiues, all which they slew, or carried away, with great part of his goods. These Philistims had not presumed since the time of Dauid, to make any of∣fensiue warre till now; for they were by him almost consumed, and had lost the best of their Townes, maintaining themselues in the rest of their small Territorie, by defensiue armes, to which they were constrained at Gibbethon by the Israelites. The Arabians were likely to haue beene then as they are now, a naked people, all horse∣men, and ill appointed; their Countrie affording no other furniture, than such as might make them fitter to robbe and spoile in the open fields, than to offend strong Cities such as were thicke set in Iuda. True it is that in ages long after following, they all the South parts of the world then knowne, in a very short space of time, destroying some, and building other some very stately Cities. But it must be considered; that this was when they had learned of the Romanes the Art of Warre; and that the prouisions which they found, together with the Arts which they lear∣ned, in one subdued Prouince, did make them able and skilfull in pursuing their conquest, and going onward into Regions farre remoued from them. At this day hauing lost in effect all that they had gotten, such of them as liue in Arabia it selfe are good horsemen, but ill appointed, very dangerous to passengets, but vnable to deale with good Souldiers, as riding starke naked, and rather trusting in the swiftnes of their horses, than in any other meanes of resistance, where they are well opposed. And such, or little better, may they seeme to haue beene, that spoiled Iudaea in the time of Iehoram. For their Countrie was alwayes barraine and desert, wanting ma∣nuall Arts whereby to supply the naturalls with furniture: neither are these bands named as chiefe in that action, but rather adherents of the Philistims. Out of this we may inferre, that one halfe, yea or one quarter of the numbers found in the least muster of Iuda and Beniamin vnder Iehosaphat (wherein were inrolled three hundred and eightie thousand fighting men) had beene enough to haue driuen away farre greater forces than these enemies are likely to haue brought into the field, had not the people beene vnable to deale with them, for lacke of weapons, which were now kept from them by their Princes ielousie, as in Sauls time by the policie of the Philistims. It may seeme that the house of the King which these inuaders tooke, was not his Palace in Ierusalem, but rather some other house of his abroad in the Countrie, where his wiues and children at that time lay for their recreation: because we reade not that they did sacke the Citie, or spoyle the Temple, which would haue inuited them as a more commodious bootie, had they got possession thereof. Yet perhaps they tooke Ierusalem it selfe by surprize, the people being disarmed, and the Kings guards too weake to keepe them out; yet had not the courage to hold it, because it was so large and populous; and therefore hauing done what spoyle they could, with-drew themselues with such purchase as they were able safely to conueigh away. The slaughter committed by Iehu vpon the two and fortie brethren of Ahazia, or (as they are called elsewhere) so many of his brothers Sonnes, and the cruell massacre wherein all the Royall seede perished (onely Ioas excepted) vnder the ty∣rannie of Athalia, following within two yeeres after this inuasion of the Philistims, and Arabians, make it seeme probable, that the of Iehoram were not all at once, but that rather the first murther beganne in his owne time, and was secon∣ded by many other heauie blowes, wherewith his house was incessantly striken, vn∣till it was in a manner quite hewed downe. After these calamities, the hand of God was extended against the bodie of this wicked King, smiting him with a grieuous disease in his bowels, which left him not vntill his guts fell out, and his wretched soule departed from his miserable carcasse. The people of the Land, as they had small cause of comfort in his life, so had they not the good manners to pretend sorrow for his death; wherefore he was denied a place of buriall among his Ancestors the Kings of Iuda, though his owne sonne suc∣ceeded him in the Kingdome, who was guided by the same spirits that had beene his Fathers euill Angels. Athalia had other matters to trouble her head, than the pompous enterring of a dead husband. Shee was thinking how to prouide for the future, to maintaine her owne greatnesse, to retaine her fauourites in their authori∣tie, and to place about her Sonne such Counsellours, of the house of AHAB, as were fit∣test 2. . 22. 4. for her turne. Wherefore shee thought it vnseasonable to make much a-doe a∣bout a thing of nothing, and offend the peoples eyes, with a stately funerall of a man by them detested: but rather chose to let the blame of things passed bee layd vpon the dead, than to procure an ill opinion of her selfe and hers, which it now did concerne her to auoide. Such is the quality of wicked , hauing made vse of bad imployments, to charge, not only with his owne vices, but with their faults also, the man whose euill inclinations their counsailes haue made worse, when once hee is gone, and can profit them no longer. The death of Iehoram fell out indeede in a busie time; when his friend and cousin the Israelite, who had the same name, was entangled in a difficult warre against the Aramite; and therefore could haue had no better leisure to helpe Athalia, in setting of things according to her owne minde, than he had (perhaps through the same ) to helpe her hus∣band, when he was distressed by the Philistims. Yea rather hee needed and craued the assistance of the men of Iuda, for the taking in of Ramoth Gilead, where they had not sped so well the last time, that they should willingly runne thither againe, vn∣lesse they were very fairely intreated. The acts of this wicked man I haue thought good to handle the more particular∣ly (pursuing the examination of all occurrences, as farre as the circumstances re∣membred in holy Scripture, would guide me by their directions) to the end that it might more plainely appeare, how the corrupted affections of men, impugning the reuealed will of God, accomplish neuerthelesse his hidden purpose, and without miraculous meanes, confound themselues in the seeming wise deuices of their owne folly: as likewise to the end that all men might learne, to submit their iudgements to the ordinance of God, rather than to thinke, that they may safely dispense with his commandements, and follow the prudent conceits which worldly wisedome dictateth vnto them. For in such kinde of vnhappie subtilties, it is manifest that Athalia was able to furnish both her Husband and her Sonne, but the issue of them partly hath appeared alreadie, and partly will appeare, in that which immediately followeth. §. V. Of the raigne of AHAZIA, and his businesse with the King of Israel. OCHAZIAS, or Ahazia, the sonne of Ichoram and Athalia, beganne his raigne ouer Iuda in the twelfth yeere of Iehoram, the sonne of Ahab King of Israel, and raigned but that one yeere. Touching his age, it is a point of more difficultie than importance to know it; yet hath it bred much disputation, whereof I see no more probable conclu∣sion, than that of Torniellus, alleaging the Edition of the at Rome, Anno Domini 1588. which saith that hee was twentie yeeres old in the beginning of his Kingdome, and the Annotations thereupon, which cite other Copies, that giue him two yeeres more. Like enough hee is to haue beene yong: for hee was gouer∣ned by his Mother, and her Ministers, who gaue him counsaile by which hee pe∣rished. In matter of Religion he altered none of his Fathers courses. In matter of State, he likewise vp held the league with the house of Ahab. Hee was much busied in doing little, and that with ill successe. He accompanied his Cousin the Is∣raelite against Ramoth Gilead, which they wanne, but not without blowes: for the Aramites fought so well, that the King of Israel was faine to aduenture his owne per∣son, which scaped not vnwounded. The Towne being wonne was manned strong∣ly, in expectation of some attempt likely to bee made by Hazael king of Aram: which done, Ieboram King of Israel with-drew himselfe to the Citie of Izreel, where with more hee might attend the curing of his woundes; and Ahazia returned to Ierusalem. It seemes that hee was but newly come home (for hee raigned in all scantly one yeere, whereof the former expedition, with the preparations for it, taken vp a great part) when hee made a new iourney, as it were for good manners sake, to visit the King of Israel, who lay sore of his woundes. Belike Athalia was brewing some new plots, which his presence would haue hindred, and therefore sought euery occasion to thrust him abroad: for otherwise it was but a vaine piece of worke so to leaue his kingdome, hauing no other businesse than by way of com∣plement to goe see one whom hee had seene yesterday. Certaine it is that the Lord had resolued at this time to put in execution that heauie iudgement, which hee had laid by the mouth of Elias the Prophet vpon the house of . And heereunto at this time had hee disposed not onely the concurrence of all other things, which in mans eyes might seeme to haue beene accidentall; but the very thoughts and affe∣ctions of such persons, as intended nothing lesse than the fulfilling of his high plea∣sure. Of these Athalia doubtlesse was one; whose mischieuous purposes it will shortly bee needfull for explanation of some difficulties arising, that wee diligently consider and examine. §. VI. How AHAZIA perished with the house of AHAB: and how that Familie was destroyed by IEHV. THe whole Armie of Israel, with all the principall Captaines lying in Ra∣moth Gilead, a Disciple of Elizeus the Prophet came in among the Cap∣taines that were sitting together, who calling out from among them Iehu, a principall man, tooke him apart, and anointed him King ouer Israel, rehearsing vnto him the prophecie of Elias against the house of Ahab, and letting him vnderstand that it was the pleasure of God to make him exe∣cutioner of that sentence. The fashion of the Messenger was such as bred in the Captaines a desire to know his , which Iehu thought meete to let them know, as doubting whether they had ouer-heard all the talke or no. When hee had ac∣quainted them with the whole matter, they made no delay, but foorth-with pro∣claimed him King. For the prophecie of Elias was well knowne among them, nei∣ther durst any one oppose himselfe against him, that was by God ordained to per∣forme it. Iehu, who had vpon the sudden this great honour throwne vpon him, was not slow to put himselfe in possession of it, but vsed the first heate of their affections who ioyned with him, in setting on foote the businesse which neerely concerned him, and was not to be fore-slowed, being no more his owne than Gods. The first care taken was that no newes of the reuolt might bee carried to Izreel, whereby the King might haue had warning either to fight or flee: this being fore∣seene, hee marched swiftly away, to take the Court while it was yet secure. King Iehoram was now so well recouered of his wounds, that hee could endure to ride a∣broad, for which cause it seemes that there was much feasting, and ioy made, espe∣cially by Queene Iezabel, who kept her state so well, that the brethren of Ahazia comming thither at this time, did make it as well their errand to salute the Queene, as to visit the King. Certaine it is, that since the rebellion of Moab against Israel, the house of Ahab did neuer so much flourish as at this time. Seuenty Princes of the bloud Royall there were that liued in Samaria; Iehoram the sonne of Queene Iezabel had wonne Ramoth Gilead, which his Father had attempted in vaine, with losse of his life; and he wonne it by valiant fight, wherein he receiued wounds, of which the danger was now past, but the honour likely to continue. The was so great betweene Is∣rael and Iuda, that it might suffice to daunt all their common enemies, leauing no hope of successe, to any rebellious enterprizer: so that now the prophecie of Elias might be forgotten, or no otherwise remembred, than as an vnlikely tale by them that held the maiesticall face of the Court, wherein so great a friend as the King of Iuda was entertained, and fortie Princes of his bloud expected. In the midst of this securitie, whilest these great Estates were (perhaps) either consulting obout prosequution of their intents, first against the Aramites, and then against Moab, Edom, and other rebells and enemies: or else were triumphing in ioy of that which was already well atchieued, and the Queene Mother dressing her selfe in the brauest manner to come downe amongst them; tidings were brought in, that the watchman had from a Tower discouered a company comming. These newes were not very troublesome: for the Armie that lay in Ramoth Gilead, to bee rea∣die against all attempts of the Aramites, was likely enough to bee discharged vpon some notice taken that the enemie would not, or could not stirre. Onely the King sent out an Horse-man to know what the matter was, and to bring him word. The messenger comming to Iehu, and asking whether all were well, was retained by him, who intended to giue the King as little warning as might bee. The seeming negli∣gence of this fellow in not returning with an answere, might argue the matter to bee of small importance: yet the King to bee satisfied, sent out another that should bring him word how all went; and he was likewise detained by Iehu. These dumbe showes bred some suspicion in Iehoram, whom the watchmen certified of all that happened. And now the company drew so neere, that they might, though not perfectly, be , and notice taken of Iehu himselfe by the furious manner of his marching. Wherefore the King that was loth to discouer any , cau∣sed his Chariot to be made ready, and issued forth with King of Iuda in his company, whose presence added maiestie to his traine, when strength to resist, or expedition to flee had been more needfull. This could not be so hastily, but that Iehu was come euen to the Townes end, and there they met each other in the field of Naboth. Iehoram beganne to salute Iehu with termes of peace, but receiuing a bitter answere, his heart failed him, so that crying out vpon the treason to his fel∣low King, he turned away to haue fled. But Iehu soone ouertooke him with an ar∣row, where-with he strooke him dead, and threw his carkasse into that field, which, purchased with the bloud of the rightfull owner, was to bee watered with bloud of the vniust possessour. Neither did Ahazia escape so well, but that he was arrested by a wound, which held him till death did seize vpon him. The Kings Palace was ioyning to the wall, by the gate of the Citie, where Ieza∣bel might soone be aduertised of this calamitie, if shee did not with her owne eyes behold it. Now it was high time for her to call to God for mercie, whose iudge∣ment, pronounced against her long before, had ouer-taken her, when shee least ex∣pected it. But shee, full of indignation, and proud thoughts, made her selfe readie in all haste, and painted her face, hoping with her stately and imperious lookes to daunt the Traitour, or at the least to vtter some Apophthegme, that should expresse her braue spirit, and brand him with such a reproach as might make him odious for euer. Little did shee thinke vpon the hungrie dogs, that were ordained to deuoure her, whose paunches the , with which shee besmeared her eyes, would more offend, than the scolding language where-with shee armed her tongue, could trou∣ble the eares of him that had her in his power. As Iehu drew neere, she opened her window, and looking out vpon him, beganne to put him in minde of Zimri, that had not long inioyned the fruits of his treason, and murther of the King his Master. This was in meere humane valuation stoutly spoken, but was indeede a part of mi∣serable , as are all things, howsoeuer laudable, if they haue an ill relation to God the Lord of all. Her owne Eunuches that stood by and heard her, were not affe∣cted so much as with any compassion of her fortune; much lesse was her enemie daunted with her proud spirit. When Iehu saw that shee did vse the little remainder of her life in seeking to vexe him; hee made her presently to vnderstand her owne estate, by deedes and not by words. He onely called to her seruants to know which of them would be of his side, and soone found them readie to offer their seruice, be∣fore the very face of their proud Ladie. Hereupon he commanded them to cast her downe head-long: which immediately they performed without all regard of her greatnesse and estate, wherein shee had a few houres before shined so gloriously in the eyes of men; of men that considered not the iudgements of God that had beene denounced against her. So perished this accursed woman by the rude hands of her owne seruants, at the commandement of her greatest enemie, that was yesterday her subiect, but now her Lord: and shee perished miserably struggling in vaine with base groomes, who con∣tumeliously did hale and thrust her, whilest her insulting enemie sate on horse-back, adding indignitie to her griefe by scornefull beholding the shamefull manner of her fall, and trampling her bodie vnder foote. Her dead carcasse that was left with∣out the walls was deuoured by dogges, and her very memorie was odious. Thus the vengeance of God rewarded her Idolatrie, murther, and oppression, with slow, but sure paiment, and full interest. Ahazia King of Iuda fleeing a-pace from Iehu, was ouer-taken by the way where he lurked; and receiuing his deadly wound in the Kingdome of Samaria, was suffe∣red to get him gone (which he did in all haste) and seeke his buriall in his owne king∣dome: and this fauour hee obtained for his grand-fathers sake, not for his fathers, nor his owne. He died at , and was thence carried to Ierusalem, where hee was enterred with his Ancestors, hauing raigned about one yeere. CHAP. XXI. Of ATHALIA, and whose Sonne he was that suc∣ceeded vnto her. §. I. Of ATHALIA her vsurping the Kingdome, and what pretences shee might forge. AFTER the death of Ahazia, it is saide that his house was not able to retaine the Kingdome: which note, and the proceedings of Athalia vpon the death of her 2. Chron. 22. 9. Sonne, haue giuen occasion to diuers opinions con∣cerning the Pedigree of Ioas, who raigned shortly af∣ter. For Athalia being thus dispoiled of her Sonne, vnder whose name shee had ruled at her pleasure, did forth-with lay hold vpon all the Princes of the bloud, and slew them, that so she might occupie the Royall Throne her selfe, and raigne as Queene, rather than liue a Subiect. Shee had before-hand put into great place, and made Counsailours vnto her sonne, such as were fittest for her purpose, and readie at all times to execute her will: that shee kept a strong guard about her it is very likely; and as likely it is that the great execution done by Iehoram, vpon the Princes, and many of the Nobilitie, had made the people tame, and fearefull to , whatsoeuer they saw or heard. Yet ambition, how violent soeuer it bee, is seldome or neuer so shamelesse as tore∣fuse the commoditie of goodly pretenses offering themselues; but rather scrapes together all that will any way serue to colour her proceedings. Wherefore it were not absurd for vs to thinke, that Athalia, when shee saw the Princes of the Royall bloud, all of them in a manner, slaine by her husband, and afterwards his owne children destroyed by the Philistims, began euen then to play her owne game, re∣ducing by artificiall practice, into faire likelihoods, those possibilities where-with her husbands bad fortune had presented her. Not without great show of reason, either by her owne mouth, or by some trustic creature of hers, might shee giue him to vnderstand, how needfull it were to take the best order whilest as yet hee might, for feare of the worst that might happen. If the issue of Dauid, which now remai∣ned onely in his Familie, should by any accident faile (as wofull experience had al∣readie shewed what might after come to passe) the people of Iuda were not vnlikely to choose a King of some new stocke, a popular seditious man peraduenture, one that to countenance his owne vnworthinesse, would not care what aspersions hee laide vpon that Royall house, which was fallen downe. And who could assure him, that some ambitious spirit, fore-seeing what might be gotten thereby, did not alreadie contriue the destruction of him, and all his seede? Wherefore it were tho wisest way to designe by his authoritie, not onely his Successour, but also the reuer∣sioner, and so to prouide, that the Crowne might neuer be subiect to any rifeling, but remaine in the disposition of them that loued him best, if the worst that might bee feared comming to passe, his owne posteritic could not retaine it. Such perswasions being vrged, and earnestly followed, by the importunate solli∣citation of her that gouerned his affections, were able to make the iealous Tyrant thinke that the only way to frustrate all deuices of such as gaped after a change, was to make her Heire the laft and yongest of his house, whom it most concerned, as be∣ing the Queene-Mother, to vp-hold the first and eldest. If Athalia tooke no such course as this in her husbands times, yet might shee doe it in her Sonnes. For Ahazia (besides that he was wholly ruled by his Mother) was not likely to take much care for the securitie of his halfe-brethren, or their chil∣dren; as accounting his Fathers other wiues, in respect of his owne high borne∣Mother, little better than Concubines, and their children basely begotten. But if this mischieuous woman forgate her selfe so farre in her wicked policie, that shee lost all opportunitie which the weakenesse of her husband and sonne did afford, of procuring to her selfe some seeming Title; yet could shee afterwards faine some such matter, as boldly shee might: being sure that none would aske to see her eui∣dence, for feare of being sent to learne the certaintie of her sonne or husband in an∣other world. But I rather thinke that shee tooke order for her affaires before hand. For though shee had no reason to suspect or feare the suddaine death of her sonne, yet it was the wisest way to prouide betimes against all that might happen, whilest her husbands issue by other women was yong and vnable to resist. We plainly find that the Brethren or Nephewes of Ahazia, to the number of two and fortie, were sent to the Court of Israel, only to salute the children of the King, and the children of the Queene. The slender occasion of which long iourney, considered together with the qualitie of these persons (being in effect all the stocke of Iehoram that could be growne to any strength) makes it very suspitious that their entertainement in Ie∣zabels house would only haue beene more formall, but little differing in substance, from that which they found at the hand of . Hee that lookes into the courses held both before and after by these two Queenes, will finde cause enough to thinke no lesse. Of such as haue aspired vnto Lordships not belonging to them, and thrust out the right Heires by pretence of Testaments, that had no other validitie than the sword of such as claimed by them could giue, Histories of late, yea of many Ages, afford plentifull examples: and the rule of Salomon is true: Is there any thing Eccles. 1. 10. whereof one may say, Behold, this is new? it hath been alreadie in the old time that was before vs. That a King might shead his brothers bloud, was proued by Salomon vpon A∣donia; that he might aliene the Crowne from his naturall Heires, Dauid had giuen proofe: but these had good ground of their doings. They which follow examples that please them, will neglect the reasons of those examples, if they please them not, and rest contented with the practice, as more willingly shewing what they may doe, than acknowledging why Salomon slew his brother that had begunne one rebellion, and was entring into another. IEHORAM slew all his brethren, which were better than 2. Chro. 21. v. 13. hee: DAVID purchased the Kingdome, and might the more freely dispose of it, yet he disposed of it as the Lord appointed; if Iehoram, who had lost much and got∣ten nothing, thought that hee might aliene the remainder at his pleasure; or if Aba∣zia sought to cut off the succession of his brethren, or of their issue: either of these was to be answered with the wordes which Iehoiada the Priest vsed afterwards, in de∣claring the title of IOASH: Behold, the Kings must raigne; as the Lord said of the sonnes of DAVID. Wherefore though I hold it very probable, that Atha∣lia did pretend some title, whatsoeuer it might bee, to the Crowne of Iuda; yet is it most certaine that shee had thereunto no right at all, but onely got it by treachery, murder, and open violence; and so shee held it sixe whole yeeres, and a part of the seuenth, in good seeming-securitie. §. II. How IEHV spent his time in Israel, so that he could not molest ATHALIA. IN all this time Iehu did neuer goe about to disturbe her; which in reason hee was likely to desire, being an enemie to her whole House. But hee was occupied at the first in establishing himselfe, rooting out the posteritie of Ahab, and reforming somewhat in Religion: after∣wards in warres against the Aramite, wherein hee was so farre ouer∣charged, that hardly hee could retaine his owne, much lesse attempt vpon others. Of the line of Ahab there were seuentie liuing in Samaria, out of which number Iehu by letter aduised the Citizens to set vp some one as King, and to prepare them∣selues to fight in his defence. Hereby might they gather how confident hee was, which they well vnderstood to proceede from greater power about him, than they could gather to resist him. Wherefore they tooke example by the two Kings whom hee had slaine, and being exceedingly afraid of him, they offered him their seruice, wherein they so readily shewed them selues obedient, that in lesse than one dayes warning, they sent him the heads of all those Princes, as they were inioyned by a se∣cond letter from him. After this hee surprized all the Priests of Baal by a subtiltie, faining a great sacrifice to their god, by which meanes he drew them altogether in∣to one Temple, where he slew them; and in the same zeale to God vtterly demoli∣shed all the monuments of that impietie. Concerning the Ido latrie deuised by Ierohoam, no King of Israel had euer greater reason than Iehu to destroy it. For he needed not to feare lest the people should be allured vnto the house of Dauid; it was (in appearance) quite rooted vp, and the Crowne of Iuda in the possession of a cruell Tyrannesse: he had receiued his king∣dome by the vnexpected grace of God; and further, in regard of his zeale expressed in destroying Baal out of Israel, hee was promised, notwithstanding his following the sinne of Ieroboam, that the Kingdome should remaine in his Familie, to the fourth Generation. But all this would not serue; he would needs helpe to piece out Gods prouidence with his owne circumspection; doing therein like a foolish greedie game∣ster, who by stealing a needelesse Card to assure himselfe of winning a stake, forfeits his whole rest. He had questionlesse displeased many, by that which he did against Baal; and many more he should offend by taking from them the vse of a superstition, so long practized as was that Idolatrie of Ieroboam. Yet all these, how many soeuer they were, had neuer once thought vpon making him King, if God, whom, to retaine them, hee now forsooke, had not giuen him the Crowne, when more difficulties ap∣peared in the way of getting it, than could at any time after be found in the meanes of holding it. This ingratitude of Iehu drew terrible vengeance of God vpon Israel, whereof Hazael King of Damascus was the Executioner. The of this barbarous Prnce we may finde in the prophecie of Elizeus, who fore-told it, saying: Their 2. King. 8. v. 12. strong Cities shalt thouset on fire, and their yong men shalt thou slay with the sword, and shalt dash their Infants against the stones, and rent in pieces their women with child. So did not onely the wickednesse of Ahab cause the ruine of his whole house, but the obsti∣nate Idolatrie of the people bring a lamentable miserie vpon all the Land. For the furie of Hazaels victorie was not quenched with the destruction of a few Townes, nor wearied with one inuasion; but he smote them in all the coasts of Israel, and wasted 2. King. 10. v. 32 all the Countrie beyond the Riuer of Iordan. Notwithstanding all these calamities, it seemes that the people repented not of their Idolatrie; (For in those dayes the Lord beganne to loath Israel,) but rather it is likely, that they bemoaned the noble House of Ahab, vnder which they had beaten those enemies to whom they were now a prey, and had brauely fought for the conquest of Syria, where they had enlarged their border, by winning Ramoth Gilead, and compelled Benhadad to restore the Ci∣ties which his Father had wonne: whereas now they were faine to make wofull shifts, liuing vnder a Lord that had better fortune and courage in murdering his Master that had put him in trust, than in defending his people from their cruell e∣nemies. Thus it commonly falls out, that they who can finde all manner of diffi∣culties in seruing him, to whom nothing is difficult, are, in stead of the ease and plea∣sure to themselues propounded by contrarie courses, ouer-whelmed with the trou∣bles which they sought to auoide, and therein by God whom they first forsooke, forsaken, and left vnto the wretched labours of their owne blinde wisedome, wherein they had reposed all their confidence. §. III. Of ATHALIAHS Gouernement. THese calamities falling vpon Israel, kept Athalia safe on that side, giuing her leisure to looke to things at home; as hauing little to doe abroad, vnlesse it were so that shee held some correspondencie with Hazael, pretending therein to imitate her husbands grand-father King Asa, who had done the like. And some probabilitie that shee did so may be gathered out of that which is recorded of her doings. For wee finde, that this wicked ATHALIA and her children brake vp the house of God, and all things that were 2. Chro. 24. v: 7. dedicate for the house of the Lord did they bestow vpon BAALIM. Such a sacriledge, though it proceeded from a desire to set out her owne Idolatrie, with such pompe as might make it the more glorious in the eyes, was not likely to want some faire pretext of necessitie of the State so requiring: in which case others before her had made bold with that holy place, and her next successour was to doe the like, being thereunto forced by Hazael, who perhaps was delighted with the taste of that which was formerly thence extracted for his sake. Vnder this impious gouernement of Athalia, the deuotion of the Priests and Le∣uites was very notable, and serued (no doubt) very much to the people in the religion taught by God himselfe, how soeuer the Queens proceedings aduanced the contrarie. For the pouertie of that sacred Tribe of must needes haue been exceeding great at this time; all their lands and possessions in the ten Tribes being vtterly lost, the oblations and other perquisites, by which they liued, being now ve∣ry few, and small; and the store laid vp in better times vnder godly Kings, being all taken away by shamefull robberie. Yet they vp-held in all this the seruice of God, and the daily sacrifice, keeping duly their courses, and performing obe∣dience to the high Priest, no lesse than in those dayes wherein their entertainement was farre better. §. IIII. Of the preseruation of IOAS. IEHOIADA then occupied the high Priest-hood, an honourable, wise and religious man. To his carefulnesse it may be ascribed, that the state of the Church was in some slender sort vp-held in those vnhappie times. His wife was Iehoshabeth, who was daughter of King Iehoram, and sister to Ahazia, a godly Ladie and vertuous, whose pietie makes it seeme that Athalia was not her Mother, though her accesse to the Courtargue the contrarie: but her discreet carriage might more easily procure her welcome to her owne Fathers house, than the education vnder such a Mother could haue her to be such as shee was. By her care Ioash the yong Prince that raigned soone af∣ter, was conueighed out of the nourserie, when Athalia destroyed all the Kings chil∣dren, and was carried secretly into the Temple, whereas secretly hee was brought vp. How it came to passe that this yong child was not hunted out, when his bodie was missing, nor any great reckoning (for ought that we finde) made of his escape, I will not stand to examine: for it was not good in policie, that the people should heare say, that one the children had auoided that cruell blow; it might hauc made them hearken after innouations, and so bee the lesse conformable to the pre∣sent gouernment. So Ioash was deliuered out of that slaughter, he and his Nurse being gone no man could tell whither, and might bee thought peraduenture to bee cast away, as hauing no other guard than a poore woman that gaue him sucke, who foolishly doubting that shee her selfe should haue beene slaine, was fled away with him into some desolate places, where it was like enough that shee and hee should pe∣rish. In such cases flatterers, or men desirous of reward, easily coine such tales, and rather sweare them to bee true in their owne knowledge, than they will lose the thankes due to their ioyfull tidings. §. V. Whose Sonne IOAS was. †. I. Whether IOAS may be thought likely to haue beene the Sonne of AHAZIA. NOw concerning this Ioash, whose sonne was, it is a thing of much difficultie to affirme, and hath caused much controuersie among wri∣ters. 2. 11. 2. 2. . 22. v. 11. The places of Scripture, which call him the sonne of AHAZIA, seeme plaine enough. How any figure of the Hebrew language might giue that title of Sonne vnto him, in regard that he was his Successor, I neither by my selfe can finde, nor can by any helpe of Authors how to an∣swere the difficulties appearing in the contrarie opinions of them, that thinke him to haue beene, or not, the naturall Sonne of Ahazia. For whereas it is said, that the house of AHAZIA was not able to retaine the Kingdome; some doe inferre that 2. . 22. v. 9. this Ioash was not properly called his Sonne, but was the next of his kindred, and therefore succeeded him, as a sonne in the inheritance of his Father. And hereunto the murder committed by Athalia, doth very well agree. For shee perceiuing that the Kingdome was to fall into their hands, in whom shee had no interest, might ea∣sily finde cause to feare, that the tyrannie exercised by her husband, at her instiga∣tion vpon so many noble Houses, would now bee reuenged vpon her selfe. The ruine of her Idolatrous religion might in this case terrifie both her and her Minions; the sentence of the Law rewarding that offence with death; and the Tragedie of teaching her what might happen to another Queene. All this had little con∣cerned her, if her owne grand-child had beene heire to the Crowne; for shee that had power enough to make her selfe Queene, could with more ease, and lesse enuie, haue taken vpon her the office of a Protector, by which authoritie shee might haue done her pleasure, and beene the more both obayed by others, and secure of her owne estate, as not wanting an Heire. Wherefore it was not needefull, that she should be so vnnaturall, as to destroy the child of her owne sonne, of whose life she might haue made greater vse, than shee could of his death: whereas indeede, the loue of grand-mothers to their Nephewes, is little lesse than that of Mothers to their children. This argument is very strong. For it may seeme incredible, that all naturall affe∣ction should be cast a-side, when as neither necessitie vrgeth, nor any commoditie thereby gotten requireth it, yea when all humane policie doth teach one the same, which nature without reason would haue perswaded. †. II. That IOAS did not descend from NATHAN. BVt (as it is more easie to finde a difficultie in that which is related, than to shew how it might haue otherwise been) the pedegree of this Ioash is, by them which thinke him not the sonne of Ahazia, set downe in such sort that it may very iustly be suspected. They say that he descended from Nathan the sonne of Dauid, and not from Salomon, to which purpose they bring a Historic (I know not whence) of two families of the race of Dauid, saying that the line of Salomon held the kingdome with this condition, that if at any time it failed, the familie of Nathan should succeede it. Concerning this Nathan the sonne of Dauid there are that would haue him to bee Nathan the Prophet, who, as they thinke, was by Dauid adopted. And of this opinion was Origen, as also S. Augustine sometime was, but after ward hee reuoked it, as was meet; for this Nathan is reckoned among the sonnes of Dauid, by the daugh∣ter 1. Chron. 3. 5. of Ammes, and therfore could not be the Prophet. Gregory Nazianzen (as I finde him cited by Peter Martyr ) and after him, Erasmus, and Faber Stapulensis, haue like∣wise held the same of Ioash, deriuing him from Nathan. But Nathan, and those o∣ther brethren of Salomon by the same mother, are thought, vpon good likelihoods, to haue been the children of Vria the Hittite: and so are they accounted by sundry of the fathers, and by Lyra, and Abulensis, who follow the Hebrew expositors of that place in the first of Chronicles. The words of Salomon calling himselfe the onely be∣gotten of his mother, doe approoue this exposition: for wee reade of no more than two sonnes which Bathshua or Bathsheba did beare vnto Dauid, whereof the one, be∣gotten in adultery, died an infant, and Salomon only of her children by the King did liue. So that the rest must needs haue been the children of Vria, and are thought to haue been Dauids onely by adoption. Wherefore, if Ioas had not been the sonne of Ahazia, then must that pedegree haue been false, wherein S. Matthew deriueth him lineally from Salomon; yea, then had not our blessed Sauiour issued from the loynes of Dauid, according to the flesh, but had onely been of his line by courtesie of the Na∣tion, and forme of Law, as any other might haue been. As for the authority of Philo, which hath drawne many late writers into the opinion that Ioash was not of the po∣steritie of Salomon, it is enough to say, that this was Frier Annius his Philo: for no o∣ther edition of Philo hath any such matter; but Annius can make Authors to speake what he list. †. III. That IOAS may probably be thought to haue beene the sonne of IEHORAM. IN so doubtfull a case, if it seeme lawfull to hold an opinion that no man hath yet thought vpon, methinkes it were not amisse to lay open at once, and peruse to∣gether two places of Scripture, whereof the one telling the wickednesse of 2. King. 8. v. 19. the sonne of Iehosaphat King of Iuda, for which hee and his children perished, re∣hearseth it as one of Gods mercies towards the house of Dauid, that according to his promise he would giue him alight, and to his children for euer: the other doth say, that for the offences of the same IEHORAM, there was not a sonne left him, saue IE∣HOAHA s the yongest of his sonnes. Now, if it were in regard of Gods promise to Dauid, that after those massacres of Iehoram, vpon all his brethren, and of the Phi∣listims, and Arabians vpon the children of Iehoram, one of the seede of Dauid escaped; why may it not be thought that hee was said to haue escaped, in whom the line of Dauid was preserued? for had all the race of Salomon been rooted vp in these wo∣full Tragedies, and the progenie of Nathan succeeded in place thereof; like enough it is that some more particular would haue been extant, of an euent so memorable. That the race of Nathan was not extinguished, it is indeed apparent by the Genealogie of our Lord; as it is recounted by S. Luke: but the of the house of Dauid, mentioned in the bookes of Kings and Chronicles, was performed in the person of Iehoahas, in whom the Royal branch of Salomon, the naturall, and not onely legall issue remaining of Dauid, was kept aliue. Wherefore it may bee thought that this Ioash, who followed in the Kingdome, was the yongest sonne of , whose life Athalia as a stepdame, was not likely to pursue. For it were not easily vnderstood, why the preseruation of Dauids line, by Gods especiall mercie, in regard of his promise made, should peritaine rather to that time, when be∣sides Ahazia himselfe, there were two and fortie of his brethren, or (as in another 2. King. 10. 13. place they are called) sonnes of his brethren remaining aliue, which afterwards were all slaine by Iebu; than haue reference to the lamentable destruction and little 2. Chron. 22. v. 8. lesse than extirpation of that progenie, wherein one onely did escape. Certainely that inhumane murther which Iehoram committed vpon his brethren, if it were (as appeareth in the Historie) reuenged vpon his owne children; then was not this ven∣geance of God accomplished by the Philistims and Arabians, but being onely begun by them, was afterwards prosecuted by Ichu, and finally tooke effect by the hands of that same wicked woman, at whose instigation hee had committed such barbarous outrage. And from this execution of Gods heauie iudgement layd vpon Iehoram and all his children, onely Iehoahas his yongest sonne was exempted; whom there∣fore 2. Chron. 21. 14. if I should affirme to bee the same with Ioas, which is called the sonne of Aha∣zia, I should not want good probabilitie. Some further appearance of necessitie there is, which doth argue that it could no otherwise haue beene. For it was the youngest sonne of Iehoram in whom the race was preserued; which could not in a∣ny likelihood be Ahazia, seeing that he was twenty yeeres old at the least (as is al∣ready noted) when hee began to raigne, and consequently, was borne in the eigh∣teenth or twentieth yeere of his Fathers age. Now, I know not whether of the two is more vnlikely, either that Iehoram should haue begotten many children before was eighteene yeeres old, or that hauing (as had) many wiues and children, hee should vpon the sudden, at his eighteenth yeere, become vnfruitfull, and beget no more in twenty yeeres following: each of which must haue been true, if this werc true that Ahazia was the same , which was his yongest sonne. But this in∣conuenience is taken away, and those other doubts arising from the causelesse of Athalia, in seeking the life of Ioas, are cleared, if Ioas and were one. Neither doth his agc with stand this opinion. For he was seuen yeeres old when 2. Chron. 24. 1. hee began to reigne; which if wee vnderstand of yeeres compleat, he might haue been a yeere old at the death of Iehoram, being begotten somewhat after the beginning of his sicknesse. Neither is it more absurd to say that he was the naturall sonne of Ieho∣ram, though called the sonne of Ahazia, than it were to say, as great Authors haue done, this difficultie not withstanding, that hee was of the posteritie of Nathan. One thing indeed I know not how to answer; which, had it concurred with the rest, might haue serued as the very foundation of this opinion. The name of Iehoahas, that soun∣deth much more neere to Ioas, than to Ahazia, in an English eare, doth in the He∣brew (as I am informed by some, skilfull in that language) through the diuersitie of certaine letters, differ much from that which it most resembleth in our Westerne 2. . 22. 6. manner of writing, and little from the other. Now, although it be so that Ahazia himselfe be also called Azaria, and must haue had three names, if hee were the same with Iehoahas; in which manner Ioas might also haue had seuerall names; yet, bc∣cause I finde no other warrant hereof than a bare possibilitie, I will not presume to build an opinion vpon the weake foundatation of mine owne coniecture, but leaue all to the consideration of such as haue more abilitie to iudge, and leisure to consi∣der of this point. †. IIII. Vpon reasons ATHALIA might to destroy IOAS, if he were her owne . IF therefore we shall follow that which is commonly receiued, and interpret the text according to the letter, it may bee said, that Athalia was not onely blinded by the passions of ambition and to her worship of , but pursued the accomplishment of some naturall desires, in seeking the of her grand∣childe, and the rest of the bloud Royall. For whether it were so that Athalia (as proud and cruell women are not alwayes chaste) had imitated the libertie of Iezabel 2. . c. 9. v. 22. her sister in law, whose were vpbraided by Iehu to her sonne; or whe∣ther she had children by some former husband, before she was married vnto Iehoram (which is not vnlikely in regard of her age, who was daughter of Omri, and sister to Ahab ) it is that she had sonnes of her owne, and those old enough to be im∣ployed, as they were, in robbing of the Temple. So it is not greatly to bee wondred at, that to the Crowne vpon her owne children, shee did seeke to cut off, by wicked policie, all other claimes. As for Ioas, if she were his grandmother, yet shee might mistrust the interest which his mother would haue in him, left when he came to yeers, it might withdraw him from her deuotion. And hereof (besides that women doe commonly better loue their daughters husbands, than their sonnes wiues) there is some in the reigne of her sonne: for shee made him spend all his time in idle iourneys, to no other apparant end, than that she might rule at home; and he liuing abroad be estranged from his , and entertaine some new fancies, wherein Iezabel had cunning enough to bee his tutoresse. But when the sword of Iehu had rudely cut in sunder all these fine deuices, then was Athalia faine to goe roundly to worke, and doe as shee did, whereby she thought to make all sure. Otherwise, if (as I could rather thinke) she were onely stepdame to Ioas, we neede not seeke into the reasons moouing her to take away his life; her owne hatred was cause enough to dispatch him among the first. §. VI. , wherein is maintained the liberty of vsing con∣iecture in Histories. THus much concerning the person of Ioas, from whom, as from a new roote, the tree of Dauid was propagated into many branches. In handling of which matter, the more I consider the nature of this Hi∣storie, and the diuersitie betweene it and others, the lesse me thinkes I neede to suspect mine owne presumption, as deseruing blame, for in matter of doubt, or boldnesse in libertie of coniecture. For all Histo∣ries doe giue vs information of humane counsailes and euents, as farre forth as the knowledge and faith of the writers can affoord; but of Gods will, by which all things are ordered, they speake onely at randome, and many times . This we often finde in profane writers, who ascribe the ill successe of great vndertakings to the neglect of some impious Rites, whereof indeede God the perfor∣mance as vehemently, as they thought him to be highly offended with the omissi∣on. Hereat we may the lesse wonder, if we consider the answere made by the Iewes in vnto Ieremie the Prophet reprehending their idolatry. For, the written Law of God was knowne vnto the people, and his punishments laid vpon them for contempt thereof were very terrible, and euen then but newly executed; yet were they so obstinately bent vnto their owne wills, that they would not by any meanes be drawne to acknowledge the true cause of their affliction. But they told the Prophet roundly, that they would worship the Queene of , as they and their Fathers, their Kings and their Princes had vsed to do; For then (said they) had we Ier. 44. v. 17. and 18. plenty of victuals, and were well, and felt no euill: adding that all manner of miseries were befallen them, since they off that seruice of the Queene of Heauen. So blinde is the wisedome of man, in looking into the counsaile of God, which to finde out there is no better nor other guide than his owne written will not peruerted by vaine additions. But this Historie of the Kings of Israel and Iuda hath herein a singular preroga∣tiue aboue all that haue been written by the most sufficient of meerely humane au∣thours: it setteth downe expresly the true, and first causes of all that happened; not in imputing the death of Ahab to his ouer-forwardnesse in battaile; the ruine of his familie, to the securitie of Ieroboam in Izreel; nor the victories of Hazael, to the great commotions raised in Israel, by the comming of ; but referring all vnto the will of God, I meane, to his reuealed will: from which that his hidden purpo∣ses doe not varie, this story, by many great examples, giues most notable proofe. True it is, that the concurrence of second causes with their effects, is in these bookes nothing largely described; nor perhaps exactly in any of those Histories that are in these points most copious. For it was well noted by that worthy Gentleman, Sir S. Phil. Sid. in his Apol. for Poetry. PHILIP SIDNIE, that Historians doe borrow of Poets, not onely much of their ornament, but somewhat of their substance. Informations are often false, records not alwayes true, and notorious actions commonly insufficient to discouer the pas∣sions which did set them first on foote. Wherefore they are faine (I speake of the best, and in that which is allowed; for to take out of Liuie euery one circumstance of Claudius his iourney against Asdruball in Italie, fitting all to another businesse, or any practice of that kinde, is neither Historicall nor Poeticall) to search into the particu∣lar humour of Princes, and of those which haue gouerned their affections, or the in∣struments by which they wrought, from whence they collect the most likely motiues, or impediments of euery businesse; and so figuring as to the life as they can imagine, the matter in hand, they iudiciously consider the defects in coun∣saile, or obliquity in proceeding. Yet all this, for the most part, is not enough to giue assurance, howsoeuer it may giue satisfaction. For the heart of man is : and Princes, howsoeuer their intents bee seldome hidden from some of those many eyes which prie both into them, and into such as liue about them; yet sometimes either by their owne close temper, or by some subtill , they conceale the trueth from all reports. Yea, ma∣ny times the affections themselues lie dead, and buried in obliuion, when the prepa∣rations which they begate, are conuerted to another vse. The industrie of an Hi∣storian, hauing so many things to weary it, may well be excused, when finding appa∣rant cause enough of things done, it forbeareth to make further search; though it of∣ten fall out, where sundry occasions worke to the same end, that one small matter in a weake minde is more effectuall, than many that seemes farre greater. So comes it many times to passe, that great fires, which consume whole houses or Townes, be∣gin with a few strawes, that are wasted or not seene; when the flame is discouered, hauing fastened vpon some wood-pile, that catcheth all about it. Questionlesse it is, that the warre commenced by Darius, and pursued by Xerxes against the Greekes, Hero. l. 1. proceeded from desire of the Persians to inlarge their Empire: howsoeuer the en∣terprize of the Athenians vpon Sardes, was noised abroad as the ground of that quar∣rell: yet Herodotus telleth vs, that the wanton of Queene Atossa, to haue the Grecian dames her bondwomen, did first moue Darius to prepare for this warre be∣fore he had receiued any iniury; and when he did not yet so much desire to get more, as to enioy what was already gotten. I will not here stand to argue whether Herodotus bee more iustly reprehended by some, or defended by others, for alleadging the vaine appetite, and secret speech of the Queene in bed with her husband, as the cause of those great euils following; this I may boldly affirme, (hauing I thinke, in euery estate some sufficient witnesses) that matter of much consequence, founded in all seeming vpon substantiall reasons, haue issued indeed from such pettie trifles, as no Historian would either thinke vpon, or could well search out. Therefore it was a good answere that Sixtus Quintus the Pope made to a certaine , comming to visite him in his Popedome, as hauing long before in his meaner estate, beene his familiar friend. This poore , being emboldened by the Pope to vse his old libertie of speech, aduentured to tell him, that he very much wondred how it was possible for his Holinesse, whom he rather tooke for a direct honest man, than any cunning polititian, to attaine vnto the Papacie; in compassing of which, all the subtiltie (sayd hee) of the most crafty braines, finde worke enough: and there∣fore the more I thinke vpon the Art of the conclaue, and your vnaptnesse thereto, the more I needs must wonder. Pope Sixtus to satisfie the plaine dealing Frier, dealt with him againe as plainly, saying, Hadst thou liued abroad as I haue done, and seene by what folly this world is gouerned, thou wouldest wonder at nothing. Surely, if this be referred vnto those exorbitant engines, by which the course of affaires is mooued; the Pope said true. For the of men are not without their vanities, which requiring and finding mutuall toleration, worke more , and earnestly, than right reason either needes or can. But if we lift vp our thoughts to that supreme Gouernour, of whose Empire all that is true, which by the Poet was said of Iupiter: Qui terram inertem, qui mare temper at Ventosum, & vrbes, regna{que} tristia Diuos{que}, mortales{que} turmas, regit . Who rules the duller earth, the wind-swolne streames, The ciuill Cities, and th'infernall realmes, Who th'host of heauen and the mortall band, Alone doth gouerne by his iust commaund. Then shall wee finde the quite contrary. In him there is no vncertaintie nor change; he foreseeth all things, and all things disposeth to his owne honour; Hee neither deceiueth nor can be deceiued, but continuing one and the same for euer, doth constantly gouerne all creatures by that law, which hee hath prescribed and will neuer alter. The vanities of men beguile their vaine contriuers, and the pros∣peritie of the wicked, is the way leading to their destruction: yea, this broad and headlong passage to hell, is not so delightfull as it seemeth at the first entrance, but hath growing in it, besides the poisons which infect the soule, many cruell thornes deepely wounding the bodie, all which, if any few escape, they haue onely this mi∣serable aduantage of others, that their descent was the more swift and expedite. But the seruice of God is the path guiding vs to perfect happinesse, and hath in it a true, though not compleat felicitie, yeelding such abundance of ioy to the conscience, as doth easily counteruaile all afflictions whatsoeuer; though indeed those brambles that sometimes teare the skinne of such as walke in this blessed way, doe commonly lay hold vpon them at such time as they sit downe to take their ease, and make them wish themselues at their iournies end, in the presence of their Lord whom they faith∣fully serue, in whose presence is the fulnesse of ioy, and at whoseright hand are pleasures Psal. 16. v. 11. for euermore. Wherfore it being the end and scope of all History, to teach by example of times past, such wisdome as may guide our desires and actions, we should not maruaile though the Chronicles of the Kings of Iuda and Israel, being written by men inspired with the Spirit of God, instruct vs chiefly, in that which is most requisite for vs to know, as the meanes to attaine vnto true felicitie, both here, and hereafter, pro∣pounding examples which illustrate this rule, The feare of the Lord is the be∣ginning of Wisedome. Had the expedition of (as it was foretold by Daniel ) been written by some Prophet after the captiuitie: wee may well that the coun∣saile of God therein, and the executioners of his righteous will, should haue occu∣pied either the whole or the principall roome in that narration. Yet had not the purpose of Darius, the desire of his Wife, and the businesse at Sardes, with other oc∣currents, been the lesse true, though they might haue beene omitted, as the lesse materiall: but these things it had beene lawfull for any man to gather out of pro∣fane Histories, or out of circumstances otherwise appearing, wherein hee should not haue done iniurie to the Sacred Writings, as long as he had forborne to derogate from the first causes, by ascribing to the second more then was due. Such, or little different, is the businesse that I haue now in hand: wherein I cannot beleeue that any man of iudgement will taxe mee, as either fabulous or presumptu∣ous. For he doth not , that rehearseth probabilities as bare coniectures; neither doth he depraue the Text, that seeketh to illustrate and make good in humane rea∣son, those things, which authority alone, without further circumstance, ought to haue confirmed in euery mans beliefe. And this may suffice in defence of the liber∣tie, which I haue vsed in coniectures, and may hereafter vse when occasion shall re∣quire, as neither vnlawfull, nor mis-beseeming an Historian. §. VII. The conspiracie against ATHALIA. WHen Athalia had now sixe yeeres and longer worne the Crowne of Iu∣da, and had found neither any forraine enemie, nor domesticall aduer∣sarie to disturbe her possession, suddenly the period of her glory, and reward of her wickednesse meeting together, tooke her away without any warning, by a violent and shamefull death. For the growth of the yong Prince began to be such, as permitted him no longer to be concealed, and it had been very vnfitting that his education should bee simple, to make him seeme the childe of some poore man (as for his safetie it was requisite,) when his capacitie re∣quired to beene indued with the stomake and qualities meete for a King. All this the Priest considered, and withall, the great increase of impietie, which taking deepe roote in the Court, was likely to spread it selfe ouer all the Countrie, if care were not vsed to weede it vp very speedily. Wherefore he associated vnto him∣selfe fiue of the Captaines, in whose fidelitie he had best assurance, and hauing taken an oath of them, and shewed them the Kings sonne, he made a Couenant with them, to aduance him to the Kingdome. These drew in others of the principall men, to countenance the action, procuring at the first onely that they should repaire to Ieru∣salem, where they were further acquainted with the whole matter. There needed not many perswasions to winne them to the businesse: the promise of the Lord vnto the house of Dauid, was enough to assure them, that the action was both lawfull, and likely to as they desired. But in compassing their intent some difficulties appeared: For it was not to bee hoped, that with open force they should bring their purpose to good issue; neither were the Captaines, and other associats of Iehoiada able by close working, to drawe together so many trustie and seruiceable hands as would suffice to manage the busi∣nesse. To helpe in this case, the Priest gaue order to such of the Leuites, as had fini∣shed their courses in waiting on the Diuine seruice at the Temple, and were now re∣lieued by others that succeeded in their turnes, that they should not depart vntill they knew his further pleasure. So by admitting the new commers, and not dis∣charging the old, he had, without any noise, made vp such a number, as would bee able to deale with the Queens ordinarie Guard, and that was enough, for if the Ty∣rannesse did not preuaile against them at the first brunt, the fauour of the People was like to shew it selfe on their side, who made head against her. These Leuites were placed in the inner Court of the Temple, about the person of the King, who as yet was kept close; the followers of the Captaines, and other adherents, were be∣stowed in the vtter Courts: As for weapons, the Temple it selfe had store enough; King Dauid had left an Armorie to the place, which was now employed in defence of his issue. All things being in a readinesse, and the day come, wherein this high designe was to be put in execution; deliuered vnto the Captaines, Armour for them and their adherents; appointed a guard vnto the Kings person; produced him o∣penly, and gaue vnto him the Crowne; vsing all ceremonies accustomed in such so∣lemnities, with great applause of the people. Of these doings, the Queene was the last that heard any word; which is not so strange as it may seeme: for insolent na∣tures, by dealing outragiously with such as bring them ill tidings, doe commonly loose the benefit of hearing what is to bee feared, whilest yet it may bee preuented, and haue no information of danger, till their owne eyes, amazed with the sudden∣nesse, behold it in the shape of ineuitable mischiefe. All was full of the rumour, and entertayned it with very good liking. Some carried home the newes, others ranne forth to see, and the common joy was so great, that without apprehension of perill, vnder the windowes of the Court, were the people running and praising the King. Athalia hearing and beholding the 2. . 23. 12. extraordinarie concourse, and noise, of folkes in the streets, making towards the Temple, with much vnvsuall passion in their lookes, did presently conceiue, that somewhat worthie of her care was happened; though, what it might bee, shee did not apprehend. Howsoeuer it were, shee meant to vse her owne wisedome in loo∣king into the matter, and ordering all as the occasion might happen to require. It may bee, that shee thought it some especiall solemnitie vsed in the Diuine , which caused this much adoe; and hereof the vnaccustomed number of Leuites, and of other deuout men, about the towne, might giue some presumption. Many things argue that shee little thought vpon her owne Tragedie; although Iosephus would make it seeme otherwise. For we finde in the Text, Shee came to the 2 Chron 23. 12. & 13. & 2. people into the house of the Lord (which was neere to her Palace) and that when shee King. c. 11. v. 13. & 14. looked and saw the King stand by his pillar, as the manner was, with the Princes, or great men of the Land by him, and the Trumpetters proclaiming him, shee rent her clothes, and cryed, Treason, Treason. Hereby it appeares that shee was quietly go∣ing, without any mistrust or feare, to take her place, which when shee found occu∣pied by another, then shee begun to afflict her selfe, as one cast away, and cryed out in vaine vpon the Treason, whereby shee saw that shee must perish. But that shee came with a guard of armed men to the Temple, (as Iosephus reporteth) and that her companie being beaten back, shee entred alone, and commanded the people to kill the yong Tyrant, I finde no where in Scripture, neither doe I hold it credible. For had shee truely knowne how things went, shee would surely haue gathered her friends about her, and vsed those forces in defence of her Crowne, by which shee gat it, and hitherto had held it. Certainely, if it were granted, that shee, like a new Semiramis, did march in the head of her troupe, yet it had beene meere madnesse in her, to enter the place alone, when her assistants were kept out; but if shee percei∣uing that neither her authoritie, nor their owne weapons, could preuaile to let in her guard, would neuerthelesse take vpon her to command the death of the new King, calling a child of seuen yeeres old a Conspirator, and bidding them to kill him, whom shee saw to bee armed in his defence, may wee not thinke that shee was mad in the most extreme degree? Certaine it is that the counsaile of God would haue taken effect, in her destruction, had shee vsed the most likely meanes to disap∣point it: yet wee neede not so cut her throate with any morall impossibilities. It is enough to say, that the godly zeale of Iehotada found more easie successe, through her indiscretion, than otherwise could haue beene expected; so that at his appoint∣ment, shee was without more adoe, carried out of the Temple and slaine, yea so, that no bloud, saue her owne, was shed in that quarrell; her small traine, that she brought along with her, not daring to stand in her defence. §. VIII. The death of ATHALIA, with a comparison of her and IEZABEL. MOst like it is, that Athalia had many times, with great indignation, be∣wailed the rashnesse of her Nephew Iehoram the , who did foo∣lishly cast himselfe into the very throat of danger, gaping vpon him, only through his eager desire of quickly knowing what the matter meant: yet, shee her selfe, by the like bait, was taken in the like trap, and hauing liued such a life as Iezabel had done, was rewarded with a sutable death. These two Queenes were in many points much alike, each of them was Daughter, Wife, and Mother to a King; each of them ruled her husband; was an Idolatresse, and a Murdresse. The only difference appearing in their conditions, is, that Iezabel is more noted as incontinent of body, Athalia as ambitious: So that each of them surviuing her husband about eight yeeres, did spend the time in satisfying her owne affections; the one vsing tyrannie, as the exercise of her haughtie minde; the other painting her face, for the ornament of her vnchaste body. In the manner of their death little difference there was, or in those things which may seeme in this world to pertaine vnto the dead when they are gone. Each of them was taken on the sud∣daine by Conspirators, and each of them exclayming vpon the Treason, receiued sentence from the mouth of one that had liued vnder her subjection; in execution whereof, Iezabel was trampled vnder the feet of her enemies horses; Athalia slaine at her owne horse-gate; the death of Athalia hauing (though not much) the more leisure to vexe her proud heart; that of Iezabel, the more indignitie, and shame of body. Touching their buriall, Iezabel was by Dogges, as the Lord had threatned by the Prophet Elias; what became of wee doe not finde. Like enough it is, that she was buried, as hauing not persecuted and slaine the Lords Pro∣phets, but suffered the Priests to exercise their function; yet of her buriall there is no monument; for shee was a Church robber. The seruice of Baal erected by these two Queenes, was destroyed as soone as they were gone, and their Chaplaines, the Priests of that Religion, slaine. Herein also it came to passe, alike, as touching them both when they were dead; the Kings who slue them, were afterwards , both of them by the same hand of Hazael the Syrian; in which point Athalia had the greater honour, if the Syrian (who seemes to haue beene her good friend) pre∣tended her reuenge, as any part of his quarrell to Iuda. Concerning children, all be∣longing to Iezabel, perished in few dayes after her: whether Athalia left any behinde her, it is vncertaine; shee had sonnes liuing after shee was Queene, of whom, or of any other, that they were slaine with her, we doe not finde. This is a matter not vnworthie of consideration, in regard of much that may de∣pend vpon it. For if the children of Athalia had beene in Ierusalem when their Mo∣ther fell, their death would surely haue followed hers as neerely, and beene regi∣stred, as well as the death of Mattan the Priest of Baal. That Law by which God Deut. 24. 16. sorbade that the children should die for the fathers, could not haue saued these vngraci∣ous Imps, whom the clause following would haue cut off, which commands, that euery man shall die for his owne sinne. Seeing therefore that they had beene pro∣fessors & aduancers of that vile and Idolatrous worship of Baal, yea had robbed the Temple of the Lord, and enriched the house of Baal with the spoile of it; likely it is, that they should not haue escaped with life, if Iehoiada the Priest could haue got∣ten them into his hands. As there was lawfull cause enough requiring their death, so the securitie of the King and his friends, that is, of all the Land, craued as much, and that very earnestly. For these had beene esteemed as heires of their mothers Crowne, and being reckoned as her assistants in that particular businesse of robbing the Temple, may be thought to haue carried a great sway in other matters, as Prin∣ces and fellowes with their Mother in the Kingdome. Therefore it is euident, that either they were now dead, or (perhaps following Hazael in his warres against Iehu ) absent from Ierusalem; whereby Iehoiada might, with the more confidence, aduen∣ture to take Armes against their Mother, that was desolate. CHAP. XXII. Of IOAS and AMASIA, with their Contemporaries; where somewhat of the building of Carthage. §. I. Of IOAS his doings, whilest IEHOIADA the Priest liued. BY the death of Athalia, the whole Countrie of was filled with great ioy and quietnesse; wherein Ioas a childe of seuen yeeres old or there-about, began his raigne, which continued almost fortie yeeres. During his minoritie, hee liued vnder the protection of that honorable man Iehoiada the Priest, who did as faithfully gouerne the Kingdome, as hee had be∣fore carefully preserued the Kings life, and restored him vnto the Throne of his ancestors. When hee came to mans estate, he tooke by appointment of Ie∣hoiada two wiues, and begat Sonnes and Daughters, repairing the family of Dauid, which was almost worne out. The first Act that hee tooke in hand, when he began to rule without a Protector, was the reparation of the Temple. It was a needfull piece of worke, in regard of the decay wherein that holy Place was fallen, through the wickednesse of vngodly Tyrants; and requisite it was that he should vp-hold the Temple, whom the Temple had vp-held. This businesse hee followed with so earnest a zeale, that not onely the were more slack than he, but euen Iehoiada was faine to be quickned by his admonition. Mo∣ney was gathered for the charges of the worke, partly out of the taxe imposed by Moses, partly out of the liberalitie of the people: who gaue so freely, that the Tem∣ple, 2. Chron. . 14. besides all reparations was enriched with vessels ofgold and siluer, and with all other Vtensiles. The sacrifices likewise were offered, as vnder godly Kings they had beene, and the seruice of God was magnificently celebrated. §. II. The death of IEHOIADA, and Apostasie of IOAS. BVt this endured no longer than the life of Iehoiada the Priest: who ha∣uing liued an hundred and thirtie yeeres, dyed before his Countrie could haue spared him. He was buried among the Kings of , as he well deserued, hauing preserued the race of them, and restored the true Religion, which the late Princes of that house, by attempting to eradicate, failed but a little, of rooting vp themselues, and all their issue. Yet his honorable Funerall seemes to haue beene giuen to him, at the motion of the peo∣ple; it being said, They buried him in the Citte of DAVID. As for the King himselfe, who did owe to him no lesse than his Crowne and life, he is not likely to haue beene Author of it, seeing that he was as easily comforted after his death, as if hee had thereby beene discharged of some heauie debt. For after the death of Iehoiada, when the Princes of Iuda beganne to flatter their King, he soone forgate, not onely the benefits, receiued by this worthie man his old Councellour, but also the good precepts which he had receiued from him, yea and God himselfe, the Author of all goodnesse. These Princes drew him to the worship of Idols, wherewith Iehoram and Athalia had so infected the Countrie, in fifteene or sixteene yeeres; that thirtie yeeres, or there-about, of the raigne of Ioas, wherein the true Religion was exercised, were not able to cleere it from that mis∣chiefe. The King himselfe, when once hee was entred into these courses, ranne on head-long, as one that thought it a roken of his libertie, to despise the seruice of God; and a manifest proofe of his being now King indeede, that hee regarded no longer the sowre admonitions of deuout Priests. Hereby it appeares, that his for∣mer zeale was onely counterfaited, wherein like an actor vpon the stage, he had stri∣uen to expresse much more liuely affection, than they could shew, that were indeed religious. §. III. The and time of the Syrians inuading Iuda in the dayes of IOAS. BVt God, from whom hee was broken loose, gaue him ouer into the hands of men, that would not easily be shaken off. Hazael King of A∣ram, hauing taken Gath a Towne of the , addressed himselfe towards Ierusalem, whither the little distance of way, and great hope of a rich bootie, did inuite him. He had an Armie heartned by many victories, to hope for more; and for ground of the warre (if his ambition cared for pretences) it was enough, that the Kings of Iuda had assisted the Israelites, in their en∣terprises vpon Aram, at Ramoth Gilead. Yet I thinke he did not want some further instigation. For if the Kingdome of Iuda had molested the Aramites, in the time of his predecessour, this was throughly recompensed, by forbearing to succour Israel, and leauing the ten Tribes in their extreme miserie, to the furie of Hazael himselfe. Neither is it likely, that Hazael should haue gone about to awake a sleeping Dogge, and stirre vp against himselfe a powerfull enemie, before hee had assured the con∣quest of Israel, that betweene Ierusalem and his owne Kingdome, if some opor∣tunitie had not promised such easie and good successe, as might rather aduance, than any way disturbe, his future proceedings against the ten Tribes. Wherefore I hold it probable, that the sonnes of Athalia, mentioned before, were with him in this action, promising (as men expelled their Countries vsually doe) to draw many partakers of their owne to his side; and not to remaine, as Ioas did, a neutrall in the warre betweene him and Israel, but to ioyne all their forces with his, as they had cause, for the rooting out of Iehu his posteritie, who, like a bloudie Traytor, had vt∣terly destroyed all the kindred of the Queenes, their mother, euen the whole house of Ahab, to which he was a subiect. If this were so, Hazael had the more apparant reason to inuade the Kingdome of Iuda. Howsoeuer it were, wee finde it plainely, that Ioas was afraid of him, and therefore tooke all the hallowed things, and all the gold 2. King. 12. 18. that was found in the treasures of the house of the Lord or in his owne house, with which present hee redeemed his peace: the Syrian (questionlesse) thinking it a better bar∣gaine, to get so much readily paid into his hand for nothing, than to hazard the as∣surance of this, for the possibilitie of not much more. So Hazael departed with a rich bootie of vnhappie treasure which, belonging to the liuing God, remayned a small while in the possession of this mightie, yet corruptible man, but sent him quickly to the graue. For in the thirtie seuenth of Ioas, which was the fifteenth of Iehoahaz, he made this purchase; but in the same or the very next yeere he died, lea∣uing all that he had vnto his Sonne Benhadad, with whom these treasures prospered none otherwise, than ill-gotten goods are wont. This enterprise of Hazael is, by some, confounded with that warre of the vpon Iuda, mentioned in the second Booke of Chronicles. But the reasons al∣leaged by them that hold the contrarie opinion, doe forcibly prooue, that it was not all one warre. For the former was compounded without bloud shed or fight; in the later, Ioas tryed the fortune of a battaile, wherein being put to the worst, hee lost all his Princes, and hardly escaped with life: In the one, Hazael himselfe was pre∣sent; in the other, he was not named: but contrariwise, the King of Aram then reig∣ning (who may seeme to haue then beene the Sonne of Hazael ) is said to haue beene at . The first Atmie came to conquer, and was so great, that it terrified the King of Iuda; The second was a small companie of men, which did animate Ioas (in 2. . 24. 24. vaine, for God was against him) to deale with them, as hauing a very great Armie. Now, concerning the time of this former inuasion, I cannot perceiue that God forsooke him, till he had first forsaken God. There are indeede some, very learned, who thinke that this expedition of Hazael was in the time of Iehoiada the Priest, be∣cause that storie is ioyned vnto the restauration of the Temple. This had beene probable, if the death of Iehoiada had beene afterwards mentioned in that place of the second Booke of Kings, or if the Apostasie of Ioas or any other matter implying so much, had followed in the relation. For it is not indeede to be doubted, that the Lord of all may dispose of all things, according to his owne will and pleasure, nei∣ther was he more vniust in the afflictions of Iob that righteous man, or the death of Iosias that godly King, than in the plagues which he laid vpon Pharaoh, or his iudge∣ments vpon the house of Ahab. But it appeares plainely, that the rich furniture of the Temple, and the magnificent seruice of God therewithall, which are ioyned to∣gether, were vsed in the house of the Lord continually, all the dayes of IEHOIADA; soone 2. . 24. 14. after whose death, if not immediately vpon it, that is (as some very learnedly collect) in the sixe, or thirtie seuenth yeere of this his raigne, the King falling away from the God of his Father, became a foule Idolater. And indeede we commonly obserue, that the crosses which it hath pleased God sometimes to lay vpon his seruants, without any cause notorious in the eyes of men, haue alwayes tended vnto the bettering of their good. In which respect, euen the sufferings of the blessed Martyrs ( the death of his Saints being precious in the sight Psal. 115. 15. of the Lord ) are to their great aduantage. But with and rebellious men, God kee∣peth a more euen, and more strict account; permitting vsually their faults to get the start of their punishment, and either delaying his vengeance (as with the ) till their wickednesse be full: or not working their amendment by his correcti∣on, but suffering them to runne on in their wicked courses, to their greater miserie. So hath he dealt with many; and so it appeares that he dealt with Ioas. For this vn∣happie man did not onely continue an obstinate Idolater, but grew so of God and all goodnesse, as if he had strouen to exceede the wickednesse of all that went before him, and to leaue such a villainous patterne vnto others, as few or none of the most barbarous Tyrants should indure to imitate. §. IIII. How ZACHARIA was murdered by IOAS. SVndry Prophets hauing laboured in vaineto reclaime the people from their superstition, Zacharia the sonne of Iehoiada the Priest, was stirred vp at length by the Spirit of God, to admonish them of their wicked∣nesse, and make them vnderstand the punishment due vnto it, where∣of they stood in danger. This was a man so honourable, and sonne to a man so exceeding beloued in his life time, and reuerenced, that if Ioas had reputed him (as Ahab did Elias ) his open enemie, yet ought he in common ho∣nestie, to haue cloaked his ill affection, and haue vsed at least some part of the re∣spect that was due to such a person: On the other side, the singular affection which he and his father had borne vnto the King, and the vnrecountable benefits, which they had done vnto him, from his first infancie, were such, as should haue placed Zacharia in the most hearty and assured loue of Ioas, yea though he had beene other∣wise a man of very small marke, and not verie good condition. The truth is, that the message of a Prophet sent from God, should bee heard with reuerence, how simple soeuer he appeares that brings it. But this King Ioas, hauing alreadie scorned the admonitions and protestations of such Prophets as first were sent, did now deale with Zacharia, like as the wicked husbandman in that parable of our Sauiour, dealt with the heire of the Vineyard; who said, This is the heire, come let vs kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours. By killing Zacharia he thought to become an absolute Com∣mander, Luke 20. 14. supposing belike that hee was no free Prince, as long as any one durst tell him the plaine truth, how great soeuer that mans deseruing were, that did so, yea though Gods commandement required it. So they conspired against this holy Prophet, and stoned him to death at the Kings appointment; but whether by any forme of open Law, as was practised vpon Naboth; or whether surprising him by any close treacherie, I doe neither reade nor can conjecture. The dignitie of his person, considered together with their treacherous conspiracie, makes it probable, that they durst not call him into publique judgement, though the manner of his death, being such as was commonly, by order of Law, inflicted vpon malefactors, may argue the contrarie. Most likely it is, that the Kings commandement, by which he suffered, tooke place in stead of Law: which exercise of meere power (as hath beene alreadie noted) was nothing strange among the Kings of Iuda. §. V. How IOAS was shamefully beaten by the Aramites, and of his death. THis odious murder, committed by an vnthankfull snake vpon the man in whose bosome he had beene fostered, as of it selfe alone it sufficed, to make the wretched Tyrant hatefull to men of his owne time, and his memorie detested in all ages; so had it the well described curse of the blessed Martyr, to accompanie it vnto the throne of God, and to call for vengeance from thence, which fell downe swiftly, and heauily vpon the head of that vngratefull monster. It was the last yeere of his raigne; the end of his time comming then vpon him, when he thought himselfe beginning to liue how he listed without controulement. When that yeere was expired, the Aramites came into the Countrie, rather as may seeme to get pillage, than to performe any great a∣ction; for they came with a small companie of men: but God had intended to doe more 2. Chron. 24. 24. by them, than they themselues did hope for. That Ioas naturally was a coward, his bloudie malice against his best friend, is, in my iudgement proofe sufficient: though otherwise his base composition with Ha∣zael, when hee might haue (as his after him did muster) three hun∣dred thousand chosen men for the warre, doth well enough shew his temper. Yet now he would needs bee valiant and make his people know, how stout of dispositi∣on their King was, when he might haue his owne will. But his timorous heart was not well cloaked. For to encounter with a few bands of rouers, hee tooke a verie great Armie, so that wise-men might well perceiue, that he knew what he did, ma∣king shew as if he would fight for his Countrie, and expose his person to danger of warre, when as indeed all was meere oftentation, and no perill to be feared; he going forth so strongly appointed, against so weake enemies. Thus might wisemen thinke, and laugh at him in secret; considering what adoe he made about that, which in all reason was (as they say) a thing of nothing. But God, before whom the wisedome of this world is foolishnesse, did laugh not onely at this vaine-glorious King, but at them that thought their King secure, by reason of the multitude that he drew along with him. When the Aramites and King Ioas met, whether it were by some folly of the leaders, or by some amazement happening among the Souldiers, or by whatsoeuer meanes it pleased God to worke, so it was, that that great Armie of Iuda receiued a notable ouer-throw, and all the Princes were destroyed: the Princes of Iuda, at whose perswasion the King had become a Rebell to the King of Kings. As for Ioas himselfe (as Abulensis and others expound the storie) hee was sorely beaten and hurt by them, being (as they thinke) taken and shamefully tormented, to wring out of him an excessiue ransome. And surely, all circumstances doe greatly strengthen this conjecture. For the text (in the old translation) saith, they exercised vpon Ioas ignominious iudgements; and that departing from him, they dismissed him in great languor. All which argues, that they had him in their hands, and handled him ill- . Now at that time Ioas the son of raigned ouer Israel, and Benhadad the son of Hazael ouer the Syrians in ; the one a valiant vnder-taking Prince, raised vp by God to re∣store the State of his miserable Countrie; the other inferior euery way to his father, of whose purchases he lost a great part, for want of skill to keepe it. The difference in condition found betweene these two Princes, promising no other euent than such as after followed, might haue giuen to the King of Iuda good cause to bee bold, and plucke vp his spirits, which Hazael had beaten downe, if God had not beene against him. But his fearefull heart being likely to quake vpon any apprehen∣sion of danger, was able to put the Syrian King in hope, that by terrifying him with some shew of warre at his doores, it were easie to make him craue any tolerable conditions of peace. The vnexpected good successe hereof, alreadie related, and the (perhaps as inexpected) ill successe, which the Aramites found in their following warres against the King of Israel, sheweth plainely the weaknesse of all earthly might, resisting the power of the Almightie. For by his ordinance, both the Kingdome of Iuda, after more than fortie yeeres time of gathering strength, was vnable to driue out a small companie of enemies; and the Kingdome of Israel, ha∣uing so beene trodden downe by Hazael, that onely fiftie Horse-men, ten Cha∣riots, and ten thousand Foot-men were left, preuailed against his Sonne, and re∣couered all from the victorious Aramites. But examples hereof are euery-where found, and therefore I will not insist vpon this; though indeed we should not, if we be Gods children, thinke it more tedious to heare long and frequent reports of our heauenly Fathers honour, than of the noble acts performed by our fore father vpon earth. When the Aramites had what they listed, and saw that they were not able, be∣ing so few, to take any possession of the Countrie, they departed out of loden with spoile, which they sent to Damascus, themselues belike falling vpon the ten Tribes, where it is to be thought that they sped not halfe so well. The King of Iuda being in ill case, was killed on his bed when he came home, by the sonnes of an Ammonitesse, and of a Moabitesse, whom some (because onely their Mothers names being strangers, are expressed) thinke to haue beene bond-men. Whether it were contempt of his fortune, or feare, lest (as Tyrants vse) hee should reuenge his disa∣ster vpon them, imputing it to their fault, or whatsoeuer else it were that animated them to murder their King; the Scripture tells vs plainly, that, sor the bloud of the 2. . 24. 25. children of IEHOIADA, this befell him. And the same appeares to haue beene vsed as the pretence of their conspiracie, in excuse of the fact when it was done. For Amazia, the sonne and successor of Ioas, durst not punish them, till his Kingdome was established; but contrariwise, his bodie was judged vnworthie of buriall in the Sepulchres of the Kings: whereby it appeares, that the death of caused the treason, wrought against the King, to find more approbation, than was requisite, among the people, though afterwards it was recompensed by his Sonne, vpon the Traytors, with well-deserued death. §. VI. Of the Princes liuing in the time of IOAS: Of the time when Carthage was built; and of DIDO. THere liued with Ioas, Mezades and Diognetus in Athens: Eudemus and Aristomedes in Corinth: about which time Agrippa Syluius, and after him Syluius Alladius, were Kings of the Albans in Italie. Ocraza∣pes, commonly called Anacyndaraxes, the thirtie seuenth King suc∣ceeding vnto Ophratanes, began his raigne ouer the Assyrians, about the eighteenth yeere of Ioas, which lasted fortie two yeeres. In the sixteenth of Ioas, Cephrenes, the fourth from Sesac, succeeded vnto Cheops in the Kingdome of Aegypt, and held it fiftie yeeres. In this time of Ioas, was likewise the raigne of Pigmalion in Tyre, and the foun∣dation of Carthage by Dido; the building of which Citie is, by diuers Authors, pla∣ced in diuers ages, some reporting it to be seuentie yeeres yonger than Rome, others aboue foure hundred yeeres elder, few or none of them giuing any reason of their assertions, but leauing vs vncertaine whom to follow: , who had read the Annalls of Tyre, counting one hundred fortie and three yeeres and eight moneths from the building of Salomons Temple, in the twelfth yeere of Hyram King of Tyre, Iosep. Cont. App. lib. 1. to the founding of Carthage by Dido, in the seuenth of Pigmalion. The particulars of this accompt (which is not rare in Iosephus ) are very perplexed, and serue not ve∣rie well to make cleere the totall summe. But whether it were so that Iosephus did omit, or else that he did mis-write, some number of the yeeres, which hee reckoneth in Fractions, as they were diuided among the Kings of Tyre, from Hyram to Pigma∣lion; we may well enough beleeue, that the Tyrian writers, out of whose Bookes he giues vs the whole summe, had good meanes to know the truth, and could rightly reckon the difference of time, betweene two workes no longer following one the o∣ther, than the memorie of three or foure generations might easily reach. This hun∣dred fortie and foure yeeres current, after the building of Salomons Temple, being the eleuenth yeere of Ioas, was a hundred fortie and three yeeres before the birth of Rome and after the destruction of Troy, two hundred eightie and nine: a time so long after the death of Aeneas, that wee might truely conclude all to bee fabulous which Virgil hath written of Dido, as Ausonius noteth, who doth honor her Statua with this Epigramme. ILLA ego sum DIDO vultu quam conspicis hospes, Auson. Ep. 117. Assimulata modis mirificis. Talis eram, sed non MARO quam mihi finxit er at mens, Vita nec laeta cupidinibus ( nec AENEAS vidit me Troius vnquam Nec Libyam aduenit, classibus Iliacis. Sed furias fugiens, arma procacis IARBAE, Seruaui, fateor, morte pudicitiam; Pectore transfixo, castos quod pertulit enses) Non furor, aut laeso amore dolor. Sic cecidisse : vixi sine vulnere famae, Vlta virum, posit is moenibus oppetij. Inuida cur in me stimulasti Musa MARONEM, Fingeret vt nostrae damna pudicitiae? Vos magis historicis lectores credite de me Quam qui furta Deum canunt. Falsidici vates: temerant qui carmine , deos assimulant vitijs. Which in effect is this, I Am that DIDO which thou here do'st see, Cunningly framed in beauteous Imag'rie. Like this I was, but had not such a soule, As MARO fained, incestuous and foule. AENEAS neuer with his Troian hoast Beheld my face, or landed on this coast. But flying proud IARBAS villanie, Not mou'd by furious loue or iealousie; I did with weapon chast, to saue my fame, Make way for death vntimely, ere it came. This was my end; but first I built a Towne, Reueng'd my husbands death, liu'd with renowne. Why did'st thou stirre vp VIRGIL, enuious Muse, Falsely my name and honour to abuse? Readers, beleeue Historians; not those Which to the world IOVES thefts and vice expose. Poets are lyers, and for verses sake Will make the gods of humane crimes partake. From the time of Dido vnto the first Punick warre, that Carthage grew and flou∣rished in wealth and conquests, we find in many histories: but in particular we find little of the Carthaginian affaires before that warre, excepting those few things that are recorded of their attempts vpon the Isle of Sicil. Wee will therefore deferre the relation of matters concerning that mightie Citie, vntill such time as they shall encounter with the State of Rome, by which it was finally destroyed; and prosecute in the meane while the Historie that is now in hand. §. VII. The beginning of AMAZIA his reigne. Of IOAS King of Israel, and ELISHA the Prophet. AMAZIAS, the sonne of Ioash, being twentie fiue yeeres old when his father dyed, tooke possession of the Kingdome of Iuda, wherein he la∣boured so to demeane himselfe, as his new beginning raigne might be least offensiue. The Law of Moses he profesled to obserue; which howsoeuer it had beene secretly despised since the time of Iehoram, by many great persons of the Land, yet had it by prouision of good Princes, yea and of bad ones (in their best times) imitating the good, but especially by the care of holy Priests, taken such deepe roote in the peoples hearts, that no King might hope to be very plausible, who did not conforme himselfe vnto it. And at that pre∣sent time, the slaughter, which the Aramites had made of all the Princes, who had with-drawne the late King from the seruice of God, being seconded by the death of the King himselfe, euen whilest that execrable murther, committed by the King vp∣on , was yet fresh in memorie, did serue as a notable example of Gods justice against Idolaters, both to animate the better sort of the people in holding the Re∣ligion of their fathers, and to discourage Amazia from following the way, which led to such an euill end. He therefore, hauing learned of his father the arte of dissimu∣lation, did not only forbeare to punish the Traytors that had slaine King Ioas, but gaue way to the time, and suffered the dead bodie to be interred, as that of Iehoram formerly had beene, in the Citie of Dauid, yet not among the Sepulchres of the Kings of Iuda. Neuerthelesse, after this, when (belike) the noise of the people ha∣uing wearied it selfe into silence, it was found that the Conspirators (howsoeuer their deede done, was applauded as the handie-worke of God) had neither any mightie partakers in their fact, nor strong maintayners of their persons, but re∣sted secure, as hauing done well, seeing it was not ill taken; the King, who perceiued his gouernement well established, called them into question, at such a time, as the heate of mens affections, being well allayed, it was easie to distinguish betweene their treasons and Gods judgement, which, by their treasons, had taken plausible ef∣fect. So they were put to death without any tumult, and their children (as the Law did require) were suffered to liue; which could not but giue contentment to the people, seeing that their King did the office of a iust Prince, rather than of a re∣uenging sonne. This being done, and his owne life the better secured, by such ex∣emplarie iustice, against the like attempts; Amazia carried himselfe outwardly as a Prince well affected to Religion, and so continued in rest, about twelue or thirteene yeeres. As Amazia gathered strength in Iuda by the commoditie of a long peace, so Ioas the Israelite grew as fast in power, by following the warre hotly against the Ara∣mites. He was a valiant and fortunate Prince, yet an Idolater, as his Predecessors had beene, worshipping the Calues of . For this sinne had God so plagued the house of Iehu, that the ten Tribes wanted little of being vtterly consumed, by Hazael and Benhadad, in the time of Iehu and his sonne Iehoahaz. But as Gods be∣nefits to Iehu, sufficed not to with-draw him from this politique Idolatrie; so were the miseries, rewarding that impietie, vnable to reclaime Iehoahaz from the same im∣pious course: yet the mercy of God beholding the trouble of Israel, condescended vnto the prayers of this vngodly Prince, euen then when hee and his miserable sub∣jects, were obstinate in following their owne abominable wayes. Therefore in temporall matters, the ten Tribes recouered apace, but the fauour of God, which had beene infinitely more worth, I doe not find, nor beleeue, that they sought; that they had it not, I finde in the words of the Prophet, saying plainly to AMAZIA, The 2. . 25. 7. Lord is not with Israel, neither with all the house of EPHRAIM. Whether it were so, that the great Prophet Elisha, who liued in those times, did fore-tell the prosperitie of the Israelites vnder the Raigne of Ioas; or whether Iehoa∣haz, wearied and broken with long aduersitie, thought it the wisest way, to dis∣charge himselfe in part of the heauie cares attending those vnhappy Syrian warres, by laying the burthen vpon his hopefull sonne; we finde that in the thirtie-seuenth 2. Kings 13. 10. yeere of IOAS, King of Iuda, IOAS the sonne of IEHOAHAZ began to raigne ouer Is∣rael in Samaria, which was in the fifteenth of his fathers raigne, and some two or three yeeres before his death. It appeares that this yong Prince, euen from the beginning of his Rule, did so well husband that poore stocke which hee receiued from his Father, of ten Cha∣riots, fiftie Horse-men, and ten thousand Foot, that he might seeme likely to proue a thriuer. Among other circumstances, the wordes which he spake to the Pro∣phet, argue no lesse. For Ioas visiting the Prophet, who lay sicke, spake vnto him thus; O my father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horse-men of the same: by 2. Kings 13. 14. which manner of speech hee did acknowledge, that the prayers of this holy man had stood his Kingdome in more stead, than all the Horses and Chariots could doe. This Prophet who succeeded vnto Elias, about the first yeere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab King of Israel, dyed (as some haue probably collected) about the third or fourth yeere of this Ioas, the Nephew of Iehu. To shew how the Spirit of Elias was doubled, or did rest vpon him; it exceedeth my facultie. This is recorded of him, that hee did not onely raise a dead child vnto life, as Elias had done, but when hee himselfe was dead, it pleased God that his dead bones should restore life vnto a car∣casse, which touched them in the graue. In fine, hee bestowed, as a legacie, three vi∣ctories vpon King Ioas, who thereby did Israel in a faire way of recouering all that the Aramites had vsurped, and weakning the Kings of in such sort, that they were neuer after terrible to Samaria. §. VIII. Of AMAZIA his warre against EDOM; His Apostasie; and ouerthrow by IOAS. THe happie successe which Ioas had found in his warre against the Ara∣mites, was such as might kindle in Amazia a desire of vndertaking some expedition, wherein himselfe might purchase the like honour. His kingdome could furnish three hundred thousand seruiceable men for the wars; and his treasures were sufficient for the payment of these, and the hire of many more. Cause of warre he had very iust against the Edomites, who hauing rebelled in the time of his grand-father Iehoram, had about fiftie yeeres beene vnreclaymed, partly by meanes of the troubles happening in Iuda, partly through the sloth and timorousuesse of his father Ioas. Yet, forasmuch as the men of Iuda had in many yeeres beene without all exercise of warre (excepting that vnhappie fight wherein they were beaten by a few bands of the Aramites ) he held it a point of wisedome to increase his forces, with Souldiers waged out of Is∣rael, whence hee hired for an hundred talents of siluer, an hundred thousand valiant 2. Cbron. 21. 6. Ios. . Iud. lib. 9. 6. 10. men, as the Scripture telleth vs, though Iosephus diminish the number, saying that they were but twentie thousand. This great Armie, which with so much cost Amazia had hired out of Israel, he was faine to dismisse, before he had imployed it, being threatned by a Prophet with ill successe, if hee strengthned himselfe with the helpe of those men, whom God (though in mercy hee gaue them victorie against the cruell Aramites ) did not loue, because they were Idolaters. The Israelites therefore departed in great anger, ta∣king in ill part this dismission, as an high disgrace; which to reuenge, they fell vpon a peece of Iuda in their returne, and shewed their malice in the slaughter of three thousand men; and some spoile, which they carryed away. But Amazia with his owne forces, knowing that God would be assistant to their journey, entered coura∣giously into the Edomites Countrie; ouer whom obtayning victorie, hee slew ten thousand, and tooke other ten thousand prisoners, all which hee threw from an high rocke; holding them, it seemes, rather as Traytors, than as iust enemies. This victorie did not seeme to reduce Edom vnder the subjection of the crowne of Iuda, which might be the cause of that seueritie, which was vsed to the prisoners; the E∣domites that had escaped, refusing to buy the liues of their friends and kinsmen at so deare a rate, as the losse of their owne libertie. Some townes in mount Seir, Amazia tooke, as appeares by his carrying away the Idols thence; but it is like they were the places most indefencible, in that he left no garrisons there, whereby he might ano∣ther yeere the better haue pursued the conquest of the whole Countrie. Howsoeuer it were, he got both honor by the journie, & gaines enough, had he not lost himselfe. Among other spoiles of the Edomites, were carried away their gods, which be∣ing vanquished and taken prisoners, did deserue well to be led in triumph. But they contrariwise, I know not by what strange witchcraft, so besotted this vnworthie King Amazia, that hee set them vp to bee his gods, and worshipped them, and burned in∣cense 2. Cbron. 25. 14. vnto them. For this when he was rebuked by a Prophet sent from God, hee gaue a churlish and threatning answere; asking the Prophet, who made him a Counseller, and bid∣ding him hold his peace for feare of the worst. If either the costly stuffe, whereof these Idols were made, or the curious workemanship and beautie, with which they were adorned by Artificers, had rauished the Kings fancie; me thinkes, he should haue rather turned them to matter of profit, or kept them as house-hold ornaments and things of pleasure, than thereby haue suffered himselfe to be blinded, with such vnreasonable deuotion towards them. If the superstitious account wherein the Edo∣mites had held them, were able to worke much vpon his imagination; much more should the bad seruice which they had done to their old Clients, haue moued him thereupon to laugh, both at the Edomites, and them. Wherefore it seemes to me, that the same affections caried him from God, vnto the seruice of Idols, which after∣wards mooued him to talke so roughly to the Prophet reprehending him. He had alreadie obeyed the warning of God by a Prophet, and sent away such auxiliarie forces as he had gathered out of Israel; which done, it is said, that he was encouraged, 2. Cbron. 25. 11. and led forth his people, thinking belike, that God would now rather assist him by mi∣racle, than let him faile of obtayning all his hearts desire. But with better reason he should haue limited his desires by the will of God, whose pleasure it was, that Esau, hauing broken the yoke of Iacob from his necke, accordingly as Isaac had foretold, should no more become his seruant. If therefore Amazia did hope to reconquer all the Countrie of Edom, he failed of his expectation; yet so, that he brought home both profit and honor, which might haue well contented him. But there is a foolish and a wretched pride, wherwith men being transported, can ill endure to ascribe vnto God the honour of those actions, in which it hath pleased him to vse their owne industrie, courage, or fore-sight. Therefore it is commonly seene, that they, who entring into battaile, are carefull to pray for aide from heauen, with due acknowledgement of his power, who is the giuer of victorie; when the field is won, doe vaunt of their owne exploits: one telling how he got such a ground of aduantage; another, how he gaue checke to such a battallion; a third, how hee seized on the enemies Canon; euery one striuing to magnifie himselfe, whilest all forget God, as one that had not beene present in the action. To ascribe to fortune the effects of another mans vertue, is, I confesse, an argument of malice. Yet this is true, that as he which findeth better successe, than he did, or in reason might ex∣pect, is deeply bound to acknowledge God the Authour of his happinesse; so hee whose meere wisedome and labour hath brought things to a prosperous issue, is doubly bound to shew himselfe thankefull, both for the victorie, and for those ver∣tues by which the victorie was gotten. And indeed so farre from weakenesse is the nature of such thankesgiuing, that it may wel be called the height of magnanimity; no vertue being so truly heroicall, as that by which the spirit of a man aduanceth it selfe with confidence of acceptation, vnto the loue of God. In which sense it is a braue speech that Euander in Virgil, vseth to Aeneas, none but a Christian being ca∣pable of the admonition, Aude hospes contemnere opes, & te quoque dignum Finge Deo. With this Philosophie Amazia (as appeares by his carriage) troubled not his head: he had shewed himselfe a better man of warre than any King of Iuda, since the time of Iehosaphat, and could be well contented, that his people should thinke him little inferior to Dauid: of which honour hee saw no reason why the Prophets should rob him, who had made him loose a hundred talents, and done him no piea∣sure, he hauing preuailed by plaine force and good conduct, without any miracle at all. That he was distempered with such vaine thoughts as these (besides the wit∣nesse of his impietie following) Iosephus doth testifie; saying, That hee despised Ios. Ant. l. GOD, and that being puft vp with his good successe, of which neuerthelesse hee would not acknowledge God to bee the Authour, hee commanded Ioas King of I∣srael to become his subject, and to let the tenne Tribes acknowledge him their So∣ueraigne, as they had done his Ancestors King Dauid and King Salomon. Some thinke that his quarrell to Ioas was rather grounded vpon the done to him by the Israelites, whom he dismissed in the journey against Mount Seir. And likely it is, that the sense of a late wrong had more power to stirre him vp, than the remem∣brance of an olde title, forgotten long since, and by himselfe neglected thirteene or foureteene yeeres. Neuerthelesse it might so be, that when he was thus prouoked, he thought it not enough to requite new wrongs, but would also call olde matters into question; that so the Kings of Israel might, at the , learne to keepe their subjects from offending Iuda, for feare of endangering their owne Crownes. Had Amazia desired onely recompence for the injurie done to him, it is not improbable that he should haue had some reasonable answere from Ioas, who was not desirous to fight with him. But the answere which Ioas returned, likening himselfe to a Cedar, and Amazia in respect of him to no better than a , shewes that the challenge was made in insolent tearmes, stuft perhaps with such proud comparison of nobilitie, as might be made (according to that which Iosephus hath written) betweene a King of ancient race, and one of lesse nobilitie than vertue. It is by Sophocles reported of Aiax, that when, going to the warre of Troy, his fa∣ther in A∣iace Lon. did bid him to be valiant, and get victorie by Gods assistance, he made answere, that by Gods assistance, a coward could get victorie, but he would get it alone with∣out such helpe: after which proud speech, though hee did many valiant acts, hee had small thankes, and finally killing himselfe in a madnesse, whereinto he fell vp∣on disgrace receiued, was hardly allowed the honour of buriall. That Amazia did vtter such words, I doe not find: but hauing once entertained the thoughts, which are parents of such words, hee was rewarded with successe according. The verie first counsaile wherein this Warre was concluded, serues to proue that hee was a wise Prince indeed at Ierusalem, among his Parasites; but a foole when hee had to deale with his equals abroad. For it was not all one, to fight with the Edomites, a weake people, trusting more in the site of their Countrey than the valour of their Souldiers; and to encounter with Ioas, who from so poore beginnings had raysed himselfe to such strength, that hee was able to lend his friend a hundred thousand men, and had all his Nation exercised, and trained vp, in a long victorious warre. But as Amazia discouered much want of judgement, invndertaking such a match; so in prosecuting the businesse, when it was set on foot, hee behaued himselfe as a man of little experience, who hauing once onely tried his fortune, and found it to be good, thought that in warre there was nothing else to doe, than send a defiance, fight, and winne. Ioas on the contrarie side; hauing beene accustomed to deale with a stronger enemie than the King of Iuda, vsed that , which peraduenture had often stood him in good stead against the Aramite. Hee did not sit waiting till the enemies brake in and wasted his Countrie, but presented himselfe with an in Iuda, readie to bid battaile to Amazia, and saue him the labour of a long journie. This could not but greatly discourage those of ; who (besides the impression of feare which an inuasion beats into people, not inured to the like) ha∣uing deuoured, in their greedie hopes, the spoyle of Israel, fully perswading them∣selues to get as much, and at as easie rate as in the journie of Edom; were so farre disappointed of their expectation, that well they might suspect all new assurance of good lucke, when the olde had thus beguiled them. All this notwithstanding, their King that had stomacke enough to challenge the patrimonie of Salomon, thought like another Dauid, to winne it by the sword. The issue of which foole∣hardinesse might easily be foreseene in humane reason; comparing together, either the two Kings, or the qualitie of their Armies, or the first and ominous beginning of the Warre. But meere humane wisedome, howsoeuer it might foresee much, could not haue prognosticated all the mischiefe that fell vpon Amazia. For as soone as the two Armies came in sight, God, whose helpe this wretched man had so de∣spised, did (as Iosephus reports it) strike such terrour and amazement into the men of Ios. Ant. l 9. c. 10 Iuda, that without one blow giuen, they fled all away, leauing their King to shift for himselfe, which hee did so ill, that his enemie had soone caught him, and made him change his glorious humour into most abiect basenesse. That the Armie which fled, sustained any other losse than of honour, I neither find in the Scriptures nor in Iosephus; it being likely that the soone beginning of their flight, which made it the more , made it also the more safe. But of the mischiefe that followed this ouerthrow, it was Gods will that Amazia himselfe should sustaine the whole dis∣grace. For Ioas carried him directly to Ierusalem, where he bad him procure that the gates might be opened, to let him in and his Armie; threatning him otherwise with present death. So much amazed was the miserable caytiue, with these dreadfull wordes, that he durst none other, than perswade the Citizens, to yeeld them∣selues to the mercie of the Conqueror. The Towne, which afterwardes being in weaker , held out two yeeres, against Nebuchadnezzar, was vtterly dismayed, when the King, that should haue giuen his life to saue it, vsed all his force of com∣mand and intreatie to betray it. So the gates of were opened to Ioas, with which honour (greater than any King of Israel had euer obtained) hee could not rest contented, but, the more to despight Amazia and his people, he caused foure hundred cubits of the wall to be throwne downe, and entred the Citie in his Char∣riot through that breach, carrying the King before him, as in triumph. This done, he sackt the Temple, and the Kings Palace, and so, taking hostages of Amazia, hee dismissed the poore creature that was glad of his life, and returned to Samaria. §. IX. A discourse of the reasons hindering IOAS from vniting IVDA to the Crowne of Israel, when he had wonne Ierusalem, and held AMAZIA prisoner. The end of IOAS his Raigne. WEE may justly maruaile how it came to passe, that Ioas, being thus in possession of Ierusalem, hauing the King in his hands, his enemies forces broken, and his owne entire, could bee so contented to depart quietly, with a little spoyle, when hee might haue seized vpon the whole Kingdome. The raigne of Athalia had giuen him cause to hope, that the issue of Dauid might be dispossessed of that crowne; his owne Nobilitie, be∣ing the sonne and grand childe of Kings, together with the famous acts that hee had done, were enough to make the people of Iuda thinke highly of him; who might also haue preferred his forme of gouernment, before that of their owne Kings, e∣specially at such a time, when a long succession of wicked Princes had smothered the thankes, which were due to the memorie of a few good ones. The commoditie that would haue ensued, vpon the vnion of all the twelue Tribes, vnder one Prince, is so apparant, that I need not to insist on it. That any message from God forbad the Israelites (as afterwards in the victorie which Peka the sonne of Romelia got vpon Ahaz ) to turne his present aduantage, to the best vse, wee doe not reade. All this makes it the more difficult to resolue the question, why a Prince so well exercised, as Ioas had bin, in recouering his owne, and winning from his enemy, should forsake the possession of Ierusalem, and wilfully neglect the possibilities, or rather cast away the full assurance of so faire a conquest, as the Kingdome of Iuda. But concerning that point, which, of all others, had beene most materiall, I meane the desire of the vanquished people to accept the Israelite for their King, it is plaine∣ly seene, that entring Ierusalem in triumphant manner, Ioas was vnable to concoct his owne prosperitie. For the opening of the gates had beene enough to haue let him not only into the Citie, but into the Royall Throne, and the peoples hearts, whom by faire (especially hauing sure meanes of compulsion) hee might haue made his owne, when they saw themselues betrayed, and basely giuen away by him whose they had beene before. The faire marke which this opportunity pre∣sented, he did not ayme at, because his ambition was otherwise and more meanely busied, in leuelling at the glorie of a triumphant through a breach. Yet this errour might haue beene corrected well enough, if entring as an ene∣mie, and shewing what he could doe, by spending his anger vpon the walles, he had within the Citie done offices a friend, and laboured to shew good will to the in∣habitants. But when his pride had done, his couetousnesse beganne, and sought to please it selfe, with that which is commonly most readie to the spoyler, yet should be most forborne. The treasure wherewith Sesac, Hazael, and the Philistims, men ig∣norant of the true God & his Religion, had quenched their greedy thirst, ought not to haue tempted the appetite of Ioas, who though an Idolatour, yet acknowledged also and worshipped the eternall God, whose Temple was at Ierusalem: Therefore when the people saw him take his way directly to that holy place, and lay his raue∣nous hands vpon the consecrated vessels, calling the family of Obed Edom (whose chil∣dren 1. Chron. 26. 15. had hereditarie charge of the treasurie) to a strict account, as if they had beene Offi∣cers of his owne Exchequer, they considered him rather as an execrable Church∣robber, than as a Noble Prince, an Israelite and their brother, though of another Tribe. Thus following that course, which the most vertuous King of our age (taxing it with the same phrase) hath wisely auoyded; by stealing a few Apples, hee lost the inheritance of the whole Orchard. The people detested him, and after the respite of a few dayes, might by comparing themselues one to one, perceiue his Souldiers to be no better than men of their owne mould, and inferio ur in number to the inhabitants of so great a Citie. It is not so easie to hold by force a mightie towne entered by capitulation, as to enter the gates opened by vnaduised feare. For when the Citizens, not being disarmed, recouer their spirits, and begin to vnderstand their first errour; they will thinke vpon euery aduantage, of place, of prouisions, of mul∣titude, yea of women armed with tile-stones, and rather choose by desperate reso∣lution, to correct the euills growne out of their former cowardice, than suffer those mischiefs to poyson the body, which in such halfe-conquests, are easily tasted in the mouth. A more example hereof cannot be desired, than the Citie of Flo∣rence, which through the weakenesse of Peter de Medices, gouerning therein as a Prince, was reduced into such hard termes, that it opened the gates vnto the French King Charles the Eighth, who not plainely professing himselfe either friend or foe to the Estate, entred the Towne, with his Armie, in triumphant manner, himselfe and his horse armed, with his lance vpon his thigh. Many insolencies were therein com∣mitted by the French, and much argument of quarrell ministred, betweene them and the Townes-men: so farre forth that the Florentines, to preserue their libertie, were driuen to prepare for fight. To conclude the matter, Charles propounds into∣lerable conditions, demanding huge summes of readie money, and the absolute Signorie of the State, as conquered by him, who entred the Citie in Armes. But Pe∣ter Caponi, a principall Citizen, catching these Articles from the Kings Secretarie, and tearing them before his face, bade him sound his trumpets, and they would ring their bells: which peremptorie wordes made the French bethinke themselues, and come readily to this agreement, that for fortie thousand pounds, and not halfe of that mony to be paid in hand, Charles should not onely depart in peace, but restore whatsoeuer he had of their Dominion, and continue their assured friend. So dange∣rous a matter did it seeme for that braue Armie, which in few moneths after wanne the Kingdome of Naples, to fight in the streets, against the armed multitude of that populous Citie. It is true, that Charles had other businesse (and so perhaps had Ioas, as shall anon be shewed) that called him away: but it was the apprehension of imminent danger that made him come to reason. In such cases the firing of houses, vsually drawes euery Citizen to saue his owne, leauing victorie to the Souldier: yet where the people are prepared and resolued, women can quench, as fast as the ene∣mie, hauing other things to looke vnto, can set on fire. And indeed that Comman∣der is more giuen to anger than regardfull of profit, who vpon the vncertaine hope of destroying a Towne, forsakes the assurance of a good composition. Diuersitie of circumstance may alter the case: it is enough to say, that it might be in Ierusalem, as we know it was in Florence. How strongly soeuer Ioas might hold himselfe within Ierusalem, he could not ea∣sily depart from thence, with his bootie safe, if the Armie of Iuda, which had beene more terrified than weakned in the late encounter, should re-enforce it selfe, and giue him a checke vpon the way. Wherefore it was wisely done of him, to take ho∣stages for his better securitie, his Armie being vpon returne, and better loden than when it came forth; for which causes it was the more vnapt to fight. Besides these impediments, within the Citie and without, seruing to coole the ambition of Ioas, and keepe it downe from aspiring to the Crowne of ; it ap∣peares that somewhat was newly fallen out, which had reference to the anger of Elisha the Prophet; who when this Ioas had smitten the ground with his arrowes thrice, told him that he should no oftner smite the Aramites. The three victories which Israel had against Aram, are by some, and with great probabilitie, referred vnto the fifth, sixth and seuenth yeeres of Ioas: after which time, if any losses ensu∣ing had blemished the former good successe, ill might the King of Israel haue like∣ned himselfe to a stately Cedar, and worse could hee haue either lent the one hundred thousand men, or meet him in battaile, who was able to bring into the field three hundred thousand of his owne. Seeing therefore it is made plaine by the words of Elisha, that after three victories, Ioas should find some change of for∣tune, and suffer losse; we must needs conclude, That the Aramite preuailed vpon him this yeere, it being the last of his Raigne. That this was so, and that the , taking aduantage of Ioas his absence, gaue such a blow to Israel, as the King at his returne was not able to remedie, but rather fell himselfe into new misfortunes, which increased the calamitie, wee may perceiue in that which is spoken of Ieroboam his sonne. For it is said, That the Lord saw the exceeding bitter afflictions of Israel, and that hauing not decreed to put out the name of Israel from vnder the heauen, he preserued them by the hand of IEROBOAM, the sonne of IOAS. This is enough to proue, that the victorious Raigne of Ioas was concluded with a sad catastrophe; the riches of the Temple hastning his miserie and death, as they had done with Sesac, Athalia, and Hazael, and as afterwards they wrought with Antiochus, Crassus, and o∣ther sacrilegious Potentates. Thus eyther through indignation conceiued against him, by the people of Ieru∣salem, and courage which they tooke to set vpon him within the Walls: or through preparation of the Armie that lay abroad in the Countrey, to bid him battaile in o∣pen field, and recouer by a new charge the honour which was lost at the former en∣counter; or through the miseries daily brought vpon his owne Countrey, by the Syrian in his absence, if not by all of these; Ioas was driuen to lay aside all thought of winning the Kingdome of Iuda; and taking hostages for his quiet passage, made all haste homewards, where hee found a sad wel-come, and being vtterly forsaken of his wonted prosperitie, for sooke also his life in few moneths after, leauing his King∣dome to Ieroboam the second, his fortunate and valiant sonne. §. X. The end of AMAZIA his and Life. ANy man is able to ghesse how Amazia looked, when the enemy had left him. He that had vaunted so much of his owne great prowesse and skil in armes, threatning to worke wonders, and set vp a new the glorious Empire of Dauid, was now vncased of his Lyons hide, and appeared nothing so terrible a beast as he had beene painted. Much argument of scoffing at him he had ministred vnto such, as held him in dislike; which at this time, doubtlesse, were very many: for the shame that fals vpon an insolent man, seldome failes of meeting with aboundance of reproch. As for Amazia (besides that the multitude are alwayes prone to lay the blame vpon their Gouernours, euen of those calamities which happened by their owne default) there was no child in all Ierusa∣lem, but knew him to be the root of all this mischiefe. He had not only challenged a good man of Warre, being himselfe a Dastard; but when he was beaten and taken by him, had basely pleaded for the common enemy, to haue him let into the Citie, that with his owne eyes hee might see what spoyle there was, and not make a bad by heare-say. The father of this Amazia, was a beastly man; yet when the Aramites tooke him and tormented him, hee did not offer to buy his owne life at so deare a rate, as the Citie and Temple of Ierusalem. Had he offered; should they haue made his promise good? Surely the haste which they had made in condescending to this hard match, was very vnfortunate: for by keeping out the Israelite (which was easie enough) any little while, they should soone beene rid of him, seeing that the Aramites would haue made him runne , with greater speed than hee came forth. Then also, when hauing trussed vp his baggage, hee was ready to bee gone, a little courage would haue serued to perswade him to leaue his load behind; had not their good King deliuered vp Hostages, to secure his returne, as loth to de∣fraud him of the recompence due to his paines taken. Such exprobrations could not but vexe the heart of this vnhappy King: it had beene well for him, if they had made him acknowledge his faults vnto God, that had punished him by all this dishonour. But we find no mention of his amendment. Rather it appeares, that hee continued an Idolatour to the very last. For it is said of him, that after his turning away from the Lord, they wrought treason against him in 2. Chron. 25. 27. Ierusalem; a manifest that he was not reclaimed, vnto his liues end. And , they which tell a man in his aduersitie of his faults passed, shall sooner bee thought to him with his fortune, than to secke his . Wherefore it is no maruaile, that Priests and Prophets were lesse welcome to him, than euer they had beene. On the other side, flatterers, and such as were desirous to put a heart into him, whereof themselues might alwayes be masters, wanted not plausible matter to him. For hee was not first, nor second, of the Kings of Iuda, that had beene ouercome in battaile. Dauid himselfe had abandoned the Citie, leauing it, before the was in sight, vnto Absalom his rebellious sonne. Many be∣sides him had receiued losses, wherein the Temple bare a part. If Ioas might so ea∣sily haue beene kept out; why did their Ancestors let Sesac in? Asa was reputed a vertuous Prince, yet with his owne hands hee emptied the Temple, and was not blamed, but held excusable by necessitie of the State. Belike these traducers would commend no actions but of dead Princes: if so, hee should rather liue to punish them, than dye to please them. Though wherein had he giuen them any cause of displeasure? was he indeed that commanded to set open the gates to Ioas; but it was the people that did it. Good seruants ought not to haue obeyed their Masters Commandements, to his disaduantage, when they saw him not master of his owne Person. As his captiuitie did acquite him from blame, of all things that hee did or suffered in that condition; so was that misfortune it selfe, in true estimation, as high∣ly to his honour, as deeply to his losse. For had hee beene as hasty to flye, as others were; hee might haue escaped, as well as others did. But seeking to teach the base Multitude courage, by his Royall example, he was shamefully betrayed by those in whom hee trusted. Vn worthie creatures that could readily obey him, when spea∣king another mans wordes, being prisoner, he commanded them to yeeld; hauing neglected his charge, when leading them in the field, he bade them stand to it, and fight like men. The best was that they must needs acknowledge his mischance, as the occasion whereby many thousand liues were saued; the Enemie hauing wisely pre∣ferred the surprise of a Lion that was Captaine, before the chase and slaughter of an Armie of Stags that followed him. These or the like words comforting Amazia, were able to perswade him, that it was so indeed. And such excuses might haue serued well enough to please the people, if the King had first studied how to please God. But hee that was vn∣willing to ascribe vnto God the good successe foretold by a Prophet; could easily find how to impute this late disaster, vnto fortune, and the fault of others. Now concerning fortune, it seemes that hee meant to keepe himselfe safe from her, by fit∣ting still; for in fifteene yeeres following (so long he out-liued his honour) we find not that he stirred. As his subjects, though nothing henceforth bee recorded of his gouernment, yet we may see by his end, that the middle time was ill spenta∣mong them, increasing their hatred, to his owne ruine. He that suspecteth his owne worth, or other mens opinions, thinking that lesse regard is had of his person, than he beleeueth to be due to his place, will commonly spend all the force of his autho∣ritie, in purchasing the name of a seuere man. For the affected sowrenesse of a vaine fellow, doth many times resemble the grauitie of one that is wise: and the feare wherein they liue, which are subiect vnto oppression, carries a shew of reuerence, to him that does the wrong; at lest it serues to dazle the eyes of vnderlings, keeping them from prying into the weaknesse of such as haue jurisdiction ouer them. Thus the time, wherein, by well vsing it, men might attaine to be such as they ought, they vsually misspend, in seeking to appeare such as they are not. This is a vaine and deceiuable course; procuring instead of the respect that was hoped for, more indig∣nation than was feared. Which is a thing of dangerous ; when an vnable spirit, being ouerparted with high , is too passionate in the execution of such an Office, as cannot be checked but by violence. If therefore Amazta thought by extreme rigour to hold vp his reputation, what did hee else than to make the people thinke he hated them, when of themselues they were aptenough to beleeue, that he did not loue them? The was that he had, by re∣uenging his fathers death, prouided well enough for his owne securitie: but who should take vengeance; (or vpon whom?) of such a murther, wherein euery one had a part? Surely God himselfe, who had not giuen or leaue vnto the people, to take his office out of his hand, in shedding the bloud of his Anoynted. Yet as Amazia, carelesse of God, was carried headlong by his owne affections; so his subjects, following the same ill example, without requiring what belonged vnto their duties, rose vp against him, with such headlong fury, that being vnable to de∣fend himselfe in Ierusalem, he was driuen to forsake the , and flye Lachis, for safegard of his life. But so extreme was the hatred conceiued against him, and so ge∣nerall, that neyther his absence could allay the rage of it in the Capitail , nor his presence in the Countrey abroad procure friends, to defend his life. , he chose the Towne of Lachis for his refuge, as a place of all other to him; yet sound he there none other fauour, than that the people did not kill him with their owne hands: for when the (who troubled not about raysing an Armic for the matter) sent pursuers after him, hee was abandoned to death. Lachis was the vtmost Citie of his Dominion Westward, standing some∣what without the border of Iuda; that he might haue made an (if hee durst aduenture) into the Territorie of the , or the of Israel. Therefore it may seeme that hee was detained , where certaine it is that hee found no kind of fauour: for had not the people of this Towne, added their owne treason to the generall insurrection; the murtherers could not at so good leisure as they did, haue carried away his bodie to Ierusalem, where they gaue him buriall with his fathers. §. XI. Of the Interregnum, or vacancie, that was in the Kingdome of IVDA, after the death of AMAZIA. IT hath alreadie beene shewed, that the raignes of the Kings of Iuda and Israel were sometimes to be measured by compleat yeeres; other∣whiles, by yeeres current: and that the time of one King is now and then confounded with the last yeeres of his fathers Raigne or the of his sonnes. But we are now arriued at a meere vacation, where∣in the Crowne of Iuda lay eleuen whole yeeres: a thing not plainly set downe in Scriptures, nor yet remembred by Iosephus, and therefore hard to bee , were it not proued by necessary consequence. we find it written, that AMAZIA King of Iuda, liued after the death of IOAS 2. C 2. & 2. . . . King of Israel fifteene yeeres; where upon it followes, that the death of Amazia, was 2. King. . . about the end of fifteene yeeres compleate, which the second (who in the yeere of AMAZIA was made King ouer Israel ) had raigned in Samaria. But the succession of Vzzia, who is also called Azaria, vnto his father in the Kingdome of Iuda; was yeeres later than the sixteenth of : for it is expressed, that AZARIA beganne to raigne in the and of IEROBOAM; the six∣teenth . King. 15. 1. yeere of his life, being ioyned with the first of and that he raigned. So the Interregnum of eleuen yeeres cannot be diuided, without some hard meanes vsed, of interpreting the text otherwise than the sounds. Yet some conjectures there are made, which tend to keepe all euen, without ac∣knowledging any voyde time. For it is thought that in the place last of all cited, by the seuen and twentieth yeere of Ieroboam, we should perhaps the seuen and yeere of his life; or else (because the like wordes are no where else in∣terpreted in the like sense) that Azaria was eleauen yeeres vnder age, that is, fiue yeeres old, when his father died, and so his sixteenth yeere might concurre with the seuen and twentieth of Ieroboam; or that the text it selfe may haue suffered some wrong, by miswriting twentie seuen for seuenteene yeeres, and so, by making the seuenteenth yeere of Ieroboam to be newly begun, all may be salued. These are the conjectures of that worthie man Gerard Mercator: concerning the first of which, it may suffice, that the Author himselfe doth easily let it passe, as improbable; the last is followed by none that I know, neither is it fit, that vpon euery doubt, we should call the text in question, which could not be satisfied in all coppies, if perhaps it were in one: as for the second, it may be held with some qualification, that Azaria began his Raigne being fiue yeeres old; but then must we adde those cleauen yeeres which passed in his minoritie, to the two and fiftie that followed his sixteenth yeere, which is all one, in a manner, with allowing an interregnum. But why should we be so carefull to auoide an interregnum in Iuda, seeing that the like necessitie hath inforced all good Writers, to acknowledge the like vacancy, twice happening within few yeeres, in the Kingdome of Israel? The space of time be∣tweene Ieroboams death, and the beginning of Zachariahs Reigne, and such another gap found betweene the death of Peka, and the beginning of Hosea, haue made it ea∣sily to be admitted in Samaria, which the consideration of things as they stood in Iu∣da, when was slaine, doth make more probable to haue happened there, yea although the necessitie of computation were not so apparant. For the publike furie, hauing so farre extended it selfe, as vnto the destruction of the Kings owne person, was not like to be appeased without order taken for obtai∣ning some redresse of those matters, which had caused it at the first to breake forth into such extremity. Wee need not therefore wonder how it came to passe, that they which already had throwne into such an horrible treason, should afterwards dare to withhold the Crowne from a Prince of that age, which being in∣uested in all ornaments of Regalitie, is exposed to many injuries, pro∣ceeding from head-strong and forgetfull subjects. As for their conjecture, who make Azaria to haue beene King but one and forty yeeres, after hee came out of his nonage; I dare not allow it, because it agrees too harshly with the text. The best opinion were that, which giues vnto Ieroboam elea∣uen yeeres of Raigne with his Father, before he beganne to raigne single in the fif∣teenth of Amazia; did it not swallow vp almost the whole Raigne of Ioas, and ex∣tending the yeeres of those which raigned in Israel (by making such of them com∣pleat, as were only current) and take at the shortest the Raignes of Princes ruling in other Nations. But I will not stand to dispute further of this: euery man may fol∣low his owne opinion, and see mine more plainly in the Chronologicall Table, drawne for these purposes. §. XII. Of Princes Contemporarie with , and more particu∣larly of SARDANAPALVS. THE Princes liuing with Amazia, and in the cleauen yeeres that fol∣lowed his death, were Ioas and Ieroboam in Israel; Cephrenes and Myce∣rinus in Egypt; Syluius Alladius, and Syluius Auentinus in Alba; Aga∣memnon in Corinth; Diognetus Pheredus, and Ariphron in Athens; in La∣cedaemon Thelectus, in whose time the Spartans wan from the Achaians, Gerauthae, , and some other Townes. But more notable than all these, was Assyrian Sardanapalus, who in the one and twentieth yeere of Amazia, succeeding his father Ocrazapes or Anacyndaraxes, raigned twentie yeeres, and was slaine the last of the eleuen void yeeres which fore-went the Raigne of Azaria. In him ended (as most agree) the line of Ninus, which had held that Empire one thousand, two hundred and fortie yeeres. A most luxurious and effeminate Palliard he was, passing away his time among strumpets, whom he imitated both in apparell and behauiour. In these voluptuous courses hee liued an vnhappie life, knowing himselfe to bee so vile, that he durst not let any man haue a sight of him; yet seene he was at length, and the sight of him was so odious, that it procured his ruine. For Arbaces, who gouerned Media vnder him, finding meanes to behold the person of his King, was so incensed with that beastly spectacle, of a man disguised in womans attire, and striuing to counterfeit an harlot, that hee thought it great shame to liue vnder the command of so vnworthie a creature. Purposing therefore to free himselfe and o∣thers from so base subiection, he was much encouraged by the prediction of Belesis or a Chaldaean, who told him plainely, that the Kingdome of Sardanapalus should fall into his hands. Arbaces well pleased with this prophecie, did promise vn∣to Belosus himselfe the gouernment of Babylon; and so concluding how to handle the busines, one of them stirred vp the Medes and allured the Persians into the quar∣rell, the other perswaded the Babylonians and Arabians to venture themselues in the same cause. These foure Nations armed fortie thousand men against Sardanapalus, who in this danger was not wanting to himselfe, but gathering such forces as hee could, out of other Nations, encountred the rebels, as one that would by deedes refute the tales that they had told of him. Neither did his carriage in the beginning of that warre, answere to the manner of his retirednesse. For in three battailes hee carried away the better, driuing Arbaces and his followers into such fearefull termes, that had not Belosus promised them constantly some vnexpected succours, they would forthwith haue broken vp their Campe. About the same time, an Armie out of Bactria was comming to assist the King; but encountring it vpon the way, perswaded so strongly by promise of libertie, that those forces joyned them∣selues with his. The sodaine departure of the enemie seeming to be a flight, caused Sardanapalus to feast his Armie, triumphing before victorie. But the Rebels being strengthened with this new supply, came vpon him by night, and forced his Camp, which through ouer-great securitie was vnprepared for resistance. This ouerthrow did so weaken the Kings heart, that leauing his wiues brother Salamenus to keepe the field, he withdrew himselfe into the Citie of Ninine; which, till new aides that he sent for should come, hee thought easily to defend; it hauing beene prophecied, that Niniue should neuer be taken, till the Riuer were enemie to the Towne. Of the greatnesse and strength of Niniue, enough hath beene spoken in our discourse of Ninus. It was so well victualled, that Arbaces (hauing in two bat∣tailes ouerthrowne the Kings Armie, and slaine Salamenus ) was faine to lye two whole yeeres before it, in hope to winne it by famine; whereof yet he saw no appea∣rance. It seemes that he wanted Engines and skill to force those wals, which were a hundred foot high, and thicke enough for three Charriots in front to passe vpon the rampire. But that which he could not doe in two yeeres, the Riuer of Tygris did in the third: for being high swolne with raines, it not only drowned a part of the Citie through which it ranne, but threw downe twentie furlongs of the wall, and made a faire breach for Arbaces to enter. Sardanapalus, eyther terrified with the accomplishment of the olde Oracle, or seeing no meanes of resistance left, shutting vp himselfe into his Palace, with his wiues, Eunuches and all his treasures, did set the house on fire, wherewith hee and they were together consumed. Strabo speakes of a monument of his, that was in Strabo l. 9. Anchiale a Citie of Cilicia, whereon was found an inscription, shewing that he built that Citie and Tharsus vpon one day: but the addition hereto, bidding men eate and drinke, and make merry, encouraging other, with verses well knowne, to a vo∣luptuous life, by his owne example, testifie that his nature was more prone to sen∣suality, than to any vertue beseeming a Prince. There are some that faintly report otherwise of his end; saying that Arbaces, when hee first found him among his Concubines, was so , that suddenly hee slew him with a dagger. But the more generall consent of Writers agrees with this rela∣tion of Diodorus Siculus, who citeth Ctesias a Greeke Writer, that liued in the Court Diod. Sic. l. 2 c. 7 of Persia, where the truth might best be knowne. Concerning the Princes which raigned in Assyria; from the time of Semiramis, vnto Sardanapalus, though I beleeue that they were sometimes (yet not, as Orosius hath it, incessantly) busied, in offensiue or else defensiue armes; yet for the most part of them I doe better trust Diodorus Siculus, who saith that their names were ouer∣passed Diod. l. 2 c. 6. by Ctesias, because they did nothing worthie of memory. Whatsoeuer they did; that which Theophitus Antiochenus hath said of them is true; Silence and ob∣liuion l. 2. hath oppressed them. CHAP. XXIII. Of VZZIA. §. I. The prosperitie of VZZIA, and of IEROBOAM the second, who raigned with him in Israel. Of the Anarchie that was in the tenne Tribes after the death of IEROBOAM. Of ZACHARIA, SAL∣LVM, MENAHEM and PEKAHIA. VZZIA, who is also called Azaria the sonne of Iotham, was made King of Iuda, when he was sixteene yeeres old, in the seuen and twentieth yeere of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas King of Israel. Hee serued the God of his father Dauid, and had therefore good successe in all his enterprises. Hee built Eloth, a Towne that stood neere to the Red Sea, and restored it to Iuda. Hee ouercame the Philistims, of whose Townes hee dismantled some, and built others in sundrie parts of their Territories. Also hee got the mastrie ouer some parts of Arabia, and brought the Ammonites to pay him tribute. Such were the fruits of his prosperous warres, wherein (as Io∣sphus rehearseth his acts) he beganne with the Philistims, and then proceeded vnto the Arabians and Ammonites. His Armie consisted of three hundred and seuen thou∣sand men of warre, ouer which were appointed two thousand sixe hundred Cap∣taines. For all this multitude the King prepared shields, and speares, and helmets, and 2. . 26. 14. other Armes requisite; following therein happily a course quite opposite vnto that which some of his late predecessors had held, who thought it better policie to vse the seruice of the Nobilitie, than of the multitude; carrying forth to warre the Prin∣ces 2, . 21. 9. and all the Charriots. As the victories of Vzzia were farre more important, than the atchieuements of all that had raigned in Iuda, since the time of Dauid; so were his riches and magni∣ficent workes, equall, if not superior to any of theirs that had beene Kings betweene him and Salomon. For besides that great conquests are wont to repay the charges of Warre with triple interest, he had the skill to vse, as well as the happinesse to get. Hee turned his Lands to the best vse, keeping Ploughmen and Dressers of Vines, in grounds conuenient to such husbandry. In other places hee had Cattell feeding, whereof he might well keepe great store, hauing wonne so much from the Ammonites and Arabians, that had aboundance of waste ground seruing for pastu∣rage. For defence of his Cattell and Heardsmen, hee built Towres in the wilder∣nesse. He also digged many Cisternes or Ponds. Iosephus cals them Water-courses; but in such drie grounds, it was enough that he found water, by digging in the most likely places. If by these Towres hee so commanded the water, that none could without his consent, releeue themselues therewith; questionlesse he tooke the one∣ly course, by which he might securely hold the Lordship ouer all the Wildernesse; it being hardly passable, by reason of the extreme drought, when the few Springs therein found, are left free to the vse of Trauailers. Besides all this cost, and the building both of Eloth by the Red Sea, and of sun∣drie Townes among the Philistims; hee repaired the wall of Ierusalem, which Ioas had broken downe, and fortified it with Towres, whereof some were an hundred and fiftie Cubits high. The State of Israel did neuer so flourish, as at this time, since the diuision of the twelue Tribes into two Kingdomes. For as Vzzia preuailed in the South, so (if not more) Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, King of the tenne Tribes, enlarged his border on the North; where obtaining many victories, against the Syrians, he the Royall Citie of Damascus, and he wanne Hamath, with all the Countrie there a∣bout from the entring of Hamath, vnto the Sea of the Wildernesse, that is (as the most 2. Reg. 14. 25. 28. expound it) vnto the vast deserts of Arabia, the end whereof was vndiscouered. So the bounds of Israel in those parts, were in the time of this Ieroboam, the same (or not much narrower) which they had beene in the Raigne of Dauid. But it was not for the of Ieroboam, that hee thriued so well; for hee was an Idolater: it was only the compassion which the Lord had on Israel, seeing the ex∣ceeding bitter affliction, whereinto the Aramites had brought his people, which caused him to alter the successe of warre, and to throw the victorious Aramites, vn∣der the feet of those, whom they had so cruelly oppressed. The line of Iehu, to which God had promised the Kingdome of Israel vnto the fourth generation, was 2. Reg. 10. 13. now not farre from the end; and now againe it was inuited vnto repentance, by new benefits, as it had beene at the beginning. But the sinne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, was held so precious, that neither the Kingdome it selfe, giuen to him by God, was able to draw Iehu from that politike Idolatrie; nor the misery falling vpon him and his posteritie, to bring them to a better course of Religion; nor yet, at the last, this great prosperitie, of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, to make him render the honour that was due, to the onely giuer of victorie. Wherefore the promise of God, made vnto , that his sonnes, vnto the fourth generation, should sit on the throne of Israel, was not enlarged; but, being almost expired, gaue warning of the appro∣ching end, by an accident (so strange, that wee, who find no particulars recorded, can hardly ghesse at the occasions) forgoing the last acomplishment. When Ieroboam the Sonne of Ioas, after a victorious raigne of one and fortie yeeres, had ended his life, it seemes in all reason that Zacharia his Son, should forth∣with haue beene admitted, to raigne in his stead; the Nobilitie of that race hauing gotten such a lustre, by the immediate succession of foure Kings, that any Compe∣titor, the crowne passed by election, must needes haue appeared base; and the vertue of the last King, hauing beene so great, as might well serue to lay the foundation of a new house, much more to establish the alreadie confirmed right of a family so rooted in possession. All this notwithstanding, two or three and twentie yeeres did passe, before Zacharia the Sonne of Ieroboam was, by vniforme consent, receiued as King. The true originall causes hereof were to be found at Dan and Be∣thel, where the golden Calues did stand: yet second instruments of this distrubance, are likely not to haue beene wanting, vpon which, the wisedome of man was ready to cast an eye. Probable it is, that the Captaines of the Armie (who afterwardes slew one another, so fast, that in fourteene yeeres there raigned fiue Kings) did now by head-strong violence, rent the Kingdome asunder, holding each what hee could, and eyther or hating some qualities in Zacharia; vntill, after many yeeres, with dissention, and the principall of them perhaps, being taken out of the way by death, for want of any other eminent man, they consented to yeeld all quiet∣ly to the sonne of Ieroboam. That this Anarchic lasted almost three and twentie yeeres, we find by the difference of time, betweene the fifteenth yeere of Vzzia, which was the last of Ieroboam his one and fortieth (his seuen and twentieth concur∣ring with the first of Vzzia ) and the eight and thirtieth of the same Vzzia, in the last sixe moneths whereof, Zacharia raigned in Samaria. There are some indeed that by supposing Ieroboam to haue raigned with his father eleuen yeeres, doe cut off the interregnum in Iuda (before mentioned) and by the same reason, abbridge this Anarchie, that was before the Raigne of Zacharia in Israel. Yet they leaue it twelue yeeres long: which is time sufficient to proue, that the Kingdome of the ten Tribes was no lesse distempered, than as is alreadie noted. But I choose rather to follow the more common opinion, as concurring more exactly with the times of other Princes raigning abroad in the World, than this doubtfull conjecture, that giues to Ieroboam two and fiftie yeeres, by adding three quarters of his fathers Raigne, vnto his own, which was it selfe indeed so long, that hee may well seeme to haue begunne it very yong: for I doe not thinke, that God blessed this Idolater, both with a longer raigne, and with a longer life, than he did his seruant Dauid. Thus much being spoken of the time, wherein the throne of Israel was voide, be∣fore the raigne of Zacharia; little may suffice to be said of his Raigne it selfe, which lasted but a little while. Sixe moneths onely was he King; in which time he decla∣red himselfe a worshipper of the golden Calues; which was enough to iustifie the judgement of God, whereby he was slaine. He was the last of house, being (inclusiuely) the first of that line; which may haue beene some cause of the troubles impeaching hs orderly succession: the prophecie hauing determined that race in the fourth generation. But (besides that Gods promise was extended vnto the vtmost) there was no warrant giuen to Sallum or to any other, for the death of Zacharia, as had beene giuen to Iehu, for the slaughter of Iehoram, and for the eradication of A∣habs house. Zacharia hauing beene sixe moneths a King, was then slaine by Sallum, who raigned after him, the space of a moneth in Samaria. What this Sallum was, I doe not 2. King. 15. 13. find; saue onely that he was a Traytour, and the sonne of one Iabesh, whereby his father got no honour. It seemes that he was one of those, who in time of faction had laboured for himselfe; and now, when al other Competitors were sitten downe, thought easily to preuaile against that King, in whose person the race of Iehu was to faile. Manifest it is, that Sallum had a strong partie: for Tiphsah or Thapsa, and the Coast thereof euen from Tirzah, where Menahem, his enemie and supplanter then lay, refused to admit, as King in his stead, the man that murdered him. Yet at the end of one moneth, Sallum receiued the reward of his treason, and was slaine by Me∣nahem who raigned in his place. Menahem the sonne of Gadi, raigned after Sallum tenne yeeres. In opposition to Sallum, his hatred was deadly, and inhumane: For hee not onely destroyed Tiphsah, and all that were therein, or thereabouts, but he ript vp all their women with child, because they did not open their gates and let him in. Had this crueltie beene vsed in reuenge of Zacharias death, it is like that hee would haue beene as earnest, in pro∣curing vnto him his Fathers Crowne when it was first due. But in performing that office, there was vsed such long deliberation, that wee may plainely discouer Ambi∣tion, Disdaine, and other priuate passions, to haue beene the causes of this beastly outrage. In the time of Menahem, and (as it seemes) in the beginning of his Raigne; , King of Assyria, came against the Land of Israel; whom this new King appeased, with a thousand talents of siluer, leauied vpon all the substantiall men in his Coun∣trey. With this money the Israelite purchased, not only the peace of his Kingdome, but his owne establishment therein: some factious man (be like) hauing either inui∣ted Pul thither, or (if he came vncalled) sought to vse his helpe, in deposing this ill beloued King. Iosephus reports of this Menahem, that his Raigne was no milder Ios. ant. l. 9. c, 11. than his entrance. But after ten yeeres, his tyrannic ended with his life: and Peka∣hia, his Sonne, occupied his roome. Of this Pekahia the storie is short: for hee raigned only two yeeres; at the end whereof, he was slaine by Peka, the Sonne of Remalia, whose treason was rewarded with the Crowne of Israel, as, in time comming, another mans Treason against him∣selfe shall be. There needs no more to be said of Menahem, and his Sonne, saue that they were, both of them, Idolaters; and the Sonne (as wee finde in Insephus ) Ios. ibid. like to his Father in crueltie. Concerning Pul the Assyrian King, who first opened vnto those Northerne Nations the way into , it will shortly follow in order of the Storie, to deliuer our opinion: whether he were that Belosus (called also Bele∣ses and by some, Phul Belochus ) who joyned with Arbaces the Median, against Sarda∣napalus, or whether he were some other man. At the present it is more fit that wee relate the end of Vzzia's life, who out-liued the happinesse wherein we left him. §. II. The end of VZZIA his Raigne and life. AS the zeale of Iehoiada, that godly Priest, was the meane, to preserue the linage of Dauid, in the person of Ioas; so it appeares, that the care of holy men was not wanting to Vzzia, to bring him vp, and aduance him to the Crowne of , when the hatred borne to his Father A∣mazia, had endangered his succession. For it is said of Vzzia, That hee sought God in the dayes of ZECHARIA (which vnderstood the visions of God) and when 2. Chron. 26. 5. as he sought the Lord, God made him prosper. But, when he was strong, his heart was lifted vp to his destruction: for hee trangressed V. 16. against the Lord his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord to burne incense, vpon the Altar of incense. Thus he thought to enlarge his owne authoritie, by medling in the Priests office, whose power had in euery extremitie beene so helpefull to the Kings of Iuda, that meere gratitude, and ciuill policie, should haue held backe Vzzia from incroching thereupon; yea, though the Law of God had beene silent in this case, and not forbidden it. Howsoeuer the King forgot his dutie, the Priests re∣membred theirs, and God forgat not to assist them. Azaria the high Priest inter∣rupted the Kings purpose, and gaue him to vnderstand, how little to his honour it would proue, that he tooke vpon him the office of the sonnes of Aaron. There were with Azaria fourescoure other Priests, valiant men, but their valour was shewed on∣ly in assisting the high Priest, when (according to his dutie) hee reprehended the Kings presumption. This was , the rest God himselfe performed. Wee find in Iosephus, that the King had apparelled himselfe in Priestly habit, and that hee Ios. ant. l. 9. c. 11. threatned Azarias and his Companions, to punish them with death, vnlesse they would be quiet. Iosephus, indeed, inlargeth the Storie, by inserting a great Earth∣quake, which did teare downe halfe an Hill, that rowled furlongs, till it rested against another Hill, stopping vp the high-wayes, and spoyling the Kings Garden in the passage. With this Earth quake, he sayth, that the roofe of the Temple did cleaue, and that a Sunne-beame did light vpon the Kings face, which was presently infected with leprosie. All this may haue beene true; and some there are who thinke that this Earth-quake is the same, which is mentioned by the Prophet Amos; where∣in they doe much misse-reckon the times. For the Earth-quake spoken of by Amos, was in the daies of Ieroboam King of Israel, who dyed seuen and thirtie yeeres before Vzzia; so that Iotham the Sonne of Vzzia, which supplyed his Fathers place in go∣uernment of the Land should, by this accompt, haue beene then vnborne: for hee was but fiue and twentie yeeres old, when hee beganne to raigne as King. There∣fore, thus farre only wee haue assurance; that while VZZIA was wroth with the 2. Chron. 26. 20. Priests, the leprosie rose vp in his forehead, before the Priests. Hereupon he was caused, in all haste, to depart the place, and to liue in a house by himselfe, vntill he dyed; the rule ouer the Kings house, and ouer all the Land, being committed to Iotham, his Sonne, and Successor. Iotham tooke not vpon himselfe the stile of King, till his Fa∣ther was dead; whom they buried in the same field wherein his Ancestors lay inter∣red, yet in a Monument a-part from the rest, because he was a Leper. §. III. Of the Prophets which liued in the time of VZZIA; and of Princes then ruling in Aegypt, and in some other Countries. IN the time of Vzzia were the first of the lesser Prophets, Hosea, Ioel, Amos, Obadia, and Ionas. It is not indeed set downe, when Ioel, or Oba∣dia, did prophecie: but if the Prophets, whose times are not expressed, ought to bee ranged (according to S. Hieromes rule) with the next be∣fore them; then must these two be iudged contemporarie with Hosea and Amos, who liued vnder King Vzzia. To enquire which of these fiue was the most ancient, it may perhaps be thought, at least a superfluous labour; yet if the age wherein Homer liued, hath so painefully beene sought, without reprehension; how can he be taxed, which offers to search out the antiquitie of these holy Prophets? It seemes to me, that the first of these, in order of time, was the Prophet Ionas; who fore∣told the great victories of Ieroboam King of Israel; & therefore is like to haue prophe∣cied 2. . c. 14. v. 25. 26. in the dayes of Ioas, whilest the affliction of Israel was exceeding bitter; the Text it selfe intimating no lesse: by which consequence, he was elder than the other Pro∣phets, whose workes are now extant. But his prophecies that concerned the King∣dome of Israel, are now lost. That which remaineth of him, seemes, not without reason, vnto some very learned, to haue belonged vnto the time of Sardanapalus, in whose dayes Niniue was first of all destroyed. This Prophet rather taught Christ by his sufferings, than by his writings now extant: in all the rest are found expresse promises of the Messias. In the Raigne of Vzzia likewise it was, that Esai, the first of the foure great Pro∣phets, beganne to see his visions. This difference of greater and lesser Prophets, is taken from the Volumes which they haue left written (as S. Augustine giues reason . Dei l. 18 c. . of the distinction) because the greater haue written larger Bookes. The Prophet Esai was great indeed, not only in regard of his much written; or of his Nobilitie, (for their opinion is reiected, who thinke him to haue beene the sonne of Amos the Prophet) and the high account wherein he liued; but for the excellencie, both of his stile and argument, wherein he so plainly foretelleth the Birth, Miracles, Passion, and whole Historie of our Sauiour, with the calling of the Gentiles, that hee might as well be called an Euangelist, as a Prophet; hauing written in such wise, That (as Hierome sayth) one would thinke he did not foretell of things to come, but compile an Hi∣storie . su∣per . of matters alreadie past. Bocchoris was King of Aegypt, and the ninth yeere of his Raigne, by our computa∣tion (whereof in due place we will giue reason) was current, when Vzzia tooke pos∣session of the Kingdome of Iuda. After the death of Bocchoris, Asychis followed in the Kingdome of Aegypt, vnto him succeeded Anysis; and these two occupied that Crowne six yeeres. Then Sabacus, an Aethopian, became King of Aegypt, and held it fiftie yeeres, whereof the tenne first ranne along with the last of Vzzia his Raigne and life. Of these and other Ae∣gyptian Kings, more shall be spoken, when their affaires shall come to be intermedled with the businesse of Iuda. In Athens, the two last yeeres of Ariphron his twentie, the seuen and twentieth of Thespeius, the twentieth of Agamnestor, and threethe first of Aeschylus his three and twentie, made euen with the two and fiftie of Vzzia: as likewise did in Alba the last seuen of Siluius Auentinus his seuen and thirtie, together with the three and twentie of Siluius Procas, and two and twentie the first of Syluius Amulius. In Media Arbaces beganne his new Kingdome, in the first of Vzzia, wherein, after eight and twentie yeeres, his Sonne Sosarmus succeeded him, and raigned thirtie yeeres. Of this Arbaces, and the diuision of the Assyrian Empire, betweene him and others, when they had oppressed Sardanapalus, I hold it conuenient to vse more particular discourse, that we may not wander in too great vncertaintie in the Storie of the As∣syrian Kings, who haue alreadie found the way into Palaestina, and are not likely to forget it. §. IIII. Of the Assyrian Kings, descending from PHVL: and whether PHVL and BELOSVS were one person; or heads of sundrie Families, that raigned a-part in Niniue and Babylon. BY that which hath formerly beene shewed of Sardanapalus his death, it is apparant, that the chiefe therein was Arbaces the Median; to whom the rest of the Confederates did not only submit themselues in that Warre, but were contented afterwards to bee judged by him; receiuing by his authoritie sentence of death, or pardon of their for∣feired liues. The first example of this his power, was shewne vpon Belosus the Ba∣bylonian, by whose especiall aduice and helpe, Arbaces himselfe was become so great. Yet was not this power of Arbaces exercised in so tyrannicall manner, as might giue offence in that great alteration of things, eyther to the Princes that had assisted him, or to the generalitic of the people. For in the condemnation of Belosus, he vsed the counsaile of his other Captaines, and then pardoned him of his owne Grace; allow∣ing him to hold, not only the Citie and Prouince of Babylon, but also those treasures, for embezeling whereof his life had beene endangered. In like manner, he gaue rewards to the rest of his partakers, and made them Ru∣lers of Prouinces; retayning (as it appeares) only the Soueraignetie to himselfe, which to vse immoderately hee did naturally abhorre. Hec is said, indeede, to haue excited the Medes against Sardanapalus, by propounding vnto them hope of trans∣ferring the Empire to their Nation. And to make good this his promise, hee de∣stroyed the Citie of Niniue; permitting the Citizens neuerthelesse to take and car∣rie away euery one his owne goods. The other Nations that ioyned with him, as the Persians and Bactrians, he drew to his side, by the allurement of libertie; which he himselfe so greatly loued, that by slacking too much the rcines of his owne So∣ueraigetie, he did more harme to the generall estate of Media, than the pleasure of the freedome, which it enioyed, could recompence. For both the Territorie of that Countrey was pared narrower by Salmanassar (or perhaps by some of his Pro∣genitors) whom wee finde, in the Scriptures, to haue held some Townes of the Medes, and the administration was so disorderly, that the people themselues were glad to see that reformation, which Deioces, the fift of Arbaces his Line, did make in that gouernment, by reducing them into stricter termes of obedience. How the force of the Assyrians grew to be such, as might in fourescore yeeres, if it sooner, both extend it selfe vnto the conquest of Israel, and teare away some of Media, it is a question hardly to be answered; not only in regard of the de∣struction of Niniue, and subuersion of the Assyrian Kingdome, whereof the Medes, vnder Arbaces, had the honour; who may seeme at that time to haue kept the Assy∣rians vnder their subiection, when the of the Prouinces were set at libertie; but in consideration of the Kings themselues, who raigning afterwardes in Babylon and Niniue, are confounded by some, and distinguished by others; whereby their Hi∣storie is made vncertaine. I will first therefore deliuer the opinion generally receiued, and the grounds whereupon it stands: then, producing the obiections made against it; I will com∣pare together the determination of that man Ioseph Scaliger, with those learned that subscribe there unto, and the iudgement of others that were more an∣cient Writers, or haue followed the Ancients in this doubtfull case. Neyther shall it be needfull to set downe a-part the seuerall authorities and arguments of sundrie men adding somewhat of weight or of clearnesse one to another: it will be enough to relate the whole substance of each : which I will doe as briefly as I can, and without to be taxed of partialitie, as being no more addicted to the one o∣pinion than to the other, by any fancie of mine owne, but meerely led by those rea∣sons which vpon examination of each part, seemed to me most forceable, though to others they may perhaps appeare weake. That which, vntill of late, hath passed as currant, is this; That Belosus was the King, who, first of the Assyrians, entred with an Armie; being called Pul, or Phul, in the Scriptures, and by Annius his Authours with such as them, Phul Belochus. Of this man it is said, that he was a skilfull Astrologer, subtile, and ambitious; that he got Babylon by composition made with ; and that not there with content, he got into his hand part of Assyria: finally, that hee raigned eight and fortie yeeres, and then dying, left the to Teglat phalasar his Sonne, in whose Posteritie it continued some few descents, till the house of Mero∣dach preuailed. The truth of this, if Annius his were proofe, could not be gain said: for that Authour (such as he is) is . But, howsoeuer Annius his Authors deserue to be suspected, it stands with no reason that we should conclude all to be false which they affirme. They, who maintaine this Tradition, justifie it by diuers good Allegations, as a matter confirmed by circum∣stances found in all , and repugnant vnto no Historie at all. For it is mani∣fest by the relation of Diodorus (which is indeed the foundation whereupon all haue built) that Arbaces and Belosus were Partners in the action against ; and that the Bactrians, who joyned with them, thought well rewarded with libertie, as likewise other Captaines were with gouernements: but that any third Person was so eminent as to haue Assyria it selfe, the Country of the Empire, bestowed vpon him, it is a thing whereof not the least apparence is found in any Hi∣storie. And certainly it stood with little reason, that the Assyrians should bee com∣mitted vnto a peculiar King, at such time as it was not thought meet to trust them in their owne wals and houses. Rather it is apparent, that the destruction of Niniue by , and the transplantation of the Citizens, was held a needfull policie be∣cause thereby the people of that Nation might be kept downe, from aspiring to re∣couer the Soueraigntie, which else they would haue thought to belong, as of right, vnto the Seat of the Empire. Vpon such considerations did the Romans, in ages long after following, destroy Carthage and the Corporation, or Bodie politike, of the Citizens of Capua; because those two Townes were capable of the Empire: a matter ouer∣dangerous euen to Rome it selfe, that was Mistresse of them both. This being so, how Tull. contra Rullum. . can it be thought that the Assyrians in three or foure yeeres had erected their King∣dome a-new, vnder one Pul? or what must this Pul haue beene (of whose deser∣uings, or cntermedling, or indeed of whose very name, wee find no mention in the Warre against Sardanapalus ) to whom the principall part of the Empire fell, eyther by generall consent in diuision of the Prouinces, or by his owne power and purchase very soone after? Surely he was none other than Belosus; whose neere Neighbour∣hood gaue him opportunitie (as he was wise enough to play his owne game) both to get Assyria to himselfe, and to empeach any other man, that should haue attempted to seize vpon it. The Prouince of Babylon, which held, being (as Herodotus . . reports) in riches, and power, as good as the third part of the Persian Empire, was able to furnish him with all that was requisite for such a businesse: if that were not enough, he had gotten into his owne hands all the gold and siluer that had beene in the Palace of Niniue. And to restore such a Citie as Niniue, was an en∣terprise fit for none to take in hand, except he had such meanes as Belosus had; which , if he were not Belosus, is likely to haue wanted. Besides all this, had Pul beene a distinct from Belosus, and Lord of Assyria, which lay beyond the Countries of Babylon and Mesopotamia, it would not haue beene an easie matter for him, to passe quite through another mans Kingdome with an Armie, seeking bootie afarre off in Israel: the only action by which the name of Phul is knowne. But if we grant, that he, whom the Scriptures call Pul or Phul, was he same whom prophane writers haue called Belosus, Beleses, and Belestis, (in like manner as Iosephus acknowledgeth, that hee, whom the Scriptures called neuer o∣therwise Iosep. ant. l. cap. 12. than Darius the Mede, was the Sonne of Astyages, and called of the Greekes by another name, that is, Cyaxarcs ) then is this scruple vtterly remooued. For Ba∣bylon and Mesopotamia did border vpon Syria and Palaestina: so that Belosus, hauing his affaires in Assyria towards the East and North, might with good leisure encroach vpon the Countries that lay on the other side of his Kingdome, to the South and West. He that lookes into all particulars, may find euery one circum∣stance concurring, to proue that Phul who inuaded Israel, was none other than Belo∣sus. For the Prince of the Arabians, who joyned with Arbaces, and brought no small part of the forces where with Sardanapalus was ouerthrowne, did enter into that a∣ction, meerely for the loue of Belosus. The friendship of these Arabians was a thing of maine importance, to those that were to passe ouer Euphrates with an Armic into Syria. Wherefore Belosus, that held good correspondence with them; and whose most fruitfull Prouince, adjoyning to their barraine quarters, might yeerely doe them inestimable pleasures; was not only like to haue quiet passage through their borders, but their vtmost assistance; yea, it stands with good reason, that they, who loued not Israel, should for their owne behoofe haue giuen him intelligence, of the destruction and ciuill broyles among the tenne Tribes; whereby, as this Pul got a thousand talents, so it seemes that the Syrians and Arabians, that had felt an heaule Ncighbour of Ieroboam, recouered their owne, setting vp a new King in Damasco, and clearing the Coast of Arabia, (from the Sea of the Wildernesse to Hamath ) of the Hebrew Garrisons. Neyther was it any new acquaintance, that made the Nations diuided by Euphrates hold together in so good termes of friendship: it was ancient consanguinitie; the memorie whereof was auaileable to the Syrians, in the time of Dauid, when the Aramites beyond the Riuer came ouer willingly, to the succour of Hadadezer, and the Aramites about Damasco. So Belosus had good reason to looke in∣to those parts; what a King raigning so farre off as Niniue, should haue to doe in Syria, if the other end of his Kingdome had not reached to Euphrates, it were hard to shew. But concerning this last argument of the businesse which might allure the Chal∣daeans into Palaestina, it may bee doubted, lest it should seeme to haue ill coherence with that which hath beene said of the long Anarchie that was in the tenne Tribes. For if the Crowne of Israel were worne by no man in three and twentie yeeres, then is it likely that Belosus was eyther vnwilling to stirre, or vnable to take the ad∣uantage when it was fairest, and first discouered. This might haue compelled those, who alone were not strong enough, to seeke after helpe from some Prince that lay further off; and so the opinion of those that distinguish Phul from Belosus, would be some what confirmed. On the other side, if we say, that Belosus did passe the Ri∣uer of Euphrates, as soone as hee found likelihood of making a prosperous journey, then may it seeme that the inter-regnum in Israel was not so long as we haue made it: for three and twentie yeeres leisure would haue afforded better opportunitie, which ought not to haue beene lost. For answere hereunto, we are to consider, what Orosius and Eusebius haue writ∣ten concerning the Chaldees: the one, that after the departure of Arbaces into Me∣dia, they laid hold on a part of the Empire: the other, that they preuailed and grew mightie, betweene the times of Arbaces and Deioces the Medes. Now, though it be held an of Orosius, where he supposeth that the occupying of Babylonia by the Chaldaeans, was in manner of a rebellion from the Medes; yet herein hee and Eusebius , that the authoritie of Arbaces did restraine the ambition, which by his absence grew bold, and by his death, regardfull only of it selfe. Now, though some haue conjectured that all Assyria was giuen to Belosus (as an ouerplus, besides the Prouince of Babylon, which was his by plaine bargaine made aforehand) in re∣gard of his high deseruings, yet the opinion more commonly receiued is, that hee did only encroch vpon that Prouince by little and little, whilest Arbaces liued, and afterwards dealing more openly, got it all himselfe. Seeing therefore, that there passed but twelue yeeres betweene the death of Arbaces, and the beginning of Me∣nahem his Raigne; manifest it is, that the conquest of Assyria, and settling of that Countrey, was worke enough to hold Belosus occupyed, besides the restauration of Niniue, which alone was able to take vp all the time remaining of his Raigne, if per∣haps he liued to see it finished in his owne dayes. So that this argument may rather serue to proue that Phul and Belosus were one person; forasmuch as the iourney of Phul against Israel was not made vntill Belosus could find leisure; and the time of aduantage which Belosus did let slip, argued his businesse in some other quarter, namely in that Prouince of which Phul is called King. Briefly, it may bee said, that he who conquered Assyria, and performed somewhat vpon a so farre di∣stant as Palaestina, was likely to haue beene, at least, named in some Historie, or, if not himselfe, yet his Countrey to haue beene spoken of for those victories: but we nei∣ther heare of Phul, in any prophane Authour, neyther doth any Writer, sacred or prophane, once mention the victories or acts whatsoeuer of the , done in those times; whereas of Belosus, and the power of the Chaldaeans, wee find good Re∣cord. Surely, that great slaughter of so many thousand Assyrians, in the quarrell of Sar∣danapalus, together with other calamities of that long and vnfortunate warre, which ouerwhelmed the whole Countrey, not ending but with the ruine and vtter desola∣tion of Niniue, must needes haue so weakened the state of Assyria, that it could not in thirtie yeeres space be able to inuade Palaestina, which the ancient Kings, raigning in Niniue, had, in all their greatnesse, forborne to attempt. Yet these afflictions, dis∣abling that Countrey, did helpe to enable Belosus to subdue it; who hauing once ex∣tended his Dominion to the borders of Media, and being (especially if he had com∣pounded with the Meds ) by the interposition of that Countrey, secure of the Scy∣thinns, and other warlike Nations on that side, might very well turne Southward, and trie his fortune in those Kingdomes, whereinto ciuill dissention of the inhabi∣tants, and the bordering enuie of the Arabians and Aramites about Damasco, and Cousins to the and Mesopotamians, did inuite him. For these, and the other before alledged reasons, it may be concluded, That what is said of Pul in the Scriptures, ought to be vnderstood of Belosus; euen as by the names of Nebuchad∣nezzar, Darius the Mede, Artashasht, and , with the like, are thought, or knowne, to be meant the same, whom prophane Historians, by names better knowne in their own Countries, haue called Nabopollassar, Cyaxares, and Artaxerxes: especially considering, that hereby we shall neither contradict any thing that hath beene written of olde, nor neede to trouble ourselues and others with framing new conjectures. This in effect is that, which they alledge in maintenance of the opinion commonly receiued. Now this being once granted; other things, of more importance, will of them∣selues easily follow. For it is a matter of no great consequence to know the truth of this point (considering it apart from that which depends thereon) Whether Pul were Belosus, or some other man: the whole race of these Assyrian and Babylonian Kings, wherin are found those famous Princes, Nabonassar, Mardocempadus, and Na∣bopollassar (famous for the Astronomicall obseruations recorded from their times) is the maine ground of this contention. If therefore Belosus or Belesis were that Phul which inuaded Israel; if he and his posteritie raigned both in Niniue and in Babylon; if he were father of Teglat-Phul-Asar, from whom Salmanasar, Senacherib, and Asar∣haddon descended; then it is manifest, that we must seeke Nabonassar, the Babylonian King, among these Princes; yea, and conclude him to be none other then Salmana∣sar, who is knowne to haue raigned in those yeeres, which Ptolomey the Mathemati∣cian hath assigned vnto Nabonassar. As for Merodach, who supplanted Asar-haddon, manifest it is, that he and his successors were of another house. This is the scope and end of all his disputation. But they that maintaine the contrarie part, will not bee satisfied with such conie∣ctures. They lay hold vpon the conclusion, and by shaking that into pieces, hope to ouerthrow all the premisses, vpon which it is inferred. For (say they) if Nabonas∣sar, that raigned in Babylon, could not be Salmanassar, or any of those other Assyrian Kings, then is it manifest, that the races were distinct, and that Phul and Belosus were seuerall Kings. This consequence is so plaine, that it needs no confirmation. To proue that Nabonassar was a distinct person from Salmanassar, are brought such argu∣ments as would stagger the resolution of him that had sworne to hold contra∣rie. For first, Nabonassar was King of Babylon, and not of Assyria. This is proued by his name, which is meerely Chaldaean, whereas Salman, the first part of Salmanas∣sars name, is proper to the Assyrians. It is likewise proued by the Astronomicall ob∣seruations, which proceeding from the Babylonians, not from the Assyrians, doe shew, that Nabonassar, from whom Ptolomie drawes that Epocha, or account of times, was a Babylonian, and no Assyrian. Thirdly, and more strongly, it is confirmed by the successor of Nabonassar, which was Mardocempadus, called in his owne language Mero-dac-ken-pad, but more briefely in Esay his prophesie, , by the former Esay 39. 1. part of his name; or Merodach Baladan; the sonne of Baladan. Now if Merodach, the sonne of Baladan, King of Babel, were the sonne of Nabonassar, then was Nabonassar none other then Baladan King of Babel, and not Salmanassar King of Assyria. What can be plainer? As for the cadence of these two names, Nabonassar & Sal∣manassar, which in Greeke or Latine writing hath no difference, we are taught by , that in the Hebrew letters there is found no affinitie therein. So concerning the places of Babylonia, whereinto Salmanassar carried captiue some part of the ten Tribes; it may well be granted, that in the Prouince of Babylon Salmanassar had got∣ten somewhat, yet will it not follow that he was King of Babylon it selfe. To con∣clude, Merodach began his raigne ouer Babylon in the sixt yeere of Hezekia, at which time tooke Samaria; therefore, if Salmanassar were King of Babylon, then must we say that he and Merodach, yea and Nabonassar, were all one man. These are the arguments of that noble and learned Writer Ioseph Scaliger; who not con∣tented to follow the common opinion, founded vpon likelihood of coniectures, hath drawne his proofes from matter of more necessarie inference. Touching all that was said before of Phul Belosus, for the prouing that Phul and Belosus were not sundrie Kings; Ioseph Scaliger pitties their ignorance, that haue spent their labour to so little purpose. Honest and painefull men he confesseth that they were, who by their diligence might haue wonne the good liking of their Rea∣ders, had they not, by mentioning Annius his Authors, giuen such offence, that men refused thereupon to reade their Bookes and Chronologies. A short answere. For mine owne part, howsoeuer I beleeue nothing that Annius his Berosus, Me∣tasthenes, and others of that stampe affirmes, in respect of their bare authoritie; yet am I not so squeamish, but that I can well enough digest a good Booke, though I finde the names of one or two of these good fellowes alleaged in it: I haue (some∣what peraduenture too often) alreadie spoken my minde of Annius his Authors: neuerthelesse, I may say here againe, that where other Histories are silent, or speake not enough, there may we without shame borrow of these, as much as agrees with that little which elsewhere we finde, and serueth to explaine or inlarge it without improbabilities. Neither indeede are those honest and painefull men (as Scaliger termes them, meaning, if I mistake him not; good silly fellowes) who set downe the Assyrian Kings from Pul forwards, as Lords also of Babylon, taking Pul for Belosus, and Salma∣nassar for Nabonassar, such Writers as a man should bee ashamed or vnwilling to read. For (to omit a multitude of others, that herein follow Annius, though disliking him in generall) Gerard Mercator is not so slight a Chronologer, that hee should be laughed out of doores, with the name of an honest meaning fellow. But I will not make comparisons betweene Scaliger and Mercator, they were both of them men notably learned: let vs examine the arguments of Scaliger, and see whether they be of such force, as cannot either be resisted or auoided. It will easily be granted, that Nabonassar was King of Babylon; that hee was not King of Assyria, some men doubt whether Scaligers reasons be enough to proue. For though Nabo∣nassar be a Chaldaean name, and Salmanassar an Assyrian; yet what hinders vs from beleeuing, that one man in two languages might bee called by two seuerall names? That Astronomie flourished among the , is not enough to proue Nabonassar either an Astrologer, or a Chaldaean. So it is, that Scaliger himselfe calls them, Scal. Canon. l. 3. as nescio quos, qui NABONASSARVM Astronomum fuisse in somnis viderunt; I know not who, that in their sleepe haue dreamt of NABONASSAR, that he was an Astrologer. Whether Nabonassar were an Astrologer or no, I cannot tell; it is hard to main∣taine the negatiue. But as his being Lord ouer the Chaldaeans, doth not proue him to haue beene learned in their sciences; so doth it not proue him, not to haue beene also King of Assyria. The Emperor Charles the fift, who was borne in Gant, and Phi∣lip his Sonne, King of Spaine, and Lords of the , had men farre more lear∣ned in all Sciences, and particularly in the Mathematicks, among their Subjects of the Low Countries, then were any that I read of then liuing in Spaine, if Spaine at that time had any; yet I thinke, Posteritie will not vse this as an argument, to proue that Spaine was none of theirs. It may well be, that Salmanassar or Nabonassar, did vse the Assyrian Souldiers, and Babylonian Schollers: but it seemes, that hee and his posteritie, by giuing themselues wholly to the more warlike Nation, lost the richer, out of which they first issued; as likewise King Philip lost partly, and partly did put to a dangerous hazard all the Netherlands, by such a course. As for the two vnan∣swerable arguments, (as Scaliger termes them, being me thinks none other than an∣sweres to somewhat that is or might be alleaged on the contrarie side) one of them which is drawne from the vnlike sound and writing of those names, Salmanassar and Nabonassar in the Hebrew, I hold a point about which no man will dispute; for it is not likenesse of sound, but agreement of time, and many circumstances else, that must take away the distinction of persons: the other likewise may be granted; which is, that Salmanassar might be Lord of some places in the Prouince of Babylon, yet not King of Babylon it selfe: this indeede might bee so, and it might be otherwise. there is nothing saue conjecture against conjecture But in that which is alleaged out of the Prophet , concerning the Sonne of ; and in that which is said of this Merodach, or Mardokenpadus, his the of Nabonassar, and his beginning to raigne in the sixt of , I finde matter of more difficultie, than can be answered in hast. I will therefore deferre the hand∣ling of these objections, vntill I meete with their subject in his proper place; which will be when we come to the time of Hezekia, wherein & was King. Yet that I may not leaue too great a scruple in the minde of the Reader, thus farre will I here satisfie him; that how strong soeuer this argument may seeme, himselfe did liue to retract it, ingenuously confessing, that in thinking to be the Sonne of Nabonassar, he had beene . Nowtherefore let vs consider, in what sort they haue fashioned their Storie, who taking Pul to be a distinct person from or Belestis, haue in like sort, as was ne∣cessarie, distinguished their off-spring, making that of Pul to faile in Asarhaddon, which left all to Merodach the Babylonian. And here I must first confesse mine owne want of Bookes, if perhaps there be many, that haue gone about to reduce this nar∣ration into some such order, as might present vnto vs the bodie of this Historie, in one view. Diuers, , there are, whom I haue seene, that since Ioseph Scaliger deliuered his opinion, haue written in fauour of some one or other point thereof: but himselfe, who hath abridged Scaligers learned Worke, De emen∣datione , hath not beene carefull to giue vs notice, how long Belesus, Bala∣dan, Pul, or Tiglat Pulassar, did raigne, (perhaps because he found it not expressed in Scaliger ) but is content to set downe , for the same person with Nabonassar, which himselfe reuoked. In this case therefore I must lay downe the plot of these deuided Kingdomes, in such sort as I finde it contriued by Augustinus Torni∣ellus; who onely of all that I haue seene, sets downe the succession, continuance, and acts, of those that raigned in Assyria after Sardanapalus, distinguishing them from Belosus, and his Posteritie, of whom he hath the like remembrance. This Torniellus is a Regular Clarke of the congregation of S. Paul, whose Annales were printed the last yeere; he appeares to me a man of curious industrie, sound , and Spirit; yet many times (and I take it, wilfully) forgetfull of thanking, or mentio∣ning those Protestant Writers, by whose Bookes hee hath receiued good informati∣on, and enriched his workes by inserting somewhat of theirs. But in this businesse he hath openly professed to follow Scaliger, whose helpe, without wrong or disho∣nour to , hee hath both vsed and . For mine owne part, I will spare to doe right vnto Torniellus; but confesse my selfe to haue receiued benefit by his writing; and wish that his Annales had sooner come to light; for that as hee much confirmed mee in some things, so would hee haue instructed and emboldened , to write more fully and lesse timorously in other things, which now I haue not leisure to reuise. Particularly in that coniecture (which I had faintly deliuered, and yet feared lest it had ouer-hastily passed out of my hand, and beene exposed to other mens constructions) of the foure Kings that inuaded the Vallie of , and were slaine by Abraham, I finde him aduenturing as I haue C. 1. §. 13. done, to say, that they may probably be thought to haue been some Lords; the contrarie opinion of all Writers notwithstanding. But now let vs consider how he hath ordered these Assyrian and Babylonian Kings. After the destruction of Sardanapalus, Arbaces being the most mightie, sought to get all to himselfe, but was opposed by ; in which contention, one Phul, a powerfull man in Assyria, sided with Belosus, and they two preuailed so farre, that fi∣nally Arbaces was content to share the Empire with them, making such a diuision thereof, as was long after made of the Roman Empire, betweene Octauian, Anthonie, and Lepidus. Another conjecture is (for Torniellus offers not this, or the rest, as matter of cer∣tainetie) that Arbaces made himselfe Soueraigne Lord of all, and placed the seate of his Empire in Media, appointing Belosus his Lieutenant in Babylonia, and in Assyria. But in short space, that is, in foure yeeres, it came to passe, by the just judgement of God, that Phul and Belosus rebelled against Arbaces, like as had done against Sardanapalus, and in stead of being his Viceroyes, made themselues absolute Kings. And to this later opinion Torniellus himselfe leanes, holding it much the more probable, as being more agreeable to that which is found in pro∣phane Histories. Why he did make and publish the former supposition, resoluing to hold the later, I shall anon, without any wrong to him, make bold to guesse. Ha∣uing thus deuised, how Phul and might, at the first, attaine to be Kings, hee orders their time, and their successors, in this manner. Foure yeeres after Arbaces, Phul beginnes to raigne, and continues eight and for∣tie yeeres. Theglatphalasar (whose name, and the names of other Princes, I write diuersly, according as the Authors whom I haue in hand are pleased to diuersifie them) succeeding vnto Phul, raigned three and twentie. Salmanassar followed him, and raigned tenne. After him Senacharib raigned seuen: and when hee was slaine, Asarhaddon his sonne tenne yeeres; in whom that Line failed. The same time that Phul tooke vpon him as King of Assyria, or not long after, (why not rather afore? for so it had beene more likely) Belosus vsurped the King∣dome of Babylon, and held it threescore and eight yeeres; at the least threescore and eight yeeres did passe, before Nabonassar followed him in the possession. To Nabonassar, whom (with Scaliger ) hee thinkes to be Baladan, are assigned sixe and twentie yeeres: then, two and fiftie to Merodach, or : foure and twentie to Ben Merodach: and lastly, one and twenty to Nabolassar, the father of Nabuchodonosor, who is like to offer matter of further disputation. Concerning the originall of these Assyrian and Babylonian Kingdomes, I may tru∣ly say, That the conjectures of other men, who giue all to Belosus, and confound him with Phul, appeare to me more neerely resembling the truth. Neither doe I thinke, that Torniellus would haue conceiued two different wayes, by which Phul might haue gotten Assyria (for how Belosus came to get Babylon, it is plaine enough) if either of them alone could haue contented him. He adhaeres to the later of the two, as better agreeing with Diodore, and other Historians. But he perceiued, that to make Phul on the suddaine King of Assyria; or to giue him so noble a Prouince, as would, of it selfe, inuite him to accept the name and power of a King, was a thing most vnlikely to haue happened, vnlesse his deserts (whereof wee finde no menti∣on) had beene proportionable to so high a reward. And for this cause (as I take it) hath hee deuised the meanes, whereby Phul might be made capable of so great a share in the Empire. If this were a true or probable supposition, then would a new doubt arise, Why this Phul, being one of the three that diuided all betweene them, was vtterly forgotten by all Historians? yea, why this Diuision it selfe, and the ciuile Warres that caused it, were neuer heard of. Questionlesse, the interuer∣ting of some Treasures by Belosus, with his Iudgement, Condemnation, and Par∣don following, were matters of farre lesse note. Therefore I doe not see, how one of the two inconueniences can this way be auoided; but that either wee must , the Dominion giuen to Phul to haue beene exceeding his merits, or else his merits, and name withall, to haue beene strangely forgotten: either of which is to make vs thinke, that rather the conjecture, inferring such a sequele, is wide of the truth. As for the rebellion of Phul and Belosus against Arbaces, it was almost impossible for the Assyrians to recouer such strength in foure yeeres, as might serue to hold out in rebellion: for Belosus, it was needlesse to rebell, considering, that Arbaces did not seeke to molest him, but rather permitted (as being an ouer∣great fauourer of libertie) euen the Medes, that were vnder his owne Gouernment, to doe what they lifted. But it is now fit that wee peruse the Catalogue of these Kings not passing through them all (for some will require a large discourse in their owne times) but speaking of their order and time in generall. If it bee so vnlawfull to thinke, that some of Annius his tales (let them all be counted his tales, which are not found in other Authors as well in his) may bee true, especially such, as contradict no ac∣knowledged truth, or apparant likelihood, why then is it said, that Phul did raigne in Assyria eight and fortie yeeres? For this hath no other ground than Annius. It is true, that painefull and judicious Writers haue found this number of yeeres, to a∣gree fitly with the course of things in History: yet all of them tooke it from Annius. it therefore be the punishment of Annius his forgerie (as questionlesse he is of∣ten of this crime) that when he tells truth, or probabilitie, hee be not belee∣ued for his owne sake; though for our owne sakes we make vse of his boldnesse, ta∣king his words for good, whereas (nothing else being offered) wee are vnwilling our selues to be Authors, of new, though not vnprobable conjectures. Herein we shall haue this commoditie, that wee may without blushing alter a little, to helpe our owne opinions, and lay the blame vpon Annius, against whom wee shall be sure to finde friends that will take our part. The raignes of Theglathalasar and did reach, by Annius his mea∣sure, to the length of fiue and twentie yeeres the one, and seuenteene the other; hath cut off two from the former, and seuen from the later of them, to fit (as I thinke) his owne computation; vsing the libertie whereof I spake last: for that any Author, saue our good Metasthenes, or those that borrowed of him, hath gone about to tell how long each of these did raigne, it is more then I haue yet found. To and Asarhaddon, giues the same length of raigne, which is found in Metasthenes. I thinke there are not many, that will arrogate so much vnto , as may well allowed vnto a man so judicious as is : yet could I wish, that he had forborne to condemne the followers of Annius, in this bu∣sinesse, wherein he himselfe hath chosen, in part, rather to become one of them, than to say as he must haue done, almost nothing. The like we finde that he hath vsed in measuring the raignes of the ; filling vp all the space betweene the end of Sardanapalus, and the beginning of Nabonassar, with the threescore and eight yeeres of Belosus. In this respect it was, perhaps, that hee thought Belosus might haue begunne his raigne somewhat later then Phul: for threescore and eight yeeres would seeme a long time for him to hold a Kingdome, that was no yong man when he tooke possession of it. But how is any whit of his age abated by shortning his raigne, seeing his life reacheth to the end of such a time, as were alone, without adding the time wherein hee was a priuate man, enough for a long liuer? Indeede, eight and fortie yeeres had beene somewhat of the most, considering that hee seemes by the Storie to haue been little lesse, at such time as hee joyned with Arbaces; and therefore the addition of twentie yeeres did vvell deserue that note (which Torniellus aduisedly giues) that if his raigne extended not so farre, then the raigne of such as came after him, occupied the middle time, vnto Nabonassar. I neither doe reprehend the boldnesse of Torniellus, in conjecturing, nor the mo∣destie of Scaliger and Sethus , in forbearing to set downe as warrantable, such things as depend only vpon likelihood. For things, whereof the perfect knowledge is taken away from vs by Antiquitie, must be described in , as Geographers in their Maps describe those Countries, whereof as yet there is made no true disco∣uerie, that is, either by leauing some part blanke, or by inserting the Land of Pig∣mies, Rocks of loade-stone, with Head-lands, Bayes, great Riuers, and other parti∣cularities, agreeable to common report, though many times controlled by follow∣ing experience, and found contrarie to truth. Yet indeede the ignorance growing from distance of place, allowes not such libertie to a Describer, as that which ari∣seth from the remedilesse obliuion of consuming time. For it is true that the Poetsaith; — feruidis Pars inclusa caloribus Mundi, nec Boreae finitimum latus, sole Niues, Mercatorem abigunt: horridacallidi Vincunt aequora Nauitae. Nor Southerne heate, nor Northerne snow That freezing to the ground doth grow, The subject Regions can fence, And keepe the greedie Marchant thence. The subtile Shipmen way will find, Storme neuer so the Seas with winde. Therefore the fictions (or let them be called conjectures) painted in Maps, doe serue only to mislead such discouerers as rashly beleeue them; drawing vpon the publishers, some angry curses, or well deserued scorne; but to keepe their own credit, they cannot serue alwaies. To which purpose I remember a pretic jest of Don Pedro de Sarmiento, a worthie Spanish Gentleman, who had beene employed by his King in planting a Colonic vpon the Streights of Magellan: for when I asked him, being then my Prisoner, some question about an Island in those Streights, which me thought, might haue done eyther benefit or displeasure to his enterprise, he told me merrily, that it was to be called the Painters wiues Island; saying, That whilest the fellow drew that Map, his wife sitting by, desired him to put in one for her; that she, in imagination, might haue an Island of her owne. But in filling vp the blankes of old Histories, we need not be so scrupulous. For it is not to be feared, that time should runne backward, and by restoring the things themselues to know∣ledge, make our conjectures appeare ridiculous: What if some good Copie of an ancient Author could bee found, shewing (if wee haue it not alreadie) the perfect truth of these vncertainties? would it be more shame to haue beleeued in the meane while, Annius or Torniellus, than to haue beleeued nothing? Here I will not say, that the credit, which we giue to Annius, may chance otherwhiles to bee giuen to one of those Authors whose names pretendeth. Let it suffice, that in regard of authority, I had rather trust Scaliger or Torniellus, than Annius; yet him than them, if his asser∣tion bee more probable, and more agreeable to approued Histories than their con∣jecture, as in this point it seemes to me; it hauing moreouer gotten some credit, by the approbation of many, and those not meanly learned. To end this tedious disputation; I hold it a sure course in examination of such opinions, as haue once gotten the credit of being generall, so to deale as in Capua did with the multitude, finding them desirous to put all the Senatours of the Citie to death. He lockt the Senatours vp within the State-house, and offered their to the Peoples mercie; obtayning thus much, that none of them should perish, vntill the Commonaltie had both pronounced him worthie of death, and elected a better in his place. The condemnation was hastie; for as fast as euery name was read, all the Towne cryed, Let him dye: but the execution required more leisure; for in substituting another, some notorious vice of the Person, or basenesse of his condition, or insufficiencie of his qualitie, made new one that was offered, to be rejected: so that finding the worfe and lesse choise, the further and the more that they sought, it was finally agreed, that the old should be kept for lack of better. §. V. Of the Olympiads, and the time when they began. AFter this diuision of the Assyrian Empire, followes the of the Olympian games, by Iphitus, in the raigne of the same King Vzzia, and in his one and fiftieth yeare. It is, I know, the generall opinion, that these games were established by Iphitus, in the first of : yet is not that opinion so generall, but that Authors, enough, haue giuen to them a more early beginning. The truth is, that in fitting those things vnto the sacred Historie, which are found in prophane Authors, wee should not bee too carefull of drawing the Hebrewes to those workes of time, which had no reference to their affaires; it is enough, that setting in due order these beginnings of accompts, we ioyne them to matters of Israel and Iuda, where occasion requires. These Olympian games and exercises of actiuitie, were first instituted by Hercules, who measured the length of the race by his owne foot; by which Pythagoras found out the stature and likely strength of Hercules his bodie. They name, not from the Mountaine Olympus, but from the Citie Olympia, otherwise Pisa, neere vn∣to Elis; where also Iupiters Temple in Elis, famous among the Graecians, and reputed among the wonders of the World, was knowne by the name of the Temple of Iupi∣ter Olympius. These games were exercised from euery fourth yeare compleat, in the plaines of Elis, a Citie of Peloponnesus, neere the Riuer Alpheus. the death of Hercules, these meetings were discontinued for many yeares, Aul. Gell. l. 1. c. 1 ex Plut. till Iphitus by aduice from the Oracle of Apollo, - them, Lycurgus the Plut. out of . Law-giuer then liuing: from which time they were continued by the Graecians, till the raigne of Theodosius the Emperor, according to Cedrenus: other thinke that they were dissolued vnder Constantine the Great. From this institution, Varro accompted the Graecian times, and their stories, to be certaine: but reckoned all before either doubtfull, or fabulous: and yet Plinie giues Plin. l. 36. c. 4. little credit to all that is written of Greece, till the raigne of Cyrus, who beganne in the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad, as Eusebius out of Diodore, Castor, Polybius, and others hath gathered, in whose time the seuen wise Graecians flourished. For Solon had speech with , and was ouerthrowne and taken by Cyrus. Many patient and piercing braines haue laboured to finde out the certaine begin∣ning of these Olympiads, namely, to set them in the true yeare of the World, and the raigne of such and such Kings: but seeing they all differ in the first accompt, that is, of the Worlds yeare, they can hardly jumpe in particulars thereon depending. Cyril against Iulian, and Didymus, beginne the Olympiads the nine and fortieth of Osias, or . Eusebius, who is contrarie to himselfe in this , accompts with those that Euseb. de . Euang. l. 10. c. 3. finde the first Olympiad in the beginning of the foure hundreth and sixth yeere after Troy, yet he telleth vs, that it was in the fiftieth yeare of Vzzia, which is (as I finde it) two yeares later. Eratosthenes placeth the first Olympiad foure hundred and seuen yeares after Troy, Eratosh. apud Clem. . . l. 1. reckoning the yeares that passed betweene; to whom Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Dio∣dorus Siculus, Solinus, and many others adhere. The distance betweene the destruction of Troy, and the first Olympiad, is thus collected by Eratosthenes. From the taking of Troy, to the descent of Hercules his into Peloponnesus, were fourescore yeares; thence to the Ionian expedition, threescore yeares; from that expedition to the time of Lycurgus his gouernement in Sparta, one hundred fiftie nine; and thence to the first Olympiad, one hundred and eight yeares. In this account the first yeare of the first Olympiad is not in∣cluded. But vaine labour it were, to seeke the beginning of the Olympiads, by numbring the yeares from the taking of Troy, which is of a date farre more . Let it suffice, that by knowing the instauration of these games, to haue beene in the foure hundreth and eight yeare current after Troy, we may reckon backe to the taking of that Citie, setting that, and other accidents, which haue reference thereto, in their proper times. The certaintie of things following the Olympiads, must teach vs how to finde when they began. To this good vse, we haue the ensuing yeares, vnto the death of Alexander the Great, thus diuided, by the same . From the beginning of the Olympiads, to the passage of Xerxes into Greece, two hundreth fourescore and seuenteen yeares; from thence to the beginning of the Peloponnesian Warre, eight and fortie yeares; forwards to the victorie of Lysander, seuen and twentie; to the battaile of Leuctra, thirtie foure; to the death of Philip King of Macedon, fiue and thirtie; and finally to the death of Alexander, twelue. The whole summe ariseth to foure hundred fiftie and three yeares; which number he otherwise also collecteth, and it is allowed by the most. Now for placing the institution of the Olympiads in the one and fiftieth yeare of Vzziah, we haue arguments, grounded vpon that which is certaine, concerning the beginning of Cyrus his raigne, and the death of Alexander; as also vpon the calculation of sundrie Eclipses of the Sunne, as of that which happened, when set out of Sardis with his Armie to inuade Greece; and of diuers other. Touching Cyrus, it is generally agreed that his raigne as King, before hee was Lord of the great Monarchie, began the first yeere of the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad, and that he raigned thirtie yeeres; they who giue him but twentie nine yeeres of raigne (following Herodotus rather than Tully, Iustine, Eusebius, and others) beginne Tull. de Diu. l. 1. Just. l. 1. a yeere later, which comes all to one reckoning. So is the death of Alexander set by . de . Euang. l. . c. 3. & de . E∣uang. l. 8. c. . all good Writers, in the first yeere of the hundreth and fourteenth Olympiad. This later note of Alexanders death, serues well to leade vs back to the beginning of Cy∣rus; as many the like obseruations doe. For if we reckon vpwards from the time of Alexander, we shall finde all to agree with the yeeres of the Olympiads, wherein Cy∣rus beganne his raigne, either as King, or (taking the word Monarch, to signifie a Lord of many Kingdomes) as a great Monarch. From the beginning of Cyrus, in the first yeere of the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad, vnto the end of the Persian Empire, which was in the third of the hundreth and twelfth Olympiad, we find two hundred and thirtie yeeres compleat: from the beginning of Cyrus his Monarchie, which la∣sted but seuen yeeres, we finde compleat two hundred and seuen yeeres, which was the continuance of the Persian Empire. Now therefore seeing that the first yeere of Cyrus his Monarchie (which was the last of the sixtieth Olympiad, and the two hundreth and fortieth yeere from the in∣stitution of those games by Iphitus ) followed the last of the seuentie yeeres, of the captiuitie of Iuda, and desolation of the Land of Israel; manifest it is, that wee must reckon backe those seuentie yeeres, and one hundred threescore and ten yeeres more, the last which passed vnder the Kings of Iuda, to finde the first of these Olym∣piads; which by this accompt is the one and fiftieth of Vzzia, as wee haue already noted. The Eclipses whereof we made mention, serue well to the same purpose. For examples sake, that which was seene when Xerxes mustered his Armie at Sardis, in the two hundreth threescore and seuenth yeere of Nabonassar, being the last of the threescore and fourteenth Olympiad; leades vs backe vnto the beginning of Xerxes, and from him to Cyrus, whence we haue a faire way through the threescore and ten yeeres, vnto the destruction of Ierusalem; and so vpwards through the raignes of the last Kings of Iuda, to the one and fiftieth yeere of Vzzia. Thus much may suffice, concerning the time wherein these Olympiads be∣ganne. To tell the great solemnitie of them, and with what exceeding great concourse of all Greece they were celebrated, I hold it a superfluous labour. It is enough to say, that all bodily exercises, or the most of them, were therein practised; as Running, Wrastling, Fighting, and the like. Neither did they onely contend for the Mastrie in those , whereof there was good vse, but in running of Chariots, fighting with Whorle bats, and other the like ancient kinds of exercises, that serued onely for ostentation. Thither also repaired Orators, Poets, Musicians, and all that thought themselues excellent in any qualitie, to make triall of their skill. Yea the very Cryers, which proclaimed the victories, contended which of them should get the honour, of hauing plaied the best part. The Eleans were Presidents of those Games; whose justice, in pronouncing without partialitie, who did best, is highly commended. As for the rewards giuen to the Victors, they were none other than Garlands of Palme, or Oliue, without any other commoditie following, than the reputation. Indeede there needed no more. For that was held so much, that when Diagoras had seene his three Sonnes crowned for their seuerall victories in those games, one came running to him with this gratulation: Morere, DIAGORAS, non enim in coelum ascensurus es; that is; Die, DIAGORAS, For thou shalt not clime vp to heauen: as if there could bee no greater happinesse on earth, than what alreadie had befallen him. In the like sense Horace speakes of these Victors, calling them, Quos Elaea domum reducit Hor at. . l. 4. Ode 2. Palma coelestes. Such as like heauenly weights doe come With an Elaean Garland home. Neither was it only the voice of the People, or the songs of Poets, that so highly extolled them, which had wonne these Olympian prizes; but euen graue Historians thought it a matter worthie of their noting. Such was (as Tullie counts it) the Tull. . . of the Greekes, that they esteemed it almost as great an honor, to haue wonne the victorie at Running or Wrastling in those games, as to haue triumphed in for some famous victorie, or conquest of a Prouince. That these Olympian games were celebrated at the full of the Moone, and vpon the fifteenth day of the Moneth , which doth answere our Iune; and what meanes they vsed to make the Moneth begin with the new Moone, that the fifteenth day might be the full; I haue shewed in another place. Wherefore I may now returne vnto the Kings of Iuda, and leaue the merrie Greekes at their games, whom I shall meete in more serious emploiments, when the Persian quarrells draw the bodie of this Historie into the coasts of Ionia and Hellespont. §. VI. Of IOTHAM and his Contemporaries. IOTHAM the Sonne of Vzziah, when hee was fiue and twentie yeeres old, and in the second of Pekah King of Israel, was anointed King in 2. Kings 15. 33. , his Father yet liuing. He built an exceeding high Gate to the Temple, of threescore cubits vpright, and therefore called Ophel: besides diuers Cities in the Hills of Iuda, and in the Forrests, Towers, and Palaces: he inforced the Ammonites to pay him Tribute, to wit, of Siluer an hundreth talents, and of Wheate and Barly two thousand measures: hee raigned sixe and twentie yeeres: of whom Iosephus giues this testimonie: Eiusmodi vero Princeps suit, vt nullum in eo virtutis genus desideres: vt qui Deum adeo coluerit, hominibus suis pr , vrbem ipsam tantae sibi curae essepassus sit, & tanto∣pere , vt vniuer sum regnum hostibus quidem contemnendum, autem incolis atque ciuibus foelix, faustum & virtue effecerit; This was such a Prince, as a man could finde no kinde of vertue wanting in him: hee worship∣ped God so religiously, hee gouerned his men so righteously, hee was so prouident for the Citie, and did so greatly amplifie it, that by his vertue and prowesse hee made his whole Kingdome not contemptible to his enemies, but to his Seruants, Inhabitants and Citizens, prosperous and happie. This is all that I finde of Iotham: his raigne was not long, but as happie in all things, as he himselfe was deuout and vertuous. Auchomenes about this time succeeded Phelesteus in Corinth: after whom, the Co∣rinthians erected Magistrates, which gouerned from yeere to yeere. And yet Pau∣sanias in his second Booke, with Strabo and Plutarch, in many places are of opinion, That Corinth was gouerned by Kings of the race of the Bacidae, to the time of Cypse∣lus, who droue them out. Teglathphalassar, or Tiglathpeleser, the sonne of Phul, the second of the Babylonians and Assyrians that was of this new race, about this time inuaded Israel, while Pekah 2. Kings 15. (who murthered his Master Pekaiah ) was King thereof. In which Expedition hee tooke most of the Cities of Nephtali and Galile, with those of Gilead, ouer Iordan, and carried the inhabitants captiue. This Tiglath raigned fiue and twentie yeeres, ac∣cording to Metasthenes. But Krentzhemius findes, that with his sonne Salmanassar he raigned yet two yeeres longer: which yeeres I would not ascribe to the sonne, be∣cause the Aera of Nabonassar beginnes with his single raigne, but reckon them to Tighlath Phulassar himselfe, who therewith raigned seuen and twentie yeeres. Aeschylus, the sonne of , about the same time, the twelfth Archon in , ruled fiue and twentie yeeres. Alcamenes gouerned Sparta: after whom, the Estate changed, according to Euscbius: but therin surely Eusebius is mistaken. For Dio∣dore, Plutarch, Pausanias, and others, witnesse the contrarie. Pausanias affirmeth, That Paus. l. 3. Polydorus, a Prince of eminent vertues, succeeded his father, and raigned threescore yeeres, and out-liued the Messeniack Warre: which was ended by Theopompus, the sonne of Nicander, his royall companion. At this time liued Nahum Prophet, who fore-told the destruction of the As∣syrian Empire, and of the Citie of ; which succeeded (saith Iosephus ) a hun∣dred and fifteene yeeres after. The Cities of Cyrene and of Aradus were built at this time, while in Media, Sosarmus and Medidus raigned, being the second and third Kings of those parts. §. VII. Of ACHAZ and his Contemporaries. AHAS, or Achaz, succeeded vnto Iotham in the seuenteenth yeere of Peka, the sonne of Remalia: the same being also the last yeere of his fathers raigne, who began in the second of the same Peka, and raigned sixteene, but not complete yeeres. This was an Idolater, exceeding all his predecessors. Hee made molten Images for Baalim, and burnt his sonne for sacri∣fice before the Idoll Moloch, or Saturne, which was represented by a man-like bra∣zen 2. King 16. 1. 2. Chron. 28. bodie, bearing the head of a Calfe, set vp not farre from Ierusalem, in a Valley shaddowed with Woods, called Gehinnom, or Tophet, from whence the word Gehen∣na is vsed for Hell. The children offered, were inclosed within the carkasse of this Idoll, and as the fire encreased, so the sacrificers, with a noyse of Cymbals and other Instruments, filled the ayre, to the ende the pitifull cries of the children might not be heard: which vnnaturall, cruell, and deuillish Oblation, Ieremie the Prophet vehemently reprehendeth, and of which S. Hierome vpon the tenth of Matthew hath written at large. By the prohibition in Leuiticus the eighteenth, it c. 7. 19. 32. appeareth that this horrible sinne was ancient: in the twelfth of , it is called an abomination which God hateth. That it was also practised elsewhere, and by many Nations remote from , diuers Authors witnesse; as Virgil in the second of his , — Sanguine placastis, &c. and Silius, — Poscere caede Dcos. Saturne is said to haue brought this custome into Italie, besides the casting of many soules into the Riuer of , in stead of which, Hercules commanded, that the waxen Images of men should be throwne in and drowned. The Deuill also taught the Carthaginians this kinde of , in so much, that when their Citie was be∣sieged, and in distresse, the Priest made them beleeue, that because they had spared their owne children, and had bought and brought vp others to bee offered, that therefore Saturne had stirred vp, and strengthened their Enemies against them: whereupon they presently caused two hundred of the noblest youths of their Citie to be slaine, and offered to Saturne or Satan, to appease him: who besides these fore∣named . de . Euang. l. 6. Nations had instructed the , the people of Crete, and Chios, of Messe∣na, Dion. l. . Diod. l. 20. of Galatia, with the Massagets, and others, in these his seruices: Further, as if hee were not content to destroy the soules of many Nations in Europe, Asia, and Africa, (as Acosta writeth) the Mexicans and other people of America, were brought by Acost. de Hist. nat. & mor. Ind. the Deuill vnder this fearefull seruitude, in which he also holdeth the Floridans and Virginians at this day. For the wickednesse of this King Ahaz, God stirred vp Rezin of Damascus, and Pekah the Sonne of , King of Israel against him, who inuaded , and be∣sieged Ierusalem, but entred it . The King of Syria, Rezin, possest himselfe of Elah by the Red Sea, and cast the Iewes out of it, and Pekah slaughtered in one day an hundred and twentie thousand , of the ablest of the Kingdome, at which time Maaseiah, the Sonne of Achaz 2. . 28. 6. was also slaine by Zichri, with Azrikam the Gouernour of his house: and the second person vnto the King. Besides all this, two hundred thousand prisoners of women and children, the Israelites led away to Samaria: but by the counsell of the Prophet Oded, they were returned and deliuered backe againe. As Israel and vexed Iuda on the North; so the Edomites and the Philistims, who euermore attended the ruine of , entred vpon them from the South; and tooke Bethsemes, Aialon, , Socho, Timnah, and Gemzo, slew many people, and 2. Chron. 28. carried away many prisoners. Whereupon when Achaz saw himselfe enuironed on all sides, and that his Idolls and dead gods gaue him no comfort, hee sent to the Assyrian Tiglathpileser, to desire some alde from him against the Israelites and Ara∣mites, presenting him with the siluer and gold both of the Temple, and Kings 2. Kings 16. House. Tiglathpileser wanted not a good example to follow, in making profit of the trou∣bles that rose in . His Father hauing lately made himselfe a Prouin∣ciall Lieutenant, King of Babylon and Assyria, had a little before led him the way in∣to , inuited by , King of Israel. Wherefore now the Sonne willingly to Achaz and embraced the aduantage. As for Belochus himselfe, he was content to assigne some other time for going through with this enterprise: because (as I haue said before) he was not firmely settled at home, and the Kings lay directly in his way, who were yet strong both in men and fame. But Tiglath, hauing now, with the treasures of Ierusalem, prepared his Armie, first inuaded the Terri∣torie of Damascus, wanne the Citie, and killed Rezin, the last of the race of the Adads, who beganne with Dauid, and ended with this Achaz. At Damascus Achaz met Ti∣glath, and taking thence a patterne of the Altar, sent it to Vriah the Priest, comman∣ding the like to be made at Ierusalem, whereon at his returne hee burnt Sacrifice to the Gods of the Syrians. In the meane while Tiglath possest all Basan, and the rest beyond Iordan, which belonged to the Tribe of Reuben, Gad, and Manasse. And then passing the Riuer, he mastered the Cities of Galilee, inuaded Ephraim, and the King∣dome of Israel, and made them his Vassalls. And notwithstanding that he was inui∣ted and waged by Achaz, yet after the spoile of Israel, he possest himselfe of the grea∣ter part of Iuda, and as it seemeth, inforced Achaz to pay him Tribute. For in the second of Kings, the eighteenth, it is written of Ezechia, that he reuolted from Ashur, or rebelled against him, and therefore was inuaded by Senacherib. After Ahaz had beheld and borne these miseries, in the end of the sixteenth yeere of his raigne hee died: but was not buried in the Sepulchers of the Kings of Iuda. With Ahaz liued Medidus, the third Prince in Media, who gouerned fortie yeeres, saith Eusebius: Diodorus and Ctesias finde Anticarmus in stead of this Medidus, to . in Chron. haue beene Sosarmus his Successour, to whom they giue fiftie yeeres. Tiglath Phileser held the Kingdome of Assyria, all the raigne of Ahaz: yet so, that Salmanassar his Sonne may seeme to haue raigned with him some part of the time. For we finde that Ahaz did send vnto the Kings of ASHVR to helpe him. The Ge∣neua 28. 16. note saies, that these Kings of Ashur were Teglath Pileser, and those Kings that were vnder his Dominion. But that hee or his Father had hitherto made such con∣quests, as might giue him the Lordship ouer other Kings, I doe neither finde any Historie, nor circumstance that proueth. Wherefore I thinke that these Kings of Ashur, were Tiglath, and Salmanassar his Sonne, who raigned with his Father, as hath beene said before: though how long hee raigned with his Father, it bee hard to define. At this time beganne the Ephori in Lacedaemon, a hundred and thirtie yeeres after Lycurgus, according to Plutarch. Eusebius makes their beginning farre later, namely, Plut. in vita Soli. in the fifteenth Olympiad. Of these Ephori, Elalus was the first; Theopompus and Po∣lydorus, being then joynt Kings. These Ephori, chosen euery yeere, were controllers, as well of their Senators as of their Kings, nothing being done without their aduice and consent. For (saith Cicero ) they were opposed against their Kings, as the Roman Tribunes against the Consuls. In the time of Ahaz died Aeschylus, who had ruled in Athens euer since the fiftith yeere of Vzzia. Alcamenon the thirteenth of the Medon∣tidae, or Gouernours of the Athenians (so called of Medon who followed Codrus ) suc∣ceeded his Father Aeschylus, and was the last of these Gouernors: he ruled only two yeeres. For the Athenians changed first from Kings (after Codrus ) to Gouernors for life; which ending in this Alcamenon, they erected a Magistrate, whom they termed an Archon, who was a kind of Burghomaster, or Gouernor of their City for ten yeeres. This alteration Pausanias in his fourth Booke beginnes, in the first yeere of the eight Olympiad. Eusebius and Halicarnassaeus in the first of the seuenth Olympiad: at which time indeed, Caerops the first of these, began his ten yeeres rule. The Kingdome of the Latines gouerned about three hundred yeere by the Syluij, of the race of Aeneas, tooke ende the same Ahaz time: the foundation of Rome, being laied by Romulus and Remus in the eight yeere of the same King. Codoman builds it the eleuenth of Achaz, Bucholzer in the eighth, as I think he should, others somewhat later, and in the raigne of Ezechias. Cicero, Eutropius, Orosius, and others, square the time of the foundation to the third yeere of the sixth Olympiad. But Halicarnassaeus, Solinus Antiochenus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius, to the first yeere of the se∣uenth: who seeme not only to me, but to many very learned Chronologers, to haue kept therein the best accompt. CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Antiquities of , and of Rome in the time of AHAS. §. I. Of the old Inhabitants, and of the name of Italie. AND here to speake of the more ancient times of Italie, and what Nations possest it before the arriuall of Ae∣neas, the place may seeme to inuite vs: the rather be∣cause much fabulous matter hath beene mixed with the truth of those elder plantations. Italie before the fall of Troy, was knowne to the Greekes by diuers Halicar. l. 1. names: as first Hesperia, then , the one name arising of the Seate, the other of the Ausones, a peo∣ple inhabiting part of it: one ancient name of it was also Oenotria, which it had of the Oenotri: whom Ha∣licarnassaeus thinks to haue been the first, that brought a Colonie of Arcadians into that Land. Afterward it was called Italie of Italus: con∣cerning which changes of names, Virgil speakes thus. Est locus Hesperiam Graij cognomine dicunt: Terra antiqua, potens armis, atque vbere glebae: Oenotrij viri, nunc fama minores Italiam dixisse, ducis de nomine, gentem. There is a Land which Greekes Hesperia name, Ancient, and strong, of much fertilitie. Oenotrians held it, but we heare by fame, That by late ages of , 'Tis from a Captaines name called Italie. Who this Captaine or King may haue beene, it is very vncertaine. For Virgil speakes no more of him, and the opinions of others are many and repugnant. But like enough it is, that the name which hath continued so long vpon the whole Countrie, and worne out all other denominations, was not at the first accepted without good cause. Therefore to finde out the originall of this name, and the first planters of this noble Countrie, Reineccius hath made a very painful search, and not improbable conjecture. And first of all he grounds vpon that of Halicarnassaeus, Halicarn. l. 1. who speakes of a Colonie which the Eleans did leade into Italie, before the name of Italie was giuen to it: Secondly, vpon that of Iustine, who saith, that Brundusium Iust. l. 12. was a Colonie of the Aetolians: Thirdly, vpon that of Strabo, who affirmes the l. 6. same of Temesa or Tempsa, a Citie of the Brutij in Italie: Lastly, vpon the au∣thoritie of Plinie, who shewes that the Italians did inhabite onely one Region of the Plin. l. 3. c. 5. Land, whence afterward the name was deriued ouerall. Concerning that which is said of the Eleans and Aetolians, who (as hee shewes) had one originall; from them hee brings the name of Italie. For the word Italia, differs in nothing from Aitolia, saue that the first Letter is cast away, which in the Greeke words is common, and the letter ( o ) is changed into ( a ) which change is found in the name of Aethalia an Island neere Italie, peopled by the Aetholians: and the like changes are very familiar in the Aeolic Dialect; of which Dialect (being almost proper to the Aetolions ) the accent and pronunciation, together with many words little altered, were retained by the Latines, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Quintilian, and the Grammarian teach. Hereunto appertaines that of Iulian the Apostata, who called the Greekes, cousins of the Latines. Also the common originall of the Greekes and Latines from Iauan; and the Fable of Ianus, whose Image had two fa∣ces, looking East and West, as Greece and Italie lay, and was stamped on Coynes, with a Ship on the other side; all which is, by interpretation, referred to Iauan, father of the Greekes and Latines: who sayling ouer the Ionian Sea, that lyes be∣tweene Aetolia and the Westerne parts of Greece and Italie, planted Colonies in both. Now whereas Reyneccius thinkes, that the names of Atlas and Italus belon∣ged both to one man, and thereto applyes that of Berosus, who called Cethim, Ita∣lus; though it may seeme strengthened by the marriage of Dardanus, whilest hee a∣bode in Italie with Electra, the daughter of Atlas, yet is it by arguments (in my va∣luation) greater and stronger, easily disproued. For they who make mention of Atlas, place him before the time of Moses: and if Atlas were Cethim, or Kittim, then was he the sonne of , and nephew of Iapheth, the eldest sonne of Noah: which antiquity farre exceedes the name of Italie, that began after the departure of Hercules out of the Countrey, not long before the Warre of Troy. Likewise Virgil, who speakes of Atlas, and of Dardanus his marriage with Ele∣ctra, hath nothing of his meeting with her in Italie; but calleth Electra and her sister Maia (poetically) daughters of the Mountaine Atlas in Africa, naming Italus among the Kings of the Aborigenes; which he would not haue done, had Atlas and Italus beene one person. As for the authoritie of Berosus in this case, wee neede the lesse to regard it, for that Reyneccius himselfe, whose conjectures are more to be valued then the dreames wherewith Annius hath filled Berosus, holds it but a figment. That the name of Italie began long after Atlas, it appeares by the Verses of Vir∣gil last rehearsed, wherein hee would not haue said, — Nunc fama minores Italiam dixisse ducis de nomine gentem, had that name beene heard of Darda∣nus left the Countrey. But seeing that, when Hercules, who died a few yeeres be∣fore the Warre of Troy, had left in Italie a Colonie of the Eleans (who in a manner were one and the same Nation with the Aetolians, as Strabo, Herodotus, and Pausa∣nias teach) then the name of Italie began: and seeing Virgil makes mention of Italus among the Italian Kings, it were no great boldnesse to say, that Italus was Com∣mander of these Eleans. For though I remember not, that I haue read of any such Greeke as was named Italus; yet the name of Aetolus, written in Greeke Aitolus, was very famous both among the Aetolians, and among the Eleans, he being sonne of a King of Elis, and founder of the Aetolian Kingdome. Neither is it more hard to de∣riue the name of Italus from Aetolus, then Italia from Aetolia. So may Virgils autho∣ritie stand well with the collections of Reyneccius; the name of Italie being taken both from a Captaine, and from the Nation, of which he and his people were. §. II. Of the Aborigines, and other Inhabitants of Latium, and of the reason of the names of Latini and Latium. IN Italic the Latines and Hetrurians were most famous; the Hetrurians hauing held the greatest part of it vnder their subjection; and the La∣tines by the vertue and felicitie of the Romans, who were a branch of them, subduing all Italic, and in few ages whatsoeuer Nation was knowne in Europe: together with all the Westerne parts of Asia, and North of Africk. The Region called Latium, was first inhabited by the Aborigines, whom Hali∣carnassaeus, Varro, and Reyneccius (following them) thinke to haue beene : and this name of Aborigines (to omit other significations that are strained) imports as much as originall, or natiue of the place, which they possessed: which title the Arcadians are knowne in vaunting manner to haue alwaies vsurped, fetching their antiquitie from beyond the Moone; because indeede, neither were the inhabitants of Peloponnesus inforced to forsake their seates so oft as other Greekes were, who dwelt without that halfe Island, neither had the Arcadians so vnsure a dwelling as the rest of the Peloponnesians, because their Countrie was lesse fruitfull in land, mountainous, and hard of accesse, and they themselues (as in such places common∣ly are found) very warlikemen. Some of these therefore hauing occupied a great part of Latium, and held it long, did according to the Arcadian manner, them∣selues Aborigines, in that language, which either their new Seate, or their Neigh∣bours thereby had taught them. How it might bee that the Arcadians who dwelt somewhat farre from Sea, and are alwaies noted as vnapt men to proue good Ma∣riners, should haue beene Authors of new discoueries, were a question not easie to be answered, were it not so, that both fruitfulnesse of children, in which those ages abounded, inforceth the superfluous companie to seeke another seat, and that some expeditions of the Arcadians, as especially that of Euander, into the same parts of , are generally acknowledged. After the Aborigines, were the Pelasgi, an ancient Nation, who sometimes gaue name to al Grecce: but their antiquities are long since dead, for lack of good records. Neither was their glorie such in Italie, as could long sustaine the name of their owne Tribe; for they were in short space accounted one people with the former inha∣bitants. The Sicani, Ausones, Aurunci, , and other people, did in ages follow∣ing disturbe the peace of Latium, which by Saturne was brought to some ciuilitie; and he therefore canonized as a god. This Saturne S. Augustine calleth Sterces or Sterculius, others terme him Stercu∣tius, and say, that hee taught the people to dung their grounds. That Latium tooke his name of Saturne, because he did latere, that is, lie hidden there, when he fled from Iupiter, it is a questionlesse fable. For as in Heathenish superstition, it was great va∣nitie to thinke that any thing could be hidden from God, or that there were many gods of whom one fled from another; so in the truth of Historie, it is well knowne, that no King raigning in those parts was so mightie, that it should be hard to finde one Countrie or an other, wherein a man might be safe from his pursuit. And yet, as most fables and poeticall fictions, were occasioned by some ancient truth, which See lib. 1. cap. 6. §. 1. & seq. either by ambiguitie of speech or some allusion, they did maimedly and darkly ex∣presse (for so they fained a passage ouer a Riuer in Hell, because death is a passage to another life, and because this passage is hatefull, lamentable, and painefull, there∣fore they named the Riuer Styx of Hate, Cocytus of Lamentation, and Acheron of Paine: so also because men are stonie-hearted, and because the Greeke people, and stones, are neere in sound, therefore they fained in the time of Deucalion stones conuerted into men, as at other times men into stones) in like manner it may be, that the originall of Saturnes hiding himselfe, was some allusion to that old opi∣nion of the wisest of the Heathen, that the true God was ignotus Deus, as it is noted Acts . 23. in the Acts; whence also Esay of the true God saies, Tu Deus abdens te. For it can not 45. . be in vainc, that the word Saturnus should also haue this very signification, if it bee deriued (as some thinke) from the Hebrew Satar, which is to hide: Howbeit I denie not, but that the original of this word, Latium, ought rather to be sought elsewhere. Reyneccius doth conjecture that the , who descended of Cethim, the Sonne of Iauan, were the men who gaue the name to Latium. For these Ceteans are remem∣bred by Homer as aiders of the Troians in their Warre. Strabo interpreting the place of Homer, calls them subjects to the Crowne of Troy. Hereupon Reyneccius gathers, that their abode was in Asia: viz. in agro ; in the Elaitian Territorie, which a∣greeth with Strabo. Of a Citie which the Aeolians held in Asia, called Elaea, or Elaia, Pausanias makes mention: Stephanus calls it Cidaemis, or (according to the Greeke writing) , which name last rehearsed hath a very neere sound to Cethim, Ci∣tim, or Cithim; the Greeke Letter ( D ) hauing (as many teach) a pronunciation ve∣ry like to ( TH ) differing onely in the strength or weakenesse of vtterance, which is found betweene many English words written with the same letters. Wherefore that these Ceteans being descended of Cethim, Cittim, or Kittim, the Sonne of Iauan, who was Progenitor of the Greekes, might very well take a denomination from the Citie, and Region, which they inhabited, and from thence be called Elaeites, or Elai∣tes, it is very likely, considering that among the Arcadians, Phocians, Aetolians, and Eleans, who all were of the Aeolique Tribe, are found the names of the Mountaine Elaeus, the Hauen Elaeas, the people Elaitae, the Cities Elaeus, Elaia, and Elateia, of which last it were somewhat harsh in the Latine tongue to call the Inhabitants by any o∣ther name then Elatini, from whence Latini may come. Now whereas both the Cetaei and Arcadians, had their originall from Cethim, it is nothing vnlikely, that a∣greeing in language and similitude of names, they might neuerthelesse differ in sound and pronunciation of one and the same word. So that as he is by many cal∣led Sabinus, to whom some (deriuing the Sabines from him) giue the name of Sabus: in the like manner might he whom the Arcadians would call Elatus (of which name they had a Prince that founded the Citie Elateia ) bee named of the Ceteans Latinus. Reyneccius pursuing this likelihood, thinks, that when Eurypilus, Lord of the Ceteans, being the Sonne of Telephus, whom Hercules begat vpon Auge, the Daughter of A∣leus King of Arcadia, was slaine by Achilles in the Troian Warre: then did Telephus, brother to Euripylus, conduct the Ceteans; who (fearing what euill might befall themselues by the Greekes, if the affaires of Troy should goe ill) passed into that part of Italie, where the were planted by Oenotrus. And Reyneccius farther thinks, that Telephus being the more gracious among the Oenotrian Arcadians, by the memorie of his Grand-mother Auge, an Arcadian Ladie, was well contented to take an Arcadian name, and to be called Elatus, which in the dialect and pronunciation either of the Ceteans, or of the Oenotrians, was first Elatinus, and then Latinus: That this name of Elatus may haue been taken or imposed by the Arcadians, it is the more easie to be thought, for that there were then two Families, the one of Aphidas, the other of Elatus, who were Sonnes of Arcas King of Arcadia, which gaue name to the Countrie: and betweene these two Families the succession in that Kingdome did passe, almost enterchangeably for many ages, till at the end of the Troian warre it fell into the hand of Hippotheus of the race of Elatus, in whose Posteritie it conti∣nued vntill the last. Againe, the name Latinus, hauing a deriuatiue sound, agrees the better with the supposition of such an accident. This is the conjecture of Rey∣neccius, which if he made ouer-boldly, yet others may follow it with the lesse re∣proofe, considering that it is not easie to finde either an apparent truth, or faire pro∣babilitie among these disagreeing Authors, which haue written the originals of Latium. §. III. Of the ancient Kings of the Latines vntill AENEAS his comming. THe Kings which raigned in Latium before the arriual of Aeneas, were, Saturnus, Picus, Faunus, and Latinus. Of Saturne there is nothing re∣membred, saue what is mentioned alreadie, and many fables of the Greckes, which whether they be appliable to this man, it is for him to judge, who shall be able to determine, whether this were the Saturne of the Greekes, called by them , or some other, stiled Saturne by the Aborigines. For the age wherein hee liued, may very well admit him to haue beene the same: but the names of Ezekiel cals the Idols of the heathen dcos stercoreos: and hence it may be that in the Euangelist wee reade for Belzebub, Belze∣bul, which is interpreted Dominus Ster∣coreus: and it may be that after that Sa∣turne became the name of an Idol, it plea∣sed God that in a like this name Ster∣cutius should sticke vnto him. Sterces, and Stercutius (for it may be, this name was not bor∣rowed from the skill which hee taught the people, but rather the soile which they laied on their grounds, had that appellation from him) doe rather make him seeme some other man. Of Picus it is said, that he was a good Horse-man. The fable of his being chan∣ged into a Bird, which we call a Pie, may well seeme (as it is interpreted) to haue growne from the skill which he had in sooth-saying, or diuination, by the flight and chattering of Fowles. Faunus, the Sonne of Picus, raigned after his Father. Hee gaue to the Arcadian (who hauing slaine by mischance his Father Echemus King of Arcadia, fled into Italie ) the waste grounds on which Rome was afterward built. Fauna, called Fatua, the sister of Faunus, was also his Wife, as all Historians a∣gree; shee was held a Prophetesse, and highly commended for her chastitie; which praise in her must needs haue beene much blemished by hcr marriage, it selfe being meerely incestuous. It is not mentioned that Faunus had by his sister any child, neither doe we reade of any other Wife which he had, saue only that Virgil giues vnto him Latinus as his Aeneid. 7. Sonne, by a Nymph, called Marica. But who this Marica was it is not found, saue onely that her abode was about the Riuer Liris neere Minturnae. Of the name Latinus, there are by Pomponius Sabinus recounted foure: one, the Sonne of Faunus, another of Hercules, a third of Vlysses by Circe, the fourth of Telema∣thus. Suidas takes notice onely of the second, of whom hee saith, that his name was in the word Latini. Telephus, and the people anciently named the Cetij, were from his surname called Latini. This agrees in effect with the opinion of Reyneccius, the difference consisting almost in this only, that Suidas calls Telephus, the Sonne of Hercules, whereas Reynec∣cius makes him his Nephew, by a sonne of the same name. This Latinus hauing the succession in that Kingdome after Faunus, did promise his only Daughter and Heire Lauinia, to Turnus the sonne of Venilia, who was sister to Amata Latinus his Wife. But when Aeneas arriued in those parts with fifteene ships, or perhaps fewer, wherein might bee imbarked according to the rate which Thucydides allowes to the Vessells then vsed, about one thousand & two hundred men: then Latinus finding that it would stand best with his assurance, to make alliance with the Troian, and moued with the great reputation of Aeneas, which himselfe had heard of in the Warre of Troy, gaue his Daughter to him, breaking off the former appointment with Turnus, who incensed herewith, sought to auenge himselfe by warre: which was soone ended with his owne death. Of Amata the Wife of Latinus, it is very certaine, that were shee an Italian, shee could not haue borne a Daughter marriageable at the arriuall of Aeneas; vnlesse we should wholly follow Suidas, and rather giue the conduct of the Cetei into Italie, to Telephus the Father, than to his Sonne, who serued in the last yeere of the Troian Warre. But Reyneccius holds her an , and thinkes withall, that Lauinia was borne before Telephus came into Italie. That this name Amata, by which Virgil and Halicarnassaeus call her, was not proper, but rather a surname, it may seeme by Varro; who calleth her Palatia: which name very well might bee deriued from the Greeke name Pallas. , which signifieth beloued, or deare, was the name by which the High Priest called euery Virgin, whom hee tooke to serue as a Nunne of Vesta; wherefore it is the more easily to be thought a surname, howsoeuer Virgil discourse of her and Venilia her sister. Lauinia, the daughter of Latinus, being giuen in marriage to Aeneas, the Kingdome of Latium, or the greatest part of that Countrie, was established in that race: wherin it continued vntill it was ouer-growne by the might and greatnesse of the Romans. §. IIII. Of AENEAS, and of the Kings and Gouernours of Alba. AENEAS himselfe being of the royall bloud of Troy, had the commaund of the Dardanians: hee was a valiant man, very rich, and highly honoured among the Troians. By his wife Creusa, the daughter of Priamus, hee had a sonne called Ascanius; whose surname vvas Iulus, hauing be∣fore the ruine of Troy (as Virgil notes) beene surna∣med Ilus. But when Aeneas vvas dead, his wife Lauinia, the daughter of Latinus, being great with child by him, and fearing the power of this Ascanius, fled into the Woods, where she was de∣liuered of a sonne, called therevpon Syluius, and surnamed Posthumus, because hee was borne after his fathers Funerall. This flight of Lauinia was so euill taken by the people, that Ascanius procured her returne, entreated her honourably, and v∣sing her as a Queene, did foster her young sonne, his halfe-brother Syluius. Yet af∣terwards, whether to auoid all occasions of disagreement, or delighted with the situation of the place; Ascanius leauing to his mother in law the Citie Lauinium, which Aeneas had built, and called after his new wiues name, founded the Citie Alba Longa, and therein raigned. The time of his raigne was, according to some, eightand twentie yeeres: Virgil giues him thirtie; others fiue and thirtie, and eight and thirtie. After his decease, there arose contention betweene Syluius, the sonne of Aeneas, and Iulus the sonne of Ascanius, about the Kingdome: but the people inclining to the sonne of Lauinia, Iulus was contented to hold the Priesthood, which he and his race enjoyed, leauing the Kingdome to Syluius Posthumus, whose poste∣ritie were afterward called Syluij. The raigne of the Alban Kings, with the continuance of each mans raigne, I finde thus set downe. 1. Syluius Posthumus. 29 yeares. 2. Syluius Aeneas. 31 yeares. 3. Syluius Latinus. 50 yeares. 4. Syluius Alba. 39 yeares. 5. Syluius Atis. 26 yeares. 6. Syluius Capys. 28 yeares. 7. Syluius Capetus. 13 yeares. 8. Syluius Tiberinus. 8 yeares. 9. Syluius Agrippa. 41 yeares. 10. Syluius Alladius. 19 yeares. 11. Syluius Auentinus. 37 yeares. 12. Syluius Procas. 23 yeares. 13. Syluius Amulius. 44 yeares. Syluius Numitor. Ilia, called also Rhea and . Romulus. Remus. The most of these Kings liued in peace, and did little or nothing worthie of re∣membrance. Latinus founded many Townes in the borders of Latium: who standing much vpon the honour of their originall, grew thereby to be called Prisci Latini. Of Ti∣berinus some thinke that the Riuer Tiber had name, being formerly called Albula: but Virgil giues it that denomination of another called Tibris, before the comming of Aeneas into Italie. The Mountaine Auentinus had name (as many write) from Auentinus King of the Albanes, who was buried therein: but Virgil hath it other∣wise. , the brother of Auentinus, is named by Eusebius as father of another Iu∣lius, and grandfather of Iulius Proculus; who leauing Alba, dwelt with Romulus in Rome. Numitor, the elder sonne of Procas, was depriued of the Kingdome by his brother Amulius; by whom also his sonne Aegesthus was slaine, and Ilia his daugh∣ter made a Nunne of Vesta, that thereby the issue of Numitor might be cut off. But she conceiued two sonnes, eyther by her vncle Amulius, as some thinke; or by Mars, as the Poets faine; or perhaps by some man of warre. Both the children their vncle commanded to be drowned, and the mother buried quicke, according to the Law; which so ordained, when the Vestall Virgins brake their chastitic. Whether it was so, that the mother was pardoned at the entreatie of Antho, the daughter of Amu∣lius, or punished as the Law required (for Authors herein doe varie) it is agreed by all, that the two children were preserued, who afterward reuenged the crueltie of their vncle, with the slaughter of him and all his, and restored Numitor their grand∣father to the Kingdomc: wherein how long hee raigned, I find not, neyther is it greatly materiall to know; for as much as the Estates of Alba and of Latium were presently eclipsed by the swift increase of Rome; vpon which the computation of Time following (as farre as concernes the things of Italie ) is dependant. After the death of Numitor, the Kingdome of Alba ceased; for Numitor left no male issue. Romulus chose rather to liue in Rome; and of the Line of Syluius none else remai∣ned. So the Albanes were gouerned by Magistrates; of whom onely two Dictators are mentioned, namely Caius Cluilius, who in the dayes of Tullus Hostilius, King of the Romanes, making Warre vpon Rome, dyed in the Campe; and Metius Suffetius, the successor of Cluilius, who surrendred the Estate of Alba vnto the Romanes, ha∣uing committed the hazard of both Signories to the successe of three men of each side, who decided the quarrell by Combat: in which, the three brethren Horatij, the Champions of the Romanes, preuailed against the Curiatij, Champions of the Albanes. After this Combat, when Metius (following Tullus Hostilius with the Albane forces against the Veientes and Fidenates ) withdrew his Companies out of the battaile, ho∣ping thereby to leaue the Romanes to such an ouerthrow, as might make them weak enough for the Albanes to deale with Tullus, who notwithstanding this falsehood, obtained the victoric, did reward Metius with a cruell death, causing him to be tyed to two Chariots, and so torne in pieces. Then was Alba destroyed and the Citizens carried to Rome, where they were made free Denizens, the noble Families being made Patritians; among which were the Iulij: of whom C. Iulius Caesar being descended, not onely gloried in his ancient, royall, and forgotten pedegree, in full assembly of the Romanes, then gouerned by a free Estate of the People: but by his rare industrie, valour, and judgement, obtained the Soucraignetie of the Roman Em∣pire (much by him enlarged) to himselfe and his posteritie; whereby the name of Aeneas, and honour of the Troian and Alban Race, was so reuiued, that seldome, if euer, any one Family hath attained to a proportionable height of glorie. §. V. Of the beginning of Rome, and of ROMVLVS birth and death. OF Rome, which deuoured the Alban Kingdome, I may here best shew the beginnings, which (though somewhat vncertaine) depend much vpon the birth and education of Romulus, the grand-child of Numi∣lor, the last that raigned in Alba. For how not onely the bordering peo∣ple, but all Nations betweene Euphrates and the Ocean were broken in peeces by the teeth of this fourth Beast, it is not to bee described in one place, hauing worke of many Ages; whereof I now doe handle onely the first, as incident vnto the discourse preceding. Q. Fabius Pictor, Portius Cato, Calphur∣nius Piso, , and others, to deriue the Romans from Ianus: but Herodo∣tus, Marsylus, and many others of equall credit, gine the Graecians for their ancestors: and as his fifth Booke; CAECILIVS rerum Romanorum scriptor Stra. 1. 5. fol. 159 eo argamento colligit, à Graecis esse conditam, quod Romani Graeco , antiquo in∣stituto HERCVLI rem sacram , matrem EVANDRI venerantur Ro∣mani; CAECILIVS (saith he) a Romane Historiographer, doth by this argument ga∣ther, that Rome was built by the Greekes, because the Romanes, after Greekish fashion, by ancient Ordinance doe sacrifice to HERCVLES: the Romanes also worship the mother of EVANDER. Plutarch in the life of Romulus remembers many founders of that Citie: as Roma∣nus the sonne of Vlysses and Circe; Romus the sonne of Emathion, whom Diomedes sent thither from Troy; or that one Romus, a Tyrant of the Latines, who draue the Tuscans out of that , built it. Solinus bestowes the honour of building Rome vpon , saying, That it was beforetimes called Valentia. Heraclides giues the denomination to Ladie, brought thither by the Graecians: others say, That it was anciently called Febris, after the name of Februa, the mother of Mars; witnesse Saint Augustine in his third Booke de Ciuitate Dei. But Liuie will haue it to be the worke of Romulus, euen from the foundation: of whom and his to a Roman Citizen vaunting of their originall, answered in these Verses: Attamen vt longe repetas, longe{que} reuoluas Maiorum primus fuit tuorum, pastor suit, illud quod dicerenolo. Yet though thou fetch thy so farre; Thy first Progenitor, who ere he were, Some Shepheard was, or else, that Ile forbeare. meaning eyther a Shepheard, or a Theefe. Now of Romulus begetting of his education and preseruation, it is said, That he had Rhea for his mother, and Mars was supposed to be his father; that he was nurst by a Wolfe, found and taken away by Faustula, a Shepheards wife. The same vnna∣turall nursing had Cyrus, the same incredible fostering had Semiramis; the one by a Bitch, the other by Birds. But, as Plutarch sayth, it is like enough that Amulius came couered with armour to Rhea, the mother of Romulus, when he begat her with child: and therein it seemeth to mee that hee might haue two purposes; the one, to de∣stroy her, because she was the daughter and heire of his elder brother, from whom he held the Kingdome; the other to satisfie his appetite, because shee was faire and goodly. For shee being made a Nunne of the Goddesse Vesta, it was death in her, by the Law, to breake her chastitie. I also find in Fauchet his . fol. 114 Antiquitez de Gaule, that Meroueë, King of the Francs, was begotten by a Monster of the Sea: but Fauchet sayes, Let them beleeue it that list; le croira qui voudra: also of Alexander, and of Scipio African, there are pocticall inuentions: but to answere these imaginations in generall, it is true, that in those times, when the World was full of this barbarous Idolatrie, and when there were as many gods as there were Kings, or passions of the minde, or as there were of vices and vertucs; then did ma∣ny women greatly borne, couer such slips as they made, by protesting to bee forced by more then humane power: did Oenone confesle to Paris, that had beene rauished by Apollo. And Anchyses boasted that hee had knowne Venus. But Rhea was made with childe by some man of Warre, or other, and therefore called Mars, the God of battell, according to the sense of the time. was ouercome by a strong wit, and by such a one as had those properties ascribed to Apollo. The Mother of might fancie a Sea Captaine to be gotten with yong by such a one: as the Daughter of Inachus fancied, according to Herodotus. Aeneas was a bastard and be∣gotten vpon some faire Harlot, called for her beautie Venus, and was therefore the child of lust, which is Venus. Romulus was nurst by a Wolfe, which was Lupa, or Lu∣pina, for the Curtesans in those dayes were called Wolfes, quaenunc (sayth HALI∣CARNASSAEVS) honestiori amicae appellantur; Which are now by an honester name called friends. It is also written, that Romulus was in the end of his life taken vp into heauen, or rather out of the world by his Father Mars, in a great storme of thunder, and lightning: so was it said that vanished away by the Riuer Ni∣micus: but thereof also speaketh modestly; for he rehearseth the other opini∣on, that the storme was the furie of the Senatours, but seemeth to adhere partially to this taking vp; and many Authours agree, that there was an vnnaturall darke∣nesse, both at his birth and at his death, and that hee might bee slaine by thunder or lightning, it is not vnlikely. For the Emperour Anastasius was slaine with lightning, so was the Father of Pompey slaine with a thunder-bolt: so Carus the Empe∣rour (who succeeded Probus ) whilest he lodged with his Armie vpon the Riuer Ti∣gris, was there slaine with lightning. But a Mars of the same kinde might end him that began him; for he was begotten by a man of warre, and by violence destroyed. And that he dyed by violence (which destinie followed most of the Roman Empe∣rours) it appeareth by Tarquinius Superbus: who was but the seuenth King after him: who when hee had murthered his Father-in-law, commanded that hee should not bee buried, for (said he) Romulus himselfe dyed and was not buried. But let end this dispute; whose words are these: They (sayth he) who draw neerest to the , say that he was by his owne Citizens; and that his crueltie in punishmnets of offendors, together with his arrogancie, were the cause of his . For it is reported, that both when his mother was rauished, whether by some man, or by a God, the whole body of the Sunne was eclipsed, and all the earth couered with darkenesse like vnto night, and that the same did happen at his death. Such were the birth and death of Romulus: whose life historified by Plutarch, doth containe (besides what is here alreadie spoken of him) the conquest of a few myles which had soone beene forgotten, if the Roman greatnesse built vpon that foundation, had not giuen it memorie in all ages following, euen vnto this day. A valiant man hee was, very strong of bodie, patient of trauell, and temperate in dyet, as forbearing the vse of wine and delicacies: but his raging ambition he knew not how to temper, which caused him to slay his brother, and neglect reuenge of the death of Tatius, his companion in the Kingdome, that he himselfe might be Lord alone in those narrow Territories. He seuen and thirtic : first alone, then with Tatius, and after his death single, till he was slaine, as is shewed: after which time the Soueraigntie fell into the hands of , a man to him vn∣knowne, and more Priest like than King-like: wherein Rome it selfe in her later times hath somewhat resembled this King. For hauing long beenesole Gouernesse till Constantinople shared with her: afterwardes, when as the Greeke Emperour was crushed by forraine enemies, and the Latines dispoyled of Imperiall power, she fell into the subjection of a Prelate, swelling by degrees from the Sheepe-hooke to the Sword, & therewith victorious to excessiue magnificence, from whence by the same degrees it fell, being driuen from luxurie to defensiue armes, and therein hauing bin vnfortunate, at length betakes her selfe againe to the Crosiers staffe. And thus much of Rome in this place by occasion of the Storie of the times of King Ahaz, during whose raigne in Iurie, the foundations of this famous Citie were laied. CHAP. XXV. Of EZEKIA, and his Contemporaries: §. I. Of the beginning of EZECHIAS, and of the agreeing of PTOLOMIES, NABONASSAR, NABOPOLASSAR and MARDOCEM∣PADVS, with the historie of the Bible. AS the first yeere of Ahaz his Raigne was confounded with the last of his father Iotham, so was the later end of his sixteene yeeres taken vp in the three first of E∣zekias his Sonne. This appeares by the Raigne of , ouer Israel, which beganne in the twelfth of Ahaz, and therefore the third thereof was concurrent with Ahaz his foureteenth. But the third of Hosea was the first of Ezekia; so it followes, that Ezekia beganne to raigne in his Fathers foureteenth yeere. Like e∣nough it is, that the third yeere of Hosea, the same be∣ing the fourteenth of Ahaz, was almost spent when Ezekia beganne, and so the fifteenth yeere of Ahaz may haue beene concurrent, for the most part, with the first of Ezekia. By supposing that Hosea beganne his Kingdome, when the twelfth yeere of Ahaz was almost compleat, some would find the meanes how to disioyne the first of He∣zekia from the fifteenth of Ahaz, placing him yet one yeere later, of which yeere, Ahaz may perhaps haue liued not many dayes. But seeing that the foureteenth and fifteenth yeeres of Ezekia, may not be remoued out of their places; it is vaine labour to alter the first yeere. In the foureteenth of EZEKIA, SENACHERIS inuading Iuda, and the Coun∣tries 2. King. 8. 13. adjoyning, lost his Armie by a miraculous stroke from Heauen, fled home, and was slaine. The yeere following it was that God added fifteene yeeres to the life of Ezekia, when he had alreadie raigned fourteene of his nine and twentie: and the same yeere was that miracle seene of the Sunnes going backe; of which wonder (as I heare) one Bartholomew Scultet, who is much commended for skill in Astronomie, hath by calculation found the very day which answered vnto the twentie fifth of April, in the Iulian yeere, being then Thursday. I haue not seene any workes of Scultet; but surely to find a motion so irregular and miraculous, it is necessarie that he produce some record of obseruation made at such a time. Howsoeuer it bee, the fifteenth yeere of Ezekia is agreed vpon; and therefore wee may not alter the first. 3. . 28. 27. As for that saying, which is vsuall in the like cases, that AHAZ slept with his Fathers, and EZEKIA his Sonneraigned in his stead, it doth no more proue that Ezekia raigned not with his Father, than the like saying doth inferre the like at the death of Ieho∣saphat, and succession of Iehoram; whereof, as concerning the beginning of the Sonne to raigne whilest his Father liued, we haue alreadie said enough. Of this godly King Ezekias, we finde, that his very beginning testified his deuo∣tion and zeale. For whether it were so, that his vnfortunate and vngracious Father (who had out-worne his reputation) gaue way to his Sonnes proceedings, which perhaps it lay not in him to hinder; or whether (as I rather thinke) the first yeere and first moneth of his raigne, wherein opened the doores of the Temple, 2. Chro. 29. v. 3. were to be vnderstood as the beginning of his sole gouernement; we plainely finde it to haue beene his first worke, that he opened the doores of the house of the Lord, which Achaz had shut vp, cleansed the Citie and Kingdome of the Idols, restored the Priests to their offices, and estates, commanded the Sacrifices to bee offered 2. Chron. 30. which had beene for many yeeres neglected, and brake downe the brasen Serpent of Moses, because the people burnt incense before it, and he called it , . Kings . which signifieth a lumpe of brasse. He did also celebrate the Passe-ouer with great magnificence, inuiting thereunto the of the ten Tribes: many there were, euen out of those Tribes, that came vp to , to this fcast. But the generall multitude of Israel did laugh the Messengers of to scorne. It was not long ere they that scorned to the memoriall of their deliue∣rance out of the Aegyptian scruitude, fell into a seruitude, out of which they neuer were deliuered. For in the fourth of his raigne, Salmanassar the Sonne of , the Sonne of Belochus, hearing that Hosea King of Israel had practised with Soe King of Aegypt, against him, inuaded Israel, besieged Samaria, and in the third yeare (after the Inhabitants had endured all sorts of miseries) forced it, and carried thence the ten Idolatrous Tribes into Assyria and Media: among whom Tobias and his Sonne of the same name, with Anna his Wife, were sent to Niniue, in whose Seates and Places the Assyrians sent strangers of other Nations, and among them many of the ancient Enemies of the Israelites, as those of Cutha, Ana, Hamah, and Sphernaim, besides Babylonians: whose Places and Nations I haue formerly descri∣bed in the Treatise of the Holy Land. These later Assyrian Kings, and the Persians, which followed them, are the first, of whom wee finde mention made both in Prophane and Sacred bookes. These therefore serue most aptly to joyne the times of the old World, (whereof none but the Prophets haue written otherwise than fabulously) with the Ages following that were better knowne, and described in course of Historie. True it is, that of Cyrus and some other Persians, we finde in the Bible the same names by which other Authors haue recorded them: but of Phul and , with other Assyrian, Kings, diuersitie of name hath bred question of the persons. Therefore, whereas the Scriptures doe speake of Salmanassar, King of Assur, who raigned in the time of Ahaz, and , Kings of Iuda, and of Hosea King of Israel, whom he carried into captiuitie: and whereas Ptolomie makes mention of Nabcnassar, speaking precisely of the time wherein he liued; it is very pertinent to shew, that Salmanassar and Nabonassar were one and the same man. The like reason also requireth, that it bee shewed of Nebuchadnezzar, that hee was the same, whom Ptolomie calleth Nabopolassar. Of both these points hath well collected sufficient proofe from the exact calculations of sundrie good Mathematicians. For by them it appeares, that betweene Nabonassar and the birth of Christ, there passed seuen hundred fortie and sixe yeares: at which distance of time the raigne of Salmanassar was. One great proofe hereof is this, which the same alleageth out of Erasmus Reinholdus, in the Prutenick Tables. Mardocempadus King of Babylon (whom Ptolomic, speaking of three Eclipses of the Moone, which were in his time, doth mention) was the same whom the Scriptures cal Merodach, who sent Embassadors to Hezekia, King of . So that if wee reckon backwards to the difference of time, betweene Merodach and Salmanassar, we shall finde it the same which is betweene Mardocempadus and Nabo∣nassar. Likewise doth shew, that whereas from the destruction of Samaria, to the deuastation of Ierusalem, in the nineteenth of Nebuchadnessar, we collect out of the Scriptures, the distance of one hundred thirtie and three yeeres: the selfe-same distance of time is found in , betweene Nabonassar and Nabopolassar. For, whereas Ptolomic seemes to differ from this accompt, making Nabonassar more an∣cient by an hundred and fortie yeeres, than the destruction of Ierusalem, wee are to vnderstand that he took Samaria in the eighth yeere of his raigne; so that the seuen foregoing yeeres added to these one hundred thirty and three, make the accompts of the Scriptures fall with that of Ptolomie. Ptolomies computation is, that from the first of , to the fifth of , there passed one hundred twentie and seuen yeeres. Now wee adde to these one hundred twentie seuen, the thir∣teene ensuing of yeeres, before the Citie and Temple were destroi∣ed, we haue the samme of one hundred and fortie yeeres. In so plaine a case more proofes are needlesse, though many are brought, of which this may serue for all, that Ptolomie placeth the first of one hundred twentie and two yeeres, after the first of , which agreeth exactly with the Scriptures. To these notes are added the consent of all Mathematicians: which in accompt of times I hold more sure than the authoritie of any Historie; and therefore I thinke it follie to make doubt, whereas Historians and Mathematicall obseruations doe so throughly concurre. Yet forasmuch as that argument of the learned Scaliger doth rest vnanswered, whereby he proued the Father of , to haue beene this Nabonassar, I will not spare to loose a word or two ingiuing the Reader satisfaction herein. It is , that the next obseruations of the heauenly Bodies, which recor∣ded, after the time of , were in the raigne of Mardocempadus; the second yeere of whose raigne is, according to Ptolomie, concurrent in part with the twentie Ptol. l. 4. c. 8. seuen of Nabonassar. For the second of three ancient Eclipses which hee calculates, being in the second yeare of Mardocempadus, was from the beginning of Nabonassar twentie seuen yeeres, seuenteene , and eleuen houres: the accompt from Na∣bonassar, beginning at high-noone the first day of the Aegyptian moneth Thot, then answering to the twentie sixt of Februarie; and this Eclipse being fiftie minutes be∣fore mid-night, on the eighteenth day of that Moneth, when the first day thereof agreed with the nineteenth of Februarie; so that the difference of time betweene the two Kings Nabonassar and , is noted by Ptolomie, according to the Aegyptian yeeres. But how does this proue, that Mardocempadus or Merodach, was the Sonne of Nabonassar? yea, how doth it proue, that he was his next Succes∣sor, or any way of his Linage? It was enough to satisfie me, in this argument, that Scaliger himselfe did afterwards Mardocempadus to haue beene rather the Nephew, than the Sonne of Baladan, or Nabonassar. For if he might be either the Nephew, or the Sonne; hee might perhaps be neither the one, nor the other. But because our Countrie-man Lidyate hath reprehended Scaliger for changing his opi∣nion; and that both Torniellus, who followes Scaliger herein, and Sethus , who hath drawne into forme of Chronologie, that learned worke, De Temporum, doe hold vp the same assertion, confounding with Nabonassar: I haue taken the paines to search, as farre as my leisure and diligence could reach, after any sentence that might proue the Kindred or succession of these two. Yet cannot I finde in the Almagest (for the Scriptures are either silent in this point, or aduerse to Scaliger; and other good authoritie, I know none, in this businesse) any sentence more neerely prouing the succession of to Nabonassar, than the place now last rehearsed: which makes no more, to shew that the one of these was Father to the other, than (that I may vse a like example) the as neere succession of William the Conqueror, declares him, to haue beene Sonne, or Grand-child to Edward the Confessor. This considered, wee may safely goe on with our accompt from Nabonassar, taking him for Salmanassar; and not fearing, that the Readers will be driuen from our booke, when they finde something in it, agreeing with Annius, forasmuch as these Kings mentioned in Scriptures, raigned in Babylon, and Assyria, in those very times which by Diodorus and Ptolomie are assigned to Belosus, Nabo∣nassar, and Mardocempadus, and the rest: no good Historie naming any others, that raigned there in those ages, and all Astronomicall obseruations, fitly concurring, with the yeeres that are attributed to these, or numbred from them. §. II. Of the danger and of Iudaea from SENNACHERIB. WHen Salmanassar was dead, and his sonne in possession of the Empire, in the fourteenth yeere of Ezcchias, he demanded of him such Tribute as was agreed on, at such time as , the Grand-fa∣ther of Sennacherib, and Father of Salmanassar, inuited by , in∣uaded Rezen King of Damascus, and deliuered him from the dange∣rous Warre which Israel had vndertaken against him. This Tribute and acknow∣ledgement when Ezechias denied, , hauing (as it seemes) a purpose to in∣uade Aegypt, sent one part of his Armie to lie before Ierusalem. Now though Eze∣chias (fearing this powerfull Prince) had acknowledged his fault, and purchased his peace, as he hoped, with thirtie hundred talents of siluer, and thirty talents of gold: wherewith he presented Sennacherib, now set downe before in , yet vn∣der the colour of better assurance, & to force the King of to deliuer hostages, 2. Kin. 18. 21. the Assyrian enuironed Ierusalem with a grosse Armie, and hauing his Sword in his hand, thought it the fittest time to write his owne conditions. Ezechias directed his three greatest Counsellers, to parlie with Rabsaces, ouer the Wall; and to receiue his demands: who vsed three principall arguments to per∣swade the people to yeeld themselues to his Master Sennacherib. For though the Chancellor, Steward, and Secretarie, sent by , desired Rabsoces to speake vn∣to them in the Syrian tongue, and not in the , yet hee with a more loud voice directed his speech to the multitude in their owne language. And for the first, hee made them know, That if they continued , and adhered to their King, that they would, in a short time, be inforced to eate their owne dung, and drinke their owne vrine: Secondly, he altogether disabled the King of Aegypt, from whom the hoped for succour; and compared him to a broken staffe, on which whoso∣euer 2. Kings 18. 21. leaneth, pierceth his owne hand: Thirdly, that the gods who should helpe them, had formerly broken and , meaning chiefly (as it is thought by some) the brasen Serpent, which had beene preserued euer since Moses time: and withall he bade them remember the gods of other Nations: whom, notwith∣standing any power of theirs, his Master had conquered and throwne downe; and for God himselfe, in whom they trusted, hee perswaded them by no meanes to relie on him; for he would deceiue them. But finding the people silent (for so the King had commanded them) after a while, when he had vnderstood that the King of A∣rabia was marching on with a powerfull Armie, hee himselfe left the Assyrian forces in charge to others, and sought Sennacherib at Lebna in , either to informe him of their resolution in Ierusalem, or to conferre with him concerning the Armie of Terhaca the Arabian. Soone vpon this there came letters from Sennacherib to Eze∣chias, whom he partly aduised, and partly threatned to submit himselfe: vsing the same blasphemous outrage against the all-powerfull God, as before. But Ezcchias sending those Counsellers to the Prophet Esay, which had lately beene sent to Rab∣saces, receiued from him comfort, and assurance, that this Heathen Idolater should not preuaile; against whom the King also besought aide from Almightie God, re∣peating the most insolent and blasphemous parts of Sennacheribs letter, before the Altar of God in the Temple, confessing this part thereof to be true. That the King 2. Kings 19. of ASHVR had destroyed the Nations and their Lands, and had set fire on their gods, for they were no Gods, but the worke of mans hands, euen wood and stone, &c. The reason that moued Sennacherib to desire to possesse himself in haste of Ierusa∣lem, was, that he might thereinto haue retraited his Armie, which was departed, as it seemeth, from the siege of Pelusium in Aegypt, for feare of Terhaca: and though the Scriptures are silent of that enterprise (which in these bookes of the Kings, and of the Chronicles or Paralipomenon, speake but of the affaires of the Iewes in effect) yet the ancient , and out of him Iosephus, and S. Hierome, together with Herodo∣tus, remember it as followeth. Herodotus calleth Sennacherib King of Arabia and As∣syria: . l. 2. p. 69. which he might justly doe, because Tiglath his Grand-father held a great part thereof, which he wrested from Pekah King of Israel: as Gilead ouer Iordan, and the rest of Arabia Petraea adjoyning: the same Herodotus also maketh Sethon King of Ae∣gypt, to be Priest, and reporteth that the reason of Sennacheribs returne from Pelusium in Aegypt, which hee also besieged, was, that an innumerable multitude of Rats had in one night eaten in sunder the Bow-strings of his Archers, and spoiled the rest of their weapons of that kinde, which no doubt might greatly amaze him: but the approch of Terhaca, remembred by Iosephus and Berosus, was the more vr∣gent. Ios. ant. l. 10. c. 1. S. Hierome vpon the seuen and thirtie of Esay, out of the same Berosus, as also in part out of Herodotus, whom Iosephus citeth somewhat otherwise than his words Her. Euterp. l. . lie, reports Senacheribs retrait in these words. SENACHERIB Re∣gem Assyriorum contra Aegyptios, & obsedisse Pelusium, extructis aggeribus, vrbi , venisse TARACHAM Regem Aethiopum in auxilium, & vna nocte iuxta Ieru∣salem, centum octoginta millia exercitus Assyrij pestilentia corruisse narrat HE∣RODOTVS: & plenissimè BEROSVS Chaldaicaescriptor Historiae, quorum fides de pro∣prijs libris petenda est; That SENACHERIB King of the Assyrians fought against the Aegyptians, and besieged Pelusium, and that when his Mounts were built for taking of the , King of the Aethiopians came to helpe them, and that in one night, neere Ierusalem, one hundred eightie fiue thousand of the Assyrian Armie perished by pesti∣lence: of these things (saith HIEROME) To wit in part, for Hero∣dotus mentio∣neth nothing, neither of Tarbaca, nor of Ierusalem, nor of the Armie there. HERODOTVS reports: and more at large BEROSVS a writer of Chaldaean Storie, whose credit is to be taken from their owne bookes. Out of Esay it is gathered, that this destruction of the Assyrian Armie was in this manner: be visited of the Lord of Hosts with thunder and shaking, and a great Esai 29. 6. noise, a whirle-winde and a tempest, and a flame of fire. But Iosephus hath it more largely out of the same Berosus, an authoritie (because so well agreeing with the Scriptures) not to be omitted, SENNACHERIBVS autem ab Aegyptiaco bello reuertens, oftendit ibi exercitum, quem sub RABSACIS Imperio reliquer at peste diuini∣tus Ios. ant. l. 10 c. 1. immissâ deletum, primâ nocte posteaquam Vrbem oppugnare , absumptis cum Ducibus & Tribunis, centum octoginta quinque millibus Militum, qua clade territus, & de reliquis copijs sollicitus, maximis itineribus in regnum suum contendit, adregiam quae Ni∣nus dicitur. Vbi paulo post per insidias Seniorum, è filijs suis, ADRAMELECHI, & Selennar other∣wise , who slew him, as he was pray∣ing to Nesioe his god. SELENNARI, vitam amisit: occisus in ipso Templo quod dicitur ARASCI; quem prae∣cipuo cultu dignabatur: quibus ob patricidium à popularibus pulsis & in Armeniam fugien∣tibus, ASARACOLDAS minor filius in Regnum successit; SENNACHERIB (saith IOSEPHVS) returning from the Aegyptian Warre, found there his Armie, which he had left vnder the command of RABSACES, destroyed by a pestilence sent from God, the first 2. Kin. 19. night that he had begunne to assault the Towne: one hundred fourescore and fiue thousand of the Souldiers being consumed with their Chieftaines and Coronells. With which destru∣ction being terrified, and withall afraid what might become of the rest of his Armie, hee made great marches into his Kingdome; to his Royall Citie, which is called Ninus, where shortly after by the treason of two of the eldest of his Sonnes, ADRAMELECH and SE∣LENNAR or SHAREZER, he lost his life in the Temple dedicated to ARASCES, or NES∣ROCH: whom he especially worshipped. These his sonnes being for their parricide chased a∣way 2. Kin. 19. 37. by the people: and flying into Armenia, ASARACOLDAS his yonger sonne succee∣ded . 1. c. 4 v. 2. in the Kingdome. Who in the beginning of his raigne sent new troupes out of Assyria and Samaria, to fortifie the Colonie therein planted by his grandfather Sal∣manassar. What this Nesroch was, it is vncertaine: Hierome in his Hebrew traditions hath somewhat of him, but nothing positiuely. It is certaine, that Venus Vrania was worshipped by the Assyrians; and so was Iupiter Belus, as Dion, , and Cyrillus witnesse. Many fancies there are, what cause his sonne had to murther him; but the Lyr. most likely is, that he had formerly dis-inherited those two, and conferred the Em∣pire on Assarhaddon. Tobit tells vs, That it was fiftie fiue dayes after re∣turne, ere he was murthered by his sonnes; during which time he slew great num∣bers of the Israelites in Nineue, till the most just God turned the Sword against his owne brest. §. III. Of his sicknesse and recouerie; and of the Babylonian King that congratulated him. AFter this maruellous deliuerie, Ezekias sickened, and was told by Isaiah, that he must die: but after hee had besought God with teares for his deliuerie, Isaiah, as hee was going from him, returned againe, and had warrant from the Spirit of God to promise him recouerie after three dayes, and a prolongation of his life for fifteene yeeres. But Ezekias somewhat doubtfull of this exceeding grace, prayeth a signe to confirme him: whereupon, at the prayer of Isaiah, the shadow of the Sunne cast it selfe the contrarie way, and 2. King. . went backe tenne degrees, vpon the Dyall of Achaz. The cause that moued Eze∣kias to lament (saith Saint Hierome ) was, because he had as yet no sonne, and then in despaire that the Messias should come out of the house of Dauid, or at least of his Seede. His disease seemeth to be the Pestilence, by the medicine giuen him by the Prophet, to wit, a masse of Figges, layed to the Botch or Sore. This wonder when the Wise-men of Chaldaea had told to Merodach, King of Baby∣lon, the first of that house, he sent to Ezekias, to be informed of the cause: at which time Ezekias shewed him all the Treasure hee had, both in the Court and in the Kingdome: for which he was reprehended by the Prophet Isaiah, who told him; The dayes are at hand, that all that is in thine house, and whatsoeuer thy fathers haue layed Esay 39. vp in store to this day, shall be carried into Babel; nothing shall bee left, saith the Lord. It may seeme strange, how Ezekia should haue got any treasure worth the shewing: for Senacherib had robbed him of all, the yeere before. But the spoile of the same Senacherib his Campe repayed all with aduantage, and made richer vpon the suddaine then euer he had beene: which vnexpected wealth was a strong temptati∣on to boasting. After this time Ezekia had rest, and spending without noyse that addition which God had made vnto his life, he died, hauing raigned nine and twen∣tie yeeres. One onely offensiue Warre he made, which was against the Philistims with good successe. Among his other acts (shortly remembred in Ecclesiasticus ) hee Ec. l. 43. deuised to bring water to Ierusalem. In two respects they say that hee offended God: the one, that hee rejoyced too much at the destruction and lamentable end of his enemie; the other, that hee so much gloried in his riches, as he could not forbeare to shew them to strangers. But the reason which moued Ezekias (speaking humanely) to entertaine the Embassa∣dors of Merodach in this friendly and familiar manner, was, because he came to visit him, and brought him a present, congratulating the recouerie of his health; as also in that Merodach had weakened the house of Senacherib, his fearefull enemie. For Merodach, who was Commander and Lieutenant vnder Senacherib in Babylon, v∣surped that State himselfe, in the last yeere of that King, and held it by strong hand against his sonne Assarhaddon; who was not onely simple, but impaired in strength, by the molestation of his brothers. This aduantage Merodach espied, and remem∣bring, that their ancestor Phul Belochus had set his owne master Sardanapalus besides the cushion, thought it as lawfull for himselfe to take the opportunitie which this Kings weakenesse did offer, as it had beene for Belochus to make vse of the others : and so, finding himselfe beloued of the Babylonians, and sufficiently powerfull, he did put the matter to hazard, and preuailed. The assertion of this hi∣storie is made by the same arguments that were vsed in maintaining the common opinion of Writers, touching Phul Belochus; which I will not here againe re∣hearse. So of this new Race, which cut a-sunder the Line of Ninus, there vvere onely fiue Kings. Phul Belochus. who raigned 48. yeeres. Tiglath Philassar. who raigned 27. yeeres. Salmanassar. who raigned 10. yeeres. Senacherib. who raigned 7. yeeres. Assarhaddon. who raigned 10. yeeres. But forasmuch as the last yeere of Salmanassar was also the first of Senacherib his sonne, we reckon the time, wherein the house of Phul held the Assyrian Kingdome, to haue beene an hundred and one yeeres, of which, the last fiue and twentie vvere spent with Ezekia, vnder Salmanassar, Senacherib, and Assarhaddon. §. IIII. The Kings that were in Media during the raigne of EZEKIA: Of the difference found betweene sundrie Authors, in rehearsing the Median Kings. Other contemporaries of EZEKIA: of CANDAV∣LES, GYGES, and the Kings descen∣ded from HERCVLES. IN the time of Ezekia, Medidus, and after him Cardiceas, raigned in Me∣dia. Whether it were so, that varietie of names, by which these Kings were called in seuerall Histories, hath caused them to seeme more than indeede they were; or whether the sonnes raigning with the fa∣thers, haue caused not onely the names of Kings, but the length of Time, wherein they gouerned Media, to exceede the due proportion: or whether the Copies themselues, of Ctesias and Annius his Metasthenes, haue beene faultie, as neither of these two Authors is ouer-highly commended of trustinesse: so it is, that the names, number, and length of raigne, are all very diuersly reported of these Me∣dian Kings, that followed Arbaces: Therefore it neede not seeme strange, that I rec∣kon Medidus and Cardiceas as contemporaries with Ezekia. For to reconcile so great a difference, as is found in those Writers that varie from Eusebius, is more than I dare vndertake. I will onely here set downe the roll of Kings that raigned in Media, accordingly as sundrie Authors haue deliuered it. Annius his Metasthenes orders them and their raignes thus: Arbaces. who raigned 28. yeeres. Mandanes. who raigned 50. yeeres. Sosarmon. who raigned 30. yeeres. Articarmin. who raigned 50. yeeres. Arbianes. who raigned 22. yeeres. . who raigned 40. yeeres. Attines. who raigned 22. yeeres. Astybarus, with his sonne Apanda. who raigned 20. yeeres. Apanda alone. who raigned 30. yeeres. Darius with Cyrus. who raigned 36. yeeres. Diodorus Siculus following Ctesias (as perhaps Annius made his Metasthenes fol∣low Diodore, with some litte variation, that he might not seeme a borrower) pla∣ceth them thus. Arbaces. who raigned 28. yeares. Mandanes. who raigned 50. yeares. . who raigned . yeares. Artycas. who raigned 50. yeares. Arbianes. who raigned 22. yeares. Arfaeus. who raigned 40. yeares. Artynes. who raigned 22. yeares. Artabanus. who raigned 40. yeares. Astybara. the continuance of these two he doth not mention. Astyages. the continuance of these two he doth not mention. Mercator hath laboured with much diligence, to reconcile these Catalogues, and to make them also agree with Eusebius. But forasmuch as it seemes to mee an im∣possible matter, to attaine vnto the truth of these forgotten times, by conjectures founded vpon Ctesias and Metasthenes, I will lay the burthen vpon Eusebius, who li∣ued in an age better furnished than ours, with bookes of this argument. Let it therefore , that these two Kings (whom I haue reckoned as contemporaries with Ezekia) Medidus and Cardiceas, are found in Eusebius: for whether were Diodorus his Arbianes, I will not stay to search. The Kings of Media, accor∣ding to Eusebius, raigned in this order. Arbaces. raigned 28. yeeres. Sosarmus. raigned 30. yeeres. Medidus. raigned 40. yeeres. Gardiceas. raigned 15. yeeres. Deioces. raigned 54. yeeres. Phraortes. raigned 24. yeeres. Cyaxares. raigned 32. yeeres. Astyages. raigned 38. yeeres. These names, and this course of succession I retaine; but adde vnto these, Cya∣xares the sonne of Astyages, according to Xenophon; and sometimes follow Herodotus, in setting downe the length of a Kings raigne, otherwise than hath it: of which variations, I will render my reasons in due place. The twentie nine yeeres of Ezekia were concurrent, in part, with the rule of the foure first that were chosen Gouernours of Athens for ten yeeres; that is, of Charops, Aesimedes, Elidicus, and Hippones. Touching the first of these I heare nothing, saue that Rome was built in his first yeere; of which perhaps himselfe did not heare. Of the second and third I finde only the names. The fourth made himselfe knowne by a strange example of justice, or rather of , that hee shewed vpon his owne Daughter. For hee finding that shee had offended in vnchastitie, caused her to be lockt vp with an Horse, giuing to neither of them any foode: so the Horse, constrai∣ned by hunger, deuoured the vnhappie Woman. In Rome, the first King, and Founder of that Citie Romulus, did raigne both be∣fore, and somewhat after Ezekia. In Lydia, Candaules the last King, ruled in the same age. This Region was first called Maeonia. Lydus the sonne of Atys raigning in it, gaue the name of Lydia, if wee beleeue such authoritie as wee finde. This Kingdome was afterward, by the appointment of an Oracle, conferred vpon Argon, who came of the sonne of Hercules, by Iardana, a bond-woman. The race of these continued raigning fiftie fiue yeeres (in which two and twentie Generations pas∣sed) the sonne continually succeeding the father. Candaules the sonne of Myrsus was the last of his race, who doated so much vpon the beautie of his owne Wife, that hee could not bee content to enjoy her, but would needs enforce one Gyges, the sonne of Dascylus, to behold her naked bodie; and placed the vnwilling man secret∣ly in her chamber, where he might see her preparing to bed-ward. This was not so closely carried, but that the Queene perceiued Gyges at his going forth, and vnder∣standing the matter, tooke it in such high disdaine, that she forced him the next day to the Kings follie with treason. So Gyges, being brought againe into the same chamber by the Queene, slew Candaules, and was rewarded not only with his Wife, but with the Kingdome of Lydia. He raigned thirtie eight yeeres, beginning in the last of Ezekia, one yeere before the death of Romulus. After Gyges, his sonne Ardys raigned nine and fortie yeeres; then Sadyattes, twelue; Halyattes, fiftie seuen; and finally Croesus, the sonne of Halyattes, fourteene yeeres: who lost the Kingdome, and was taken by Cyrus of Persia. And here by the way we may note, that as the Lydian Kings, whom Croesus his Progenitor dispossest, are deduced from Hercules, so of the same Hercules there sprang many other Kings, which gouerned seuerall Countries very long; as in Asia, the Mysians; in Greece, the Lacedaemonians, Messenians, Rhodians, Corin∣thians, and Argiues; and from the Argiues, the Macedonians; as likewise from the Corinthians, the Syracusanes: besides many great and famous, though priuate, Families. But of the Heraclidae that raigned in Lydia, I haue not troubled myselfe to take notice in the times of their seuerall raignes: for little is found of them, beside the bare names, and the follie of this last King Candaules. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Kings that raigned in Aegypt, betweene the deliue∣rance of ISRAEL from thence, and the raigne of EZEKIA in Juda, when Aegypt and Iuda made a league against the Assyrians. §. I. That many names of Aegyptian Kings, found in Historie, are like to belonged only to Viceroyes. An example prouing this out of WILLIAM of Tyre his Historie of the holy Warre. THE emulation and quarrells arising in these times, betweene the mightie Kingdomes of Aegypt and , doe require our paines, in collecting the most memorable things in Aegypt, and setting downe briefly the state of that Countrie, which had conti∣nued long a flowrishing Region, and was of great power, when it contended with for the Ma∣strie. Of Cham the sonne of Noah, who first planted that Countrie, and of , Orus, and other ancient Kings, that raigned there, vntill the Israelites were thence deliuered, more hath beene said than I can stand to; though I hold it no shame to faile in such coniectures. That which I haue deliuered, in speaking mine opinion of the Aegyptian Dynasties, must heere againe helpe me. For it may truely be affirmed, That the great number of Kings, which are said to haue raigned in Aegypt, were none other than Viceroyes or Ste∣wards, such as Ioseph was, and such as were the Soldanes in later ages. Therefore, I will not onely forbeare to seeke after those, whom and Diodorus haue reckoned vp, from the mouthes of Aegyptian Priests, deliuering them by number, without rehearsing their names; but will saue the labour of them in order, whose names only are found; the yeares of their raignes, and other circum∣stances, prouing them to haue beene Kings in deede, being not recorded. But that I may not seeme before hand, to lay an ground, after I may build what I list; it were not amisse, to giue vnto the Reader such satis∣faction in this point, as apparent reason, and truth of Historie doth affoord. First therefore, wee ought not to beleeue those numbers of Generations, which the ly∣ing Priests haue reckoned vp, to magnifie their Antiquities. For wee know, that from Abraham, our Sauiour Christ was remoued onely fortie two descents, which makes it , that in farre shorter time, namely before the Persian Empire, there could not haue passed away twice as many successions in Aegypt: especially consi∣dering, that many of these, whose continuance is expressed, raigned longer than fortie yeeres. It followes that we should square the number of the Aegyptian Kings in some euen proportion, to those which did beare rule in other Countries. As for the rest, whose names we finde scattered here and there; any man that will take the paines to reade the nineteenth booke of the holy warre written by William Archbishop of Tyre, may easily perswade himselfe, that it is not hard to find names enow, of such as might be thought to haue raigned in Aegypt, being other then Regents or . Yet will I here insert, as briefly as I can, some things making to that purpose for the pleasure and information of such, as will not trou∣ble themselues with turning ouer many Authors. When Elhadech the Caliph ruled in Aegypt, one Dargan, a powerfull and a subtile man, made himselfe , by force and cunning, chasing away Sanar an Arabian, who was Soldan before and after him. This Dargan ministred matter of quarrell to Amalricke King of Ierusalem; and sustained, with little losse, an inuasion, which Amalricke made vpon Aegypt. Heereupon hee grew so insolent and proud, that Sanar the former Soldan hoped to make his partie good against him, if he could get any forces wherewith to enter Aegypt. Briefly, Sanar sueth to Noradine, King of Damasco, for aide, who sends an Army of his Turkes, vnder the command of Syracon, against the Soldan Dargan. So Dargan and Sanar met, and fought: The Victorie was Dargans; but hee enioyed it not: for in few daies after, hee was slaine by treason, whereby Sanar did recouer his Dignitie: which to establish, he slew all the Kindred and Friends of Dargan, that he could finde in the great Citie of Cairo. To all these doings, the Caliph Elhadech gaue little regard: for he thought it little concerned him, which of them liued, and had the administration of the Kingdome, whilest he might haue the profit of it, and enioy his pleasure. But new troubles presently arise, which (one would thinke) doe neerely touch the Caliph himselfe. Syracon with his Turkes, whom Sanar hath gotten to come into Aegypt, will not now be entreated there to leaue him, and quietly goe their way home. They seize vpon the Towne of Belbeis, which they fortifie, and there attend the arriuall of more companie from Damasco, for the conquest of al Aegypt. The Soldan perceiues their intent, and findes himselfe not strong enough to expell them; much lesse to repell the Turkish Armie, that was likely to second them. He therefore sends Mes∣sengers to King Almaricke of Ierusalem, whom with large promises, he gets to bring him aide, and so driues out the Turkes. Of al this trouble, the great Caliph heares no∣thing, or not so much, as should make him looke to the playing of his owne game. A greater mischiefe ariseth, concerning the Caliph Elhadech particularly, in his owne Title. Syracon, Captaine of the Turkes that had beene in Aegypt, goes to the Caliph of Baldach (who was opposite to him of Aegypt, each of them claiming as heire to Mahomet, that false prophet, the Soueraignetie ouer all that were of the Saracen Law) and tells him the weakenesse of the Aegyptian, with his owne abilitie of do∣ing seruice in those parts, offering his best meanes for the extirpation of the Schis∣maticall Caliph, and the reduction of all Aegypt, with the Westerne parts, vnder the subiection of the Babylonian. This motion is readily and ioyfully entertained; all the Easterne Prouinces are vp in Armes; and Syracon, with a mightie power, des∣cendeth into Aegypt. The noise of this great expedition so affrighteth King Alma∣ricke, that with all his forces he hasteth into Aegypt: well knowing how neerely it concerned him and his Kingdome of Ierusalem, to keep the Saracens from ioyning all vnder one head. Sanar the Soldan perceiuing the faithful care of the Christians his friends, welcomes them, and bestirs him selfe in giuing them all manner of content, as it behoued him: for by their admirable valour, he finally draue the enemies out of the Countrie. But this victorie was not so soone gotten, as it is quickly told. Strange it is (which most concernes our present purpose) that of so desperate a danger, the Caliph, as yet, seemes to know nothing. May we not thinke him to haue beene King in title only, who medled so little in the Gouernment? The Soldan, fin∣ding that the Christians (without whose helpe, all was lost) could not well stay, so long as his necessities required; makes large offers to King Almaricke, vpon condi∣tion, that he should abide by it. He promiseth a great Tribute ( William of Tyre cals it a Tribute; the Saracens, perhaps, called it a Pension) which the Kings of Ierusalem should receiue out of Aegypt, for this behoouefull assistance. But the Christians vn∣derstanding that the Soldan (how much soeuer he tooke vpon him) was subiect to an higher Lord, would make no bargaine of such importance, with any other than the Caliph himselfe. Hereupon Earle of Caesarea, and a Knight of the Tem∣plars, are sent vnto , to ratifie the couenants. Now shall we see the great∣nesse of the Caliph and his estate. These Embassadors were conueighed by the Soldan to Cairo; where arriuing at the Palace, they found it guarded by great troupes of Souldiers. The first entrance was through darke Porches, that were kept by many armed bands of Aethiopians, which with al diligence, did reuerence vnto the Soldan, as he passed along. Through these streights the Warders led them, into goodly open Courts, of such beautie and riches, that they could not retaine the grauitie of Embassadors, but were enforced to admire the things which detained their eyes. For there they saw goodly marble Pillars, gilded Beames, all wrought ouer with embossed works, curious pauements, fish-ponds of marble with cleare waters, and many sorts of strange Birds, vnknown in these parts of the world, as comming perhaps from the East Indies, which then were vndiscouered. The further they went, the greater was the magnificence; for the Caliph his conueighed them into other Courts within these; as farre excelling the former, as the former did surpasse ordinary houses. It were tedious perhaps to rehearse, how, the further they entred, the more high state they found, and cause of maruaile; suffice it, that the good Archbishop, who wrot these things, was neuer held a vaine Author. Finally they were brought into the Caliphs owne lodgings, which were yet more stately, and better guarded, where entring the pre∣sence, the Soldan hauing twice prostrated himselfe, did the third time cast off his Sword, that he ware about his neck, and throw himselfe on the ground, before the curtaine, behinde which the Caliph sate. Presently the trauerse, wrought with Gold and pearles was opened, and the Caliph himselfe discouered, sitting with great Ma∣iestie on a throne of gold, hauing very few of his most inward seruants and Eunuches about him. When the Soldan had humbly kissed his Masters feet, he briefly told the cause of his comming, the danger wherein the land stood, and the offers that he had made vnto King Almericke, desiring the Caliph himselfe to ratifie them, in presence of the Embassadors. The Caliph answered, That he would throughly performe all which was promised. But this contented not the Embassadors: They would haue him to giue his hand vpon the bargaine; which the Aegyptians, that stood by, thought an impudent request. Yet his greatnes condescended at length, after much deliberation, at the earnest request of the Soldan, to reach out his hand. When the Earle of Caesarea saw that the Caliph gaue his hand, neither willingly nor bare, hee told him roundly thus much in effect. SIR, Truth no holes to hide it selfe; Princes, that will hold couenant, must deale openly, nakedly, and sincerely; Giue vs therefore your bare hand, if you meane that we shall trust you, for we will make no bargaines with your Gloue. Much adoe there was about this: for it seemed a∣gainst the Maiestie of such a Prince to yeelde so farre. But, when it would none o∣therwise be, with a smiling cheare (though to the great griefe of his Seruants) hee vouchsafed to let the Earle take him by the bare hand; and so rehearsing the word by word, as the Earle spake them, he ratified all; dismissing finally the Embassadors, with such rewards as testified his Greatnesse. In this Caliph and his Sultan, we may discerne the Image of the ancient Pharaoh, and his Viceroy: we see a Prince of great estate, sitting in his Palace, and not vexing himself with the great preparations made against him, which his neighbour Countries: we see his Viceroy, in the meane season, vsing all Royal power; making warre and peace; entertaining, and expelling Armies of strangers; yea making the Land of Aegypt tributarie to a forraine Prince. What greater authoritie was giuen to Ioseph, when Pharaoh said vnto him, Thou shalt be ouer mine house, and at thy word shall all my people be armed, only in the Kings Throne will I bee aboue thee, Behold, I haue set thee ouer all the Land of Aegypt? I doe not commend this forme of Gouernement; neither can I approoue the coniecture of mine Author, where hee thinks, that the Aegyptians, euer since Iosephs time, haue felt the burden of that seruitude, which hee brought vpon them, when he bought them, and their Lands, for Pharaoh. Herein I finde his iudgement good; that he affirmes this manner of the Aegyptian Kings, in taking their ease, and ruling by a Viceroy, to be part of the ancient customes, practised by the Pharaohs. For we finde, that euen the Ptolomies (excepting Ptolomaeus Lagi, and his sonne Phi∣ladelphus, founder and establisher of that race) were giuen, all of them, wholly to please their owne appetites, leauing the charge of the Kingdome to Women, Eu∣nuches, and other ministers of their desires. The pleasures which that Countrie affoorded, were indeede sufficient to inuite the Kings thereof vnto a voluptuous life; and the awfull regard wherein the Aegyptians held their Princes, gaue them securitie, whereby they might the better trust their officers, with so ample Com∣mission. But of this matter, I will not stand longer to dispute. It is enough to haue shewed, that the great and almost absolute power of the Viceroyes gouerning Aegypt, is set downe by Moses, and that a liuely example of the same is found in William of Tyre; who liued in the same age; was, in few yeeres after, Chancellour of the Kingdome of Ierusalem; and had full discourse with Hugh Earle of Caesarea, touch∣ing all these matters. Wherefore it remaines, that wee bee not carried away with a vaine opinion, to beleeue that all they were Kings, whom reports of the fabulous Aegyptians haue honored with that stile; but rest contented with a Catalogue of such, as we finde by circumstance, likely to haue raigned in that Countrie; after whom it followes that we should make enquirie. §. II. Of ACHERRES; whether he were VCHOREVS that was the eighth from OSYMANDYAS. Of OSYMANDYAS and his Tombe. IN this businesse I hold it vaine to be too curious. For who can hope to attaine to the perfect knowledge of the truth, when as Diodorus varies from Herodotus, Eusebius, from both of them; and late Writers, that haue sought to gather the truth out of these and others, finde no one with whom they can agree? In this case Annius would doe good ser∣uice, if a man could trust him. But it is enough to be beholding to him, when others doe either say nothing, or that which may iustly bee suspected. I will therefore hold my selfe contented, with the pleasure that he hath done me, in saying some∣what of Osiris, Isis, Orus, and those antiquities remoued so farre out of sight: as for the Kings following the departure of Israel out of Aegypt, it shall suffice, that Hero∣dotus, Diodorus, and Eusebius, haue not beene silent, and that Reineccius hath taken paines, to range into some good order the names that are extant in these, or found scattering in others. From the of Israel out of Aegypt, vnto the raigne of Thuoris (who is generally taken to be the same that the Greeks call Proteus ) there is little or no disa∣greement about the Aegyptian Kings. Wherefore I set downe the same which are found in Eusebius, and giue to euerie one the same length of raigne. Acherres was the first of these, who succeeded vnto Chenchres, that perished in the Red Sea. This King seemes to Reineccius to be the same whom Diodorus calls , the founder of Memphis. But whereas mention is found in Diodorus of a great King, named Osymandyas, from whom Vchoreus is said to be the eighth; it will either hardly follow, that Timaus (as Reineccius coniectures) was the great Osyman∣dyas; or else that this Acherres was Vchoreus: for the distance betweene them was more then eight generations. Mercator iudgeth Osymandyas to haue beene the husband of Acencheres, Orus the second his Daughter; thinking that Manethon (cited by Iosephus ) doth omit his name, and insert his wiues, into the Catalogue of Kings, because he was King in his wiues right. As for Vchoreus, it troubles not Mer∣cator to finde him the eighth from this man: for he takes Ogdous, not to signifie in this place of Diodore (as that Greeke word else doth) the eighth, but to be an Aegyp∣tian name, belonging also to Vchoreus, who might haue had two names, as many of the rest had. I will not vexe my braines in the vnprofitable search of this, and the like inextricable doubts. All that Diodore hath found of this Osymandyas, was wrought vpon his monument; the most thereof in figures, which I thinke the Ae∣gyptians did fabulously expound. For whereas there was pourtraied a great Armie with the siege of a Towne, the captiuitie of the People, and the triumph of the Conqueror; all this, the Aegyptians said to denote the conquest of Bactria made by that King: which how likely it was, let others iudge. I hold this goodly peece of worke, which Diodore so particularly describes, to haue beene erected for a com∣mon place of buriall, to the ancient Kings and Queenes of Aegypt, and to their Viceroyes; whilest yet they were not so ambitious, as euery one to haue his owne particular monument, striuing therein to exceed all others. This appeares by the many statuaes, therein placed, by the Warres, the iudgement Seate, the receiuing of Tribute, the offering Sacrifice to God, the account of Reuennues, and plentie of all Cattaile and Foode; all which were there curiously wrought, shewing the seuerall Offices of a Gouernour. On the Tombe of Osymandyas was this inscription. I am OSYMANDYAS King of Kings; If any desire to know what I am, or where I lie, let him exceede some of my workes. Let them, that hope to exceede his workes, la∣bour to know what he was. But since by those wordes, Or where I lie, it should seeme that hee lay not there interred, wee may lawfully suspect that it was Ioseph, whose body was preserued among the Hebrewes, to be buried in the Land of Ca∣naan, and this emptie Monument might King Orus, who out-liued him, erect in honor of his high deserts, among the royall Sepulchers. To which purpose, the plentie of Cattell, and all manner of viands, had good reference. The name Osy∣mandyas doth not hinder this coniecture; seeing Ioseph had one new name giuen to him by Pharaoh, for expounding the dreame, and might, vpon further occasions, haue another, to his encrease of honor. As for that stile, King of Kings, it was perhaps no more than Beglerbeg, as the Turkish Bassaes are called, that is, Great aboue the Great. Now although it be so, that the reckoning falls out right, betweene the times of Ioseph and Acherres (for Acherres was the eighth in order, that raigned after the great Orus, whose Viceroy Ioseph was) yet will I hereby seeke, neither to fortifie mine owne coniecture, as touching Ioseph, nor to inferre any likelihood of Acherres his being Vchoreus. For it might well bee, that Memphis was built by some such King as was Gehoar, Lieutenant vnto the Caliph Elcain, who hauing to his Masters Iohn Leo Hist. Afric. l. 1. &. l. 8. vse, conquered Aegypt, and many other Countries, did build, not farre from old Memphis, the great Citie of Cairo (corruptly so pronoun∣ced) naming it El Cahira, that is, an enforcing, or an imperious Mistresse, though he himselfe were a Dalmatian slaue. §. III. Of CHERRES, ARMEVS, RAMESSES, and AMENOPHIS. Of MYRIS, and the Lake that beares his name. WHen Acherres had eight yeeres, Cherres succeeded, and held the Kingdome fifteene yeeres: then raigned Armeus fiue yeeres, and after him Ramesses, threescore and eight. Of Armeus and Ramesses is that Historie vnderstood by Eusebius, which is common among the Greekes, vnder the names of Danaus and Aegyptus. For it is said that Danaus, being expelled out of Aegypt by his Brother, fled into Greece, where he ob∣tained the Kingdome of Argos: that he had fiftie Daughters, whom vpon seeming reconciliation, hee gaue in marriage to his Brothers fiftie Sonnes, but commanded euery one of them to kill her husband the first night; that onely Hypermnestra, one of his Daughters, did saue her husband Lynceus, and suffered him to escape; finally, That for this fact, all the bloudie sisters, when they died, were enioyned this foo∣lish punishment in Hell, to fill a leaking Vessell with water. The raigne of in Argos was indeed in this age; but that Armeus, was Da∣naus; and Ramesses, Aegyptus; is more then Reineccius beleeues: hee rather takes Armeus to haue beene Myris, or Meris, who caused the great lake to be made which beares his name. For my owne part, as I can easily beleeue, that he which fled out of Aegypt into Greece, was a man of such qualitie as the Soldan Sanar, of whom we spake before; so doe I not finde how in so short a raigne, as fiue yeeres, a worke of that labour could be finished, which was required vnto the Lake of Myris, and the Monuments therein; whereof his owne Sepulchre and his being some part, it is manifest that he was not buried in Argos. Wherefore of Myris, and of all other Kings, whose age is vncertaine, and of whose raignes we haue no assurance, I may truly say, that their great workes are not enough to prooue them of the house of Pharaoh, seeing that greater deedes or more absolute, then were those of Ioseph, who bought all the people of Aegypt as bond-men, and all their Land for bread; of , who founded Cairo; and of Sanar, who made the Countrie Tributarie; were performed by none of them. It shall therefore be enough to set downe the length of their raignes, whom we finde to haue followed one another in order of succession: but in rehearsing the great acts which were performed, I will not stand to examine, whether they that did them were Kings or no. The Lake of Myris is, by the report of Diodore and Herodotus, three thousand sixe hundred furlongs in compasse, and fiftie fadomes deepe. It serued to receiue the waters of Nilus, when the ouer-flow, being too great, was harmefull to the Coun∣trie; and to supply the defect, by letting out the waters of the Lake, when the Ri∣uer did not rise high enough. In opening the sluces of this Lake, for the letting in or out of waters, were spent fiftie talents; but the Lake it selfe defraied that cost; see∣ing the tribute imposed vpon Fish taken therein, was euery day one talent, which Myris gaue to his Wife to buy sweet ointments, and other ornaments for her bodie. In the middest of it was left an Iland, wherein were the Sepulchers of Myris and his Wife, and ouer each of them a Pyramis, that was a furlong, or (according to Hero∣dotus ) fiftie paces high; hauing on the tops their statues, sitting in Thrones. I finde not the description of this Lake in Maps, answerable to the report of Historians: yet is it very great. The yeeres of Armeus are by Manethon diuided, by inserting one Armesis (whom Eusebius omits) that should haue raigned one yeere and odde mo∣neths of the time; but I hold not this difference worthy of examination. After Ramesses, his sonne Amenophis held the Kingdome fortie yeares. Some giue him only nineteene yeeres; and Mercator thinkes him to haue beene the King that was drowned in the Red Sea: whereof I haue already spoken in the first Booke. §. IIII. Of the Kings that raigned in the Dynastie of the Larthes. SETHOSIS, or Zethus, raigned after his Father Amenophis, fiftie fiue yeeres. To him are ascribed the famous acts of that ancient Sesostris. But the state of the World was not such in these times, that so great an expedition, as the old Sesostris made, could haue beene either ea∣sily performed, or forgotten in the Countries through which he pas∣sed, had it now beene performed, as any man will perceiue, if hee looke vpon my Chronologicall Table, and consider who liued with this Zethus. With this King beganne the Dinastie of the Larthes; which Reineccius conjectures to haue had the same signification, wherein the old Kings of Hetruria were called Lartes, (the He∣trurians being issued out of Lydia, the Lydians out of Aegypt ) and to haue signified as much as Imperator or Generall. The Warres in which these Kings were Generalls, I take to haue beene against the Aethiopians: for sure I am, that they troubled not the Countrie of Palaestina, that lay next vnto them on the one hand; nor is it likely that they trauailed ouer the desart sands, on the other hand; to seeke matter of conquest, in the poore Countries of Africa. But these Generalls (if the Larthes were such) were not many. Fiue only had that title; and the last of these tooke it, per∣haps, as hereditarie from the first; in such sort as the Roman Emperors were proud for a while, to be called Antonini, till the most vnsuteable conditions of Heliogabalus, made his Successors forbeare the name. Here it may be objected, that the Dynasties (as appeares by this particular) tooke name from the Kings, that the Kings also did administer the gouernement them∣selues; and that therefore I am deceiued in ascribing so much vnto the Viceroies. But it is to be , that what is said of these Larthes, depends only vpon con∣jecture, and that the authoritie of the Regents, or Viceroies, might bee great e∣nough, though some few Kings tooke the conduct of Armies into their owne hands. For so we finde in Iohn Leo, that the Soldan of Aegypt (after such time as the Iohn Leo, l. . Soldan Saladine, murdering the Caliph, got the Soueraignetie to himselfe) had vnder him a Viceroy, stiled Eddaguadare, who had authoritie to place, or displace, any Ma∣gistrates, or Officers; and that this mans Familie was almost as great, as the Soldens owne. Yet was there also the Amir Cabir, or Lord Generall of the Soldans forces, who had the charge of defending the Land, and might as he thought good, spend of the Soldans Treasure. So might the Office of the Viceroies continue, though the Kings themselues, taking the charge, or title of Generalls vpon them, did some what abridge the greatnesse of that second place. As for the names of the Dynasties, it skills not whence they were drawne; whether from their Countrie, as those of the Thebans and Diapolitans, or from some eminent men, or man, who ruled in that time, as many thinke, that the seuenteenth Dynastie was called of the Sheep-heards, be∣cause Ioseph gouerned in part therof; or from the Kings themselues that raigned; as this was said to be of the Larthes or Generalls. The next, as Manetho (but Annius his Manetho ) hath it, was without any Larthes or Generals, yet was it not without Kings, forasmuch as Vaphres, and Sesac, raigned therein, if many others did not. But let vs now returne to the businesse which we left. Ramses was King after Zethus, or Sethosis, threescore and sixe yeeres. He is mista∣ken for that second Sesostris, of whom I haue spoken in the first Bookes. I finde no∣thing worth rehearsall of this Ramses, or of Amenophis, and Annemenes, that fol∣lowed him in order, the former of which raigned fortie, the later sixe and twentie yeeres. Wherefore it may well bee, that the name which Zethus had from valour, was taken by these as hereditarie. Thuoris, the last of the Larthes, raigned only seuen yeeres; yet is hee thought to haue beene that Proteus, of whom Herodotus hath mention, saying, That hee tooke Helena from Paris, and after the sack of Troy, restored her to Menelaus. I neede say no more in refutation of this, then that the time of Thuoris his raigne, lasted not so long as from the Rape of Helen to her restitution. This Proteus or Cetes (as he is named by some) together with Thon, and others, mentioned by Greeke Writers in this businesse, or in other such matters, may seeme to be vnder-Officers: for such only are like to haue had their residencie about Pha∣ros, and the Sea-coast, where Menelaus arriued. Of Proteus, who detained Helen, it is said, That he could foretell things to come, and that hee could change himselfe into all shapes: whereby is signified his craftie head, for which he is growne into a Prouerbe. The Poets fained him a Sea-God, and keeper of Neptunes Seale-fishes, for belike he was some vnder-Officer to the Ad∣mirall, hauing charge of the Fishing about the Isle of Pharos, as was said before. Remphes, the Sonne of Proteus, is reckoned the next King, by Diodore, as also by Herodotus, who calls him Ramsinitus, and tells a long tale, fit to please children, of his couetousnesse, and how his treasure-house was robbed by a cunning Theefe, that at last married his Daughter. But of this a man may beleeue what be list. How long this King raigned I know not, nor thinke that either hee, or his Father, did raigne at all. §. V. Of Aegyptian Kings whose names are found scattering in sundrie Authors, their times being not recorded. The Kings of Aegypt, according to CEDRENVS. Of VAPHRES and SESAC. MAny other names of Aegyptian Kings, are found scattered heere and there; as Tonephersobis, of whom Suidas deliuers only the bare name and title; Senemures, or Senepos, mentioned in Macrobius, who per∣haps was the same that by Suidas is called Senyes, or Euenes, noted by occasion of a great Phisicion that liued vnder him; Banchyris, recorded by the Suidas, for his great justice; and Thulis, of whom Suidas tells great mat∣ters; as that his Empire extended to the Ocean Sea; that he gaue name to the Isle of Thule, which some take to be Iseland; and that he consulted with the Deuill, or (which is all one) with Seraphis, desiring to know, who before him had beene, or af∣ter him should be so mightie as himselfe. The answere or confession of the Deuill was remarkable; which I finde Englished in the translation of Plessis his worke, Of the truenesse of Christian Religion. The Greeke Verses are somewhat otherwise, and more imperfect in those Copies that I haue of Cedrenus and Suidas, but the sense is all one; which is this: First GOD, and next THE WORD, and then THE SPRITE, Which three be ONE, and joyne in ONE all three: Whose force is endlesse. Get thee hence fraile wight, The Man of Life vnknowne excelleth thee. I should haue thought that Suidas had borrowed all this of Cedrenus, had I not found somewhat more in Suidas, than Cedrenus hath hereof; as the forme of inuo∣cation which Thulis vsed, and that clause, of his giuing name to the Iland: though in this last point I hold Suidas to be deceiued; as also Cedrenus is, or (at least) seemes to me, in giuing to this King such profound antiquitie of raigne. Indeede the very name of that Booke, cited often by Cedrenus, which he calls Little Genesis, is alone enough to breede suspition of some imposture: but the Frierly stuffe that hee al∣ledgeth out of it, is such as would serue to discredit himselfe, were it not otherwise apparant, that he was a man both deuout, and of good judgement, in matters that within his compasse. I will here set downe the List of olde Aegyptian Kings de∣liuered by him, and leaue the censure to others. The first King of Aegypt that he sets downe, is Mizraim, the sonne of Cham. Af∣ter him hee findes many of a new race, deriuing their pedegree thus: Nimrod, the sonne of Chus, was also called Orion; and further, tooke vpon him the name of the Planet Saturne, had to wife Semiramis, who was of his owne Linage, and by her three sonnes; Picus, surnamed Iupiter, Belus and Ninus. Picus chasing his father out Assyria into Italie, raigned in his stead thirtie yeeres, and then gaue vp that King∣dome to Iuno, his sister and wife, and to Belus his sonne: after which Belus, who raig∣ned onely two yeeres, Ninus had the Kingdome, and married his owne mother Se∣miramis. But Picus went into Italie, to visite his olde father Saturne; Saturne forth∣with resigned the Kingdome to him. Picus Iupiter raigned in Italie threescore and two yeeres, had threescore and tenne Wiues or Concubines, and about as many children: finally died, and lyes buried in the Isle of Crete. The principall of Iupi∣ters sonnes were Faunus, Perseus, and Apollo. Faunus was called by the name of the Planet Mercurie: hee raigned in Italie, after his father, fiue and thirtie yeeres: and then (finding that all his brethren conspired against him) he went into Aegypt, with abundance of Treasure; where, after the death of Mizraim, hee got the King∣dome, and held it nine and thirtie yeeres. After Mercurie, Vulcan raigned in Aegypt foure yeeres and a halfe. Then Sol, the sonne of Vulcan, raigned twentie yeeres and a halfe. There followed in order Sosis, Osiris, Orus, and Thules, of whome we spake before: the length of their seuerall raignes is not set downe. After Thules, was the great Sesostris King twentie yeeres. His successor was Pharao, called Narecho, that held the Crowne fiftie yeeres, with which there passed from him the surname of Pharao, to a very long posteritie. These reports of Cedrenus I hold it enough to set downe as I finde them: let their credit rest vpon the Author. Others yet we finde, that are said to haue raigned in Aegypt, without any certaine note, when, or how long: about whome I will not labour, as more to be reprehended of vaine curiositie, in the search made after these already rehearsed, then of negligence, in omitting such as might haue beene added. Vaphres, the father in law to Salomon; and Sesac, the afflicter of Rchoboam, leade vs againe into faire way, but not . The name of Vaphres is not found in the Scriptures; but wee are beholding to Clemens Alexandrinus and Eusebius for it. Clem. . l. 1 Euseb. de Praep. Euang. l. 9. c. 4. These giue vs not the length of his raigne; but we know, that he liued in the times of Dauid and of Salomon. He came into Palestina with an Armie, tooke Gezar from the Canaanites, and gaue it to his daughter, Salomons wife: though for her sake per∣haps 1. King. 9. 16. & 11. v. 18, 19, &c. it was, that in time following either he, or (as I rather take it) Sesac his sonne did fauour the enemies of Salomon, who kept so many Wiues and Concubines, be∣sides this Aegyptian Princesse. In the life of Rehoboam all hath beene written that I finde of Sesac, excepting the length of his raigne, which must haue and twentie yeeres, if he were that Smendis with whome Eusebius beginnes the one and twentieth Dynastie. Now forasmuch as it would serue to no great purpose, that wee knew the length of Sesac his raigne, and of theirs that followed him, vnlesse therewithall we knew the beginning of Sesac, vpon which the rest haue dependance; this course I take. From the fourth yeere of Iehoiakim, King of Iuda, in which Pharao Neco was slaine, I reckon vpwards the yeeres of the same Neco, and of his predecessors, vnto the be∣ginning of Sesac: by which acommpt, the first yeere of Sesac is found, concurrent with the twentieth of Salomons raigne, and the twentie sixt of Sesac with the fift of Rehoboam: wherein Sesac spoyled the Temple, and died, enjoying the fruits of his Sacriledge no longer, then Ioas the Israelite and Crassus the Romane did; who, after him, spoyled the Temple of . To fill vp the time betweene Sesac and Neco, I haue rather taken those Kings that I find in the Greeke Historians, than them which are in his Catalogue. For of these that are deliuered by Eusebius, wee finde no Name nor Act recorded elsewhere, saue onely of Bocchoris, who is remembred by Diodore, Plutarch, and o∣thers, much being spoken of him, that makes him appeare to haue beene a King. Hereunto I may adde, that the succession is often interrupted in Eusebius by Ae∣thiopians, which got the Kingdome often, and held it long: whereas contrariwise it appeares by the Prophet Esay, that the Councellors of Pharao did vaunt of the long and flourishing continuance of that house, insomuch, that they said of Pharaoh, am the Sonne of the Wise, I am the Sonne of the ancient King. But that which ouer∣throwes . 19. 11. the reckoning of Eusebius, is, the good agreement of it with his mistaken times of the Kings of Iuda. For though it please him well to see how the raignes of Iosias and Neco meere by his computation, yet this indeede marres all; the raigne of Iosias being misplaced. This error growes from his omitting, to compare the raignes of the Kings of Iuda with theirs of Israel: by which occasion, Ioram, King of Israel, is made to raigne three yeeres after of Iuda; Samaria is taken by Sal∣manassar before Hezekia was King: and in a word, all, or most of the Kings, haue their beginnings placed in some other yeere of their collateralls than the Scriptures haue determined. §. VI. Of CHEMMIS, CHEOPS, , and other Kings recited by HERODOTVS and DIODORVS SICVLVS, which raigned betweene the times of REHO∣BOAM and EZEKIA. FOllowing therefore the Greeke Historians, I place Chemmis, or (accor∣ding to Diodore ) Chembis, first in the ranke of those that were Kings af∣ter Sesac. Hee raigned fiftie yeeres, and built the greatest of the three Pyramides, which was accompted one of this worlds Wonders. The Pyramis hath his name from the shape, in that it resembleth a flame of fire, growing from the bottome vpwards narrower and narrower to the toppe. This of Chemmis being foure-square, had a Base of seuen akers euery way, and was aboue sixe akers high. It was of a very hard and durable Stone, which had lasted, when Diodore saw it, about a thousand yeeres, without complaining of any injurie that it had suffered by weather in so long space. From the raigne of Chemmis, vn∣to the age of Augustus Caesar, wherein Diodore liued, are indeede a thousand yeeres; which giues the better likelyhod vnto this time wherein Chemmis is pla∣ced. As for this and other Pyramides, late Writers testifie, that they haue seene them yet standing. After Chemmis, Diodore placeth Cephrenes his brother; but doubtfully, and en∣clining Diodor. l. 1. rather to the opinion, that his sonne Chabreus succeeded. Herodotus hath . l. 2. Cheops (who might bee Chabreus ) and Cephrenes after him. These are said to haue beene brethren; but the length of their raignes may argue the later to haue beene sonne to the former: for Cheops fiftie yeeres; Cephrenes fiftie sixe. These were, as Chemmis had beene, builders of Pyramides, whereby they purchased great hatred of their people, who already had ouer-laboured themselues in erecting the first. These Pyramides were ordained to be Tombes, for those that raised them; but the malice of the Aegyptians is said to haue cast out their bodies; and to haue called their Monuments by the name of an Heardsman, that kept his Beasts there∣abouts. It may be, that the robbing them of their honour, and entituling a poore fellow to their workes, was held to be the casting out of their bodies: otherwise, it is hard to conceiue, how it might bee, that they, who had not power to auoide the like , laid vpon them by the yonger brother, or sonne, should haue power or leisure to take such reuenge vpon his Predecessor. To the like malice may be ascri∣bed the tale deuised against Cheops his Daughter; That her Father, wanting mony, did prostitute her, and that shee, getting of euery man that accompanied her, one stone, did build with them a fourth Pyramis, that stood in the middest of the other three. Belike shee was an insolent Lady, and made them follow their , for her sake, longer a while than they thought to haue done, in raising a Monument, with the superfluitie of her Fathers prouisions. Mycerinus, the sonne of Cephrenes, raigned after his Father sixe yeeres. He would haue built as his foregoers did, but preuented by death, finished not what hee had begunne. The people thought him a good King, for that he did set open the Tem∣ples, which Cheops and Cephrenes had kept shut. But an Oracle threatned him with ashort life of sixe yeeres only, because of this his deuotion; For (said the Oracle) Aegypt should haue beene an hundred and fiftie yeeres, which thy knew, and performed for their parts, but thou hast released it, therefore shalt thou but sixe yeeres. It is very strange, that the Gods should bee offended with a King for his pietie; or that they should decree to make a Countrie impious, when the people were desirous to serue them; or that they hauing so decreed, it should lie in the power of a King, to alter destinie, and make the ordinance of the Gods to faile in ta∣king full effect. But these were Aegyptian Gods. The true GOD was, doubtlesse, more offended with the restitution of such Idolatrie, than with the interruption. And who knowes, whether Chemmis did not learne somewhat at Ierusalem, in the last yeere of his Father , that made him perceiue, and to those that fol∣lowed him, the vanitie of his Aegyptian superstition? Sure it is that his raigne, and the raignes of Cheops, and Cephrenes, were more long and more happie, than that of Mycerinus, who, to delude the Oracle, reuelled away both daies and nights, as if by keeping candles lighted, hee had changed his nights into daies, and so doubled the time appointed: a seruice more pleasing to the Deuill, than the restitution of Idola∣trie durst then seeme, when it could speede no better. I finde in fiftie yeeres assigned to this King; which I verily beleeue to haue beene some errour of the print, though I finde it not corrected among such ouer-sights: for I know no Author that giues him so many yeeres, and himselfe takes notice of the Oracle, that threatned Mycerinus with a short life, as is before shewed. Bocchorus is placed next vnto Mycerinus, by Diodore, who speakes no more of him than this, that he was a strong man of body, and excelling his Predecessors in wit. He is spoken of by diuers Authors, as one that loued justice; and may be taken for that Banchyris, whom Suidas commends in that kinde: reckons foure and fortie yeeres of his raigne. After Bocchorus, one Sabacus an Aethiopian followes, in the Catalogue of Diodore; but certaine ages after him. Herodotus, quite omitting Bocchorus, hath Asychis; who made a sharpe law (as it was then held) against bad debtors, that their dead bodies should be in the creditors disposition, till the debt were paied. This Asychis made a Pyramis of brick, more costly and faire, in his owne judgement, than any of those that the former Kings had raised. Besides this Asychis, Herodotus placeth one Anysis, ablinde man, before the Aethiopian. The raignes of these two are perhaps those many ages, which the Aegyptians, to magnifie their antiquities, accounted betweene Bocchorus and him that followed them. But all this could make but sixe yeeres; and so long doth , so long doth hold, that these two Kings, betweene them both, did gouerne. If any man would lengthen this time, holding it vnpro∣bable, that the raignes of two Kings should haue beene so spent; he may doe it by taking some yeeres from Sethon or Psammeticus, and adding them to either of these. To adde vnto these, without subtracting from other, would breede a manifest : forasmuch as part of Sesac his raigne, must haue beene in the of REHOBOAM; as also the last of Pharao Neco was the fourth of Iehoiakim, 1. King. 14. 25. and the first of . For mine owne part I like it better to allow sixe 2. . 12. v. 2. yeeres only to these two Kings, than to loose the witnesse of , who, con∣curring herein with the Scriptures, doth of Senacheribs warre: at which time Sethon was King of Aegypt. I will not therefore adde yeeres vnto these obscure names; for by adding vnto these men three yeeres, wee shall thrust the beginning of Sethon out of place, and make it later than the death of . In regard of this agreement of Herodotus with the Scriptures, I am the more willing to hold with him, in his Kings. Otherwise it were a matter of no great enuie, to leaue both Asychis and out of the roll; which were easily done, by placing Sesac lower, and extending his life yet sixe yeeres further, or more, (if the like abridge∣ment shall be required of his raigne) into the yeeres of Rehoboam. Of the Aethiopian, who tooke the Kingdome from Amysis, it is agreed by the most, that he raigned fiftie yeeres. He was a mercifull Prince, not punishing all capitall offences with death, but imposing bondage and bodily labour vpon male∣factors; by whose toyle he both got much wealth into his owne hands, letting out their seruice to hire, and performed many workes, of more vse than pompe, to the singular benefit of the Countrey. Zonaras calls this King Sua; the Scriptures call him So. Hosea, the last King of Israel, made a League with him against Salmanassar, little to his good: for the Aegyptian was more rich than warlike, and therefore his friendship could not preserue the Israelite from destruction. It , that the encroching power of the Assyrian, grew terrible to Aegypt a∣bout these times; the victories of Tiglath Phulassar, and Salmanassar, hauing eaten so farre into Syria, in the raigne of this one King So or Sabacus. Yea, perhaps it was in his daies (for his raigne beganne in the of Menahem ) that Phul himselfe did make the first entrance into . This caused So to animate the halfe subdued people, against their Conquerours; but the helpe which he and his Successor gaue them was so , that Embassador compared the Aegyptian succour to a broken of Reede. Such indeede had Hosea found it, and such Ezekia might haue found it, had hee not beene supported by the stronger staffe of Him, that rules all Nations with a of yron. It appeares by the words of , that the opinion was great in , of the Aegyptian forces, for and Horse∣men; 2. King. 18. 24. but this power, whatsoeuer it was, grew needfull, within a little while, for the de∣fence of Aegypt it selfe which So left vnto Sethon his successor, hauing now fulfilled the fiftie yeeres of his raigne. Herodotus and Diodorus haue both one tale, from the relation of Priests, concerning the departure of this King; saying, that he left the Countrie, and willingly retired into Aethiopia, because it was often fignified vnto him in his dreames, by the God which was worshipped at Thebes, that his raigne should be neither long nor prosperous, vnlesse he slew all the Priests in Ae∣gypt; which rather than to doe, he resigned his Kingdome. Surely, these Aegyptian gods were of a strange qualitie, that so ill rewarded their Seruants, and inuited Kings to doe them wrong. Well might the Aegyptians (as they likewise did) wor∣ship Dogs as gods, their chiefe gods had the propertie of Dogs, which loue their Masters the better for beating them. Yet to what end the Priests should haue fained this tale, I cannot tell; and therefore I thinke that it might be some of the fearefull old man, who seeing his Realme in danger of an inuasion, sought an honest excuse for his departure out of it, and with-drawing himself into Aethiopia, where he had beene bred in his youth. What if one should say, that the Aethiopia into which he went, was none other than Arabia, whereof the King (per∣haps at the instigation of this man) raised an Armie against , when meant to inuade Aegypt, within two or three yeeres after? But I will not trouble my selfe with such enquirie. This I hold, that So, or Sabacus, was not indeede an Aethiopian (for in his time liued the Prophet Esay, who mentioneth the antiquitie of house) but onely so surnamed for his education, and because issuing from thence, he got the Kingdome from Anysis, who was his opposite. The quiet and milde forme of his Gouernement; his holding the Kingdome so long without an Armie; and many other circumstances argue no lesse. But whether finally hee betooke to a priuate life, or whether hee fore went his Life and Kingdome at once, being now very old, it is time that we leaue him, and speake of Sethon his next Suc∣cessor, who is omitted by , but remembred by , by a sure token of his hauing beene King. §. VII. Of SETHON who raigned with EZEKIA, and sided with him against . THe first yeere of Sethons raigne falls into the of , which was the fift of . It was a troublesome age, and full of dan∣ger; the two great Kingdomes of Assyria and Aegypt, being then in∣gaged in a Warre, the whereof was to determine, whether of should rule or serue. The Assyrian had the better men of warre; the Aegyptian better prouision of necessaries: the Assyrian, more Subjects; the Ae∣gyptian, more Friends; and among the new conquered halfe Subjects of Assur, ma∣nie that were Aegyptian in , though Assyrian in outward shew. Of this last sort were , and his people; who, knowing how much it con∣cerned Pharao, to protect them against his owne great Enemie, preferred the friend∣ship of so neere and mightie a Neighbour, before the seruice of a terrible, yet farre remoued King. But herein was great difference, betweene Ezekia and his Subjects: For the good King, fixing his especiall confidence in God, held that course of po∣licie, which hee thought most likely to turne to the benefit of his Countrie: the multitude of , looking into the faire hopes which this Aegyptian league pro∣mised, were puffed vp with vaine conceits, thinking that all was safe, and that now they should not neede to feare any more of those jniuries, which they had suffered by the Assyrians, and so became forgetfull of God, taking counsaile but not of him. The Esay 30. 1. Prophet Esay complained much of this presumption; giuing the people of Iuda to vnderstand, That the Aegyptians were men, and not God, and their Horses flesh, and not Spirit; that God himselfe should defend Israel vpon repentance, and that ASSVR should by the sword, but not of man. As for the (said the Prophet) they Esay 31. v. 3. & 8. are , and they shall helpe in vaine, their strength is to sit still. Esay 30. 7. According to the Prophets words it came to passe. For in the treatie of Confe∣deracie Esay 3. 4. that was held at Zoan, all manner of contentment and assurance was giuen to the Iewes, by Sethon, or his Agents, who filled them with such reports, of Horses and Charets, that they did not looke (as Esay saith) vnto the holy one of Israel, nor seeke vnto Esay 31. 1, 2. the Lord. But he yet is wisest. After a while came Sennacherib with his Armie, and wakened them out of these dreames; for Sethon their good Neighbour, as neere as hee was, did seeme farre off, being vnreadie, when his helpe was most needfull. It may seeme that he purposed, rather to make Palaestina than Aegypt the stage, whereon this great Warre should be acted, and was not without hope, that the Assyrians and Iewes, weakening one ano∣ther, should yeeld vnto him a faire aduantage ouer both. Yet he fought with mo∣nie; for he sent Horses and Camels laden with treasure, to hire the Arabians, whom Esay calleth a people that cannot profit. These Arabians did not profit indeede; for Esay 30. 6. (besides that it seemes by the same place of Esay, that the rich treasures miscarried, and fell into the enemies hands before any helpe appeared from Tirhaca, ) all the strong Cities of Iuda were taken by , except Libna, Lachis, and Ierusalem it selfe, which were in fore distresse, till the sword of God, and not of Man, defeated the Assyrtan, who did goe, sor feare, to his Tower, that is, he fled to , where he 31. 9. was slaine. Concerning this expedition of Sennacherib, Herodotus takes this notice of it: That it was purposed against Aegypt, where the men of warre, being offended with Se∣thon their King, who had taken away their allowance, refused to beare armes in de∣fence of him and their Country; that Sethon being Vulcans Priest, bemoaned himselfe to his god, who by dreame promised to send him helpers; that hereupon Sethon, with such as would follow him, which were crafts-men, shop-keepers, and the like) towards Pelusium; and that a great multitude of field-mice entring the Campe of Sennacherib by night, so gnaw the bowes quiuers, and straps of his mens armour, that they were faine the next day to flie away in all haste, finding themselues . In memorie hereof (saith Herodotus ) the statue of this King is set vp in the Temple of Vulcan, holding a Mouse in his hand, with this inscription: Let him, that b holds me, serue . Such was the relation of the Aegyptian Priests, wherein how farre they swarued from the truth, being desirous to magnifie their owne King, it may easily be perceiued. It seemes that this Image of Sethon was fal∣len downe, the tale forgotten in Diodorus his time, or else perhaps, the Priests did forbeare to tell it him (which caused him to omit it) for that the Nation of the was then well knowne to the world, whereof euery child could haue told, how much falsehood had beene mingled with the truth. We sinde this historie agreeable to the Scriptures, thus farre forth; That Senna∣cherib King of the Assyrians, and Arabians, (so Herodotus calleth him: the Syrians or peraduenture some borderers vpon Syria, being meant by the name of Arabians ) li∣ued in this age, made Warre vpon Aegypt, and was miraculously driuen home. As for that exploit of the Mice, and the great pleasure that Vulcan did vnto his Priest; happy it was (if Sethon were a Priest) that he took his god now in so good a moode. For within three or foure yeeres before this, all the Priests in Aegypt should haue beene slaine, if a merciful King had not spared their liues, as it were halfe against the gods will. Therefore this last good turne was not enough to serue as an example, that might stirre vp the Aegyptians to pietie, seeing that their deuotion, which had lasted so long before, did bring all the Priests into danger of such a bad reward. Ra∣ther I thinke, that this Image did represent Sennacherib himselfe, and that the Mouse in his hand, signified Hieroglyphically (as was the Aegyptian manner of expressing things) the shamefull issue of his terrible expedition, or the destruction of his Ar∣mie, by meanes which came no man knew from whence. For the vengeance of God, shewed vpon this vngodly King, was indeede a very good motiue to pietie. But the embleme, together with the Temple of Vulcan (being perhaps the chiefe Temple in that Towne where this Image was erected) might giue occasion to such a fable; the Deuill helping to change the truth into a lie, that God might be robbed of his honour. Yet that we may not belie the Deuill, I hold it very likely, that Se∣thon, finding himselfe in danger, did call vpon his gods, that is, vpon Vulcan, Serapis, or any to whom hee had most deuotion. But so had other of his Predecessors done in the like neede: yet which of them had obtained succour by the like miracle? Surely the Iewes (euen such of them as most were giuen to Idolatrie) would haue beene ashamed of the confidence which they reposed, in the Charets of Aegypt, be∣cause they were , and in the Horse-men, because they were very strong; had it beene Esay 31. 1. told them, that Sethon, in stead of sending those Horse-men and Charets, was be∣seeching Vulcan, to send him and them good luck, or else (for these also were Aegyp∣tian gods) addressing his praiers to some Onyon or Cat. Howsoeuer it was, doubt∣lesse the prophecie of Esay tooke effect, which said, They shall be all ashamed of the peo∣ple that cannot profit them, nor helpe, nor doe them good, but shall bee a and also a reproch. Such is commonly the issue of humane wisedome, when rcsting secure vpon prouision that it selfe hath made, it will no longer seeme to stand in need of God. Some there are who take Sethon to haue beene set downe by , vnder the name of Tarachus the Aethiopian; and therefore the twentie yeeres which are giuen to Tarachus, they allow to the Raigne of Sethon. These haue well , that Ta∣rachus the Aethtopian is mentioned in the Scriptures, not as a King of Aegypt, but as a friend to that Countrie, or at least an to Senacherib, in the war last of the Aethiopians (as they are englished) ouer which hce raigned, being indeede Chusites or Arabians. Hereupon they suppose aright, that Eusebius hath mistaken one King for another. But whereas they thinke, that this Tarachus or Tirhaka, is pla∣ced in the roome of Sethon, and therefore giue to Sethon the twentie yeeres of Tara∣chus, I hold them to haue erred on the other hand. For this Aethiopian (as he is cal∣led) began his Raigne ouer Aegypt, by Eusebius his accompt, after the death of Se∣nacherib and of Ezekia, in the first yeere of King of Iuda. Therefore he, or his yeeres, haue no reference to Sethon. Herodotus forgets to tell how long Sethon raigned; Functius peremptorily, citing no Authour, nor allcaging reason it, sets him downe thirtie three yeers; many omit him quite; and they that name him, are not carefull to examine his continu∣ance. In this case, I follow that rule which I propounded vnto my selfe at the first, for measuring the Raignes of these Aegyptian Kings. The yeeres which passed from the fift of Rehoboam, vnto the fourth of Iehoiakim, I so diuide among the Aegyptians, that giuing to euery one the proportion allowed vnto him by the Author in whom hee is found, the rest is to be conferred vpon him whose length of Raigne is vncer∣taine; that is, vpon this Sethon. By this accompt I find the thirtie three yeeres, that are set downe by Functius, to agree very neerely, if not precisely, with the time of Se∣thons Raigne; therefore I conforme my owne reckoning to his, though I could be content to haue it one yeere lesse. The reason of this computation I shall render more at large, when I arriue at the time of Psammiticus, whereupon it hath much dependance, and whereinto the course of this Historie will shortly bring me, the Ae∣gyptian affaires growing now to be interlaced with the matters of Iuda, to which is meete that I . CHAP. XXVII. Of MANASSE and his Contemporaries. §. I. The wickednesse of MANASSES. His imprisonment, Repentance, and Death. MANASSE, the Sonne of Ezekias, forgetting the pie∣tie of his Father, and the prosperitie which followed him, set vp, repaired, adorned, and furnished, all the Altars, Temples, and high Places, in which the De∣uill was by the Heathen worshipped. Besides, hee himselfe esteemed the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, with all the hoste of Heauen, as gods, and worshipped them: and of all his acts the most abo∣minable was, that he burnt his Sonnes for a Sacrifice to the Deuill Moloch, or Melchor, in the Valley of Hinnon, or Benhennon: wherein was kindled the fire of Sacrifice to the Deuills. He also gaue himselfe to all kinde of Witchcraft and Sorcerie, accompanied and maintained those that had familiar Spirits, and all sorts of Enchanters: besides, he shed so much innocent bloud, as Ierusalem was replenished therewith, from corner to corner. For all his vices and abominations, when he was reprehended by that aged and reuerent Prophet Esay (who was also of the Kings race, and as the Iewes . . 1. Glycas pag 275. . de Pat. affirme, the Father in-law of the King) he caused the Prophet neere vnto the Foun∣taine of Siloe to be sawne in sunder, with a woodden saw, in the eightieth yere of his life: a cruelty more and monstrous then hath been heard of. The Scrip∣tures indeede are hereof yet the same is confirmed by Epiphanius, Isidore, Eu∣sebius, and others too many to rehearse, and too good to be suspected. Therefore the 2. . 33. 11. brought vpon them the Captaines of the Host of the Kings of ASHVR, which tooke MANASSE, and put him in fetters, and bound him in chaines, and carried him to Babel: Where after he had lien twentie yeere as a captiue, and dispoiled of all honour and hope; yet to his heartie repentance and continuall praier, the God of infinite mer∣cie had respect, and moued the Assyrtans heart to deliuer him. It is also likely that Merodach, because he loued his father , was the easilier perswaded to restore Manasse to his libertie and estate. After which, and when hee was againe established, remembring the miseries which followed his wickednesse, and Gods great mercies toward him, he changed forme, detested his former foolish and deuillish Idolatry, and cast downe the Idols of his owne erection, prepared the Altar of God and sacrificed theron. He repaired a great part of Ierusalem: and dyed after the long raigne of fiftie fiue yeeres. Glycas and Suidas report, that Manasse was held in a case of yron by the Assyrians: and therein fedde with bread of branne and water, which men may beleeue as it shall please their fancies. §. II. Of troubles in Aegypt following the death of SETHON. The raigne of PSAMMITICVS. THat the wickednesse of King Manasses was the cause of the euill, which fell vpon his Kingdome and Person, any Christian must needes be∣leeue: for it is affirmed in the Scriptures. Yet was the state of things, in those parts of the World, such, at that time, as would haue inuited any Prince (and did perhaps inuite Merodach, who fulfilled Gods pleasure, vpon respect borne to his owne ends) desirous of enlarging his Empire, to make attempt vpon Iuda. For the Kingdome of Aegypt, which was become the pillar, whereon the state of Iuda leaned, about these times was miserably distracted with ciuill dissension, and after two yeeres, ill amended by a diuision of the gouern∣ment betweene twelue Princes. After some good agreement betweene these, ele∣uen of them fell out with the twelfth of their colleagues, and were all finally sub∣dued by him, who made himselfe absolute King of all. This Inter-regnum, or meere Anarchie, that was in Aegypt, with the diuision of the Kingdome following it, is placed by Diodore, who omitteth Sethon, betweene the raignes of Sabacus, and : but Herodotus doth set the , or twelue Gouernours, imme∣diately before Psammiticus, who was one of them, and after Sethon. The occasion of this dissension seemes to haue beene the vncertainetie of title to that Kingdome (for that the Crowne of Aegypt passed by succession of bloud, I haue often shewed) which ended, for a while, by the partition of all among twelue, though things were not settled, vntill one had obtained the Soueraignetie. These twelue Rulers gouerned fifteene yeeres, in good seeming agreement, which to preserue, they made strait couenants and alliances one with another, be∣ing jealous of their estate, because an Oracle had foretold, that one of them should depose all the rest, noting him by this token, that he should make a drinke offering, in Vulcans Temple, out of a Copper goblet. Whilest this vnitie lasted, they joyned together in raising a Monument of their Dominion, which was a Labyrinth, built neere vnto the Lake of Moeris; a worke so admirable, that (as Herodotus, who beheld it, affirmes) no words could giue it commendation, answerable to the statelinesse of the worke it selfe. I will not here set downe that vnperfect description, which Herodotus makes of it, but thinke enough to say, that he preferres it farre before the Pyramides, one of which (as he saith) excelled the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, or any of the fairest workes in Greece. Diodorus reports this Labyrinth to haue beene the worke of Marus, or Menides, a King which liued fiue generations before Pro∣teus, that is, before the Warre of Iroy, and from this Labyrinth (saith hee) Daedalus tooke the patterne of that which hee made for Minos in Creete. Who this Marus, or Menides was, I cannot tell. Reineccius takes him to haue beene Annemenes, which raigned immediately before Tkuoris. But this not with Diodore: for Daedalus and Minos were both dead long before Annemenes was King. Belike , de∣siring to accommodate the fabulous relations of Manethon, Chaeremon, and others, that are found in Iosephus, touching Amenophis and his children, to the storie of A∣masis, Ios. . App. l. 1. & Actisanes the Aethiopian, mentioned by Diodore; held it consequent, after he had conjectured Manethons Amenophis, to be Diodorus his Amasis; that Sethon should be Actisanes, and that Annemenes should bee Marus. If in this case I might intrude a conjecture; the times which wee now handle are those, about which Reineccius hath erred in making search; Amasis was Anysis; Actisanes was Sabacus; and Marus was one of these twelue Princes, to whom Herodotus giues the honour of building this famous Labyrinth. For Actisanes the Aethiopian deposed Amasis; Sabacus the Aethiopian deposed Anysis; Actisanes gouerned well, and was milde in punishing offendors; so likewise was Sabacus; Marus the next King after Actisanes built this Labyrinth; and the next (sauing Sethon, whom Diodore omits, as hauing not heard of him) that ruled after Sabacus, performed the same worke, according to Herodotus, who was more likely to heare the truth, as liuing to the Age wherein it was performed. The varietie of names, and difference of times, wherein Diodore belee∣ued the Priests, might bee a part of the Aegyptian vanitie, which was familiar with them, in multiplying their Kings, and boasting of their antiquities. Here I might adde, that the twelue great Hals, Parlours, and other circumstances remembred by Herodotus, in speaking of this building, doe helpe to proue, that it was the worke of these twelue Princes. But I hasten to their end. At a solemne feast in Vulcans Temple, when they were to make their drinke-offe∣rings, the Priest, forgetting himselfe, brought forth no more than eleuen Cups. Hereupon Psammiticus, who standing last, had not a Cup, tooke off his brazen Hel∣met, and therewith supplyed the want. This caused all the rest to remember the Oracle, and to suspect him as a Traitor; yet, when they found that it was not done by him vpon set purpose, or ill intent, they forbare to kill him, but, being jealous of their estate, they banished him into the marish Countries by the Sea side. This Oracle, and the euent, is held by Diodore as a sable, which I beleeue to haue beene none other: In the rest Herodotus and Diodore agree, saying, that hyred Souldiers out of Caria and Ionia, by whose aide he vanquished his Companions, and made himselfe sole King. The yeeres of his raigne, according to Herodotus, were fiftie foure; according to Eusebius, fortie foure; Mercator, to reconcile these two, giues fortie foure yeeres to his single raigne, and ten to his ruling, joyntly with the Princes before spoken of. Indeede, he that was admitted, being a man growne (for hee cannot in reason be supposed to haue beene then a yong fellow) into the number of the twelue Gouer∣nours, must be thought to haue liued vnto extreme old age, if he ruled partly with others, partly alone, threescore and nine yeeres. I therefore yeeld rather to Eusevius; but will not aduenture to cut fiue yeeres from the Aristocratie: though peraduenture Psammiticus was not at first one of the twelue, but succeeded (either by election, or as next of bloud) into the place of some Prince that dyed, and was ten yeeres com∣panion in that gouernement. Another scruple there is, though not great, which troubles this reckoning. The yeeres of these , as we finde them set downe, are more by one, than serue to fill vp the time, betweene the fift of Rehoboam, and the fourth of Iehoiakim. This may not be. Wherefore either we must abate one yeere from Sethons raigne; that was of vncertaine length; or else (which I had rather doe; because Functius may haue followed better authoritie than I know, or than himselfe alleageth, in giuing to a time so neerely agreeing with the truth) wee must confound the last yeere of one raigne, with the first of another. Such a supposition were not insolent. For no man can suppose, that all the Kings, or any great part of them, which are set downe in Chronologicall tables, raigned precisely so many yeeres as are ascribed vnto them, without any fractions: it is enough to thinke, that the surplusage of one mans time, supplied the defect of anothers. Wherefore I confound the last yeere of those fifteene, wherein the twelue Princes ruled, with the first of Psammiticus; who surely did not fall out with his Companions, fight with them, and make him∣selfe Lord alone, all in one day. Concerning this King it is recorded, that he was the first in Aegypt, who enter∣tained any strait amitie with the Greekes; that hee retained in pay his Mercenaries of , Ionia, and Arabia to whom hee gaue large rewards and possessions; and that he greatly offended his Aegyptian Souldiers, by bestowing them in the wing of his Armie, whilest his Mercenaries held the right wing (which was the more hono∣rable place) in an expedition that he made into Syria. Vpon this disgrace it is said, that his Souldiers, to the number of two hundred thousand, forsooke their naturall Countrie of Aegypt, and went into Aethiopia, to dwell there: neither could they be reuoked by kinde Messages, nor by the King himselfe, who ouer-tooke them on the way; but when hee told them of their Countrie, their Wines, and Children. they answered, that their weapons should get them a Countrie, and that nature had enabled them to get other wiues and children. It is also reported of him, That he caused two to be brought vp in such sort, as they might not heare any word spoken; by which meanes, he hoped to find out, what Nation or Language was most ancient; forasmuch as it seemed likely, that nature would teach the children to speake that language, which men spake at the first. The issue hereof was, that the children cried, Beccus, Beccus, which word being found to signifie Bread in the Phrygian tongue, serued greatly to magnific the Phrygian antiquitie. Goropius Becanus makes no small matter of this, for the honour of his Low- ; in which the word Becker, signifies (as Baker in English) a maker of bread. He that will turne ouer any part of Goropius his works, may finde enough of this kinde, to perswade a willing man, that and all the Patriarchs vsed none other tongue than the Low-Dutch, before the confusion of languages at Babel; the name it selfe of Babel, being also Dutch and giuen by occasion of this confusion; for that there they beganne to babble, and talke, one knew not what. But I will not insist vpon all that is written of . The most regardable of his acts was the siege of Azotus in , about which he spent nine and twen∣tie yeeres. Neuer haue wee heard (saith ) that any Citie endured so long a siege as this; yet Psammiticus carried it at the last. This Towne of Azotus had beene wonne by Tartan, a Captaine of Senacherib, and was now, as it seemeth, relee∣ued, but in vaine, by the , which made it hold out so well. §. III. What reference these Aegyptian matters might haue to the imprisonment and enlargement of MANASSES. In what part of his raigne MA∣NASSES was taken prisoner. WEre it certainely knowne, in what yeere of his raigne Manasses was ta∣ken prisoner, and how long it was before hee obtained libertic; I thinke wee should finde these Aegyptian troubles to haue beene no small occasion, both of his captiuitie and enlargement: God so dispo∣sing of humane actions, that euen they, who intended onely their owne businesse, fulfilled onely his high pleasure. For either the ciuill warres in Ae∣gypt that followed vpon the death of Sethon; or the renting of the Kingdome, as it were, into twelue peeces; or the warre betweene Psammiticus and his Colleagues; or the expedition of Psammiticus into Syria, and the siege of Azotus, might minister vnto the Babylonian, either such cause of hope, to enlarge his Dominion in the South parts; or such necessitie of sending an Armie into those parts, to defend his owne, as would greatly tempt him, to make sure worke with the King of . The same occasions sufficed also, to procure the deliuerie of Manasses, after he was taken. For hee was taken (as hath it) by subtiltie, not by open force, neither did they that him, winne his Countrie, but only waste it. So that the Iewes, ha∣uing learned wit, by the ill successe of their folly, in Amazia, were like to be more circumspect, in making their bargaine vpon such another accident: and the Babylonian (to whom the matters presented more weighty arguments of hope and feare, than the little Kingdome of iuda could affoord, had no reason, to spend his forces, in pursuing a small conquest, but as full of difficultie as a greater, whereby hee should compell his mightiest enemies to come to some good agree∣ment; when by quitting his present aduantage ouer the Iewes, hee might make his way the fairer into Aegypt. Now concerning the yeere of Manasses his raigne, wherein hee was taken priso∣ner; or concerning his captiuitie if selfe, how long it lasted; the Scriptures are silent, and Iosephus giues no information. Yet I finde cited by Torniellus three opinions, the one of Bellarmine, who thinkes that Manasses was taken in the fifteenth yeere of his raigne; the other of the Author of the greater Hebrew Chronologie, who affirmes, that it was in his twentie seuenth yeere; the third, of Rabbi Kimhi vpon Ezekiel, who saith, that he was fortie yeeres an Idolater, and liued fifteene yeeres after his repen∣tance. The first of these conjectures is vpheld by Torniellus, who reiects the second, as more vnprobable, and condemnes third as most false. Yet the reasons allea∣ged by in defence of the first, and refutation of the last opinion, are such as may rather proue him to fauour the Cardinall, as farre as he may, (for where need requires, hee doth freely dissent from him) than to haue vsed his accustomed dili∣gence in examining the matter, before hee gaue his judgement. Two arguments he brings to maintaine the opinion of Bellarmine: the one, that Ammon the Sonne of Manasses, is said by Iosephus, to haue followed the workes of his Fathers youth; the other, that had Manasses growne old in his sinnes, it is not like that should haue con∣tinued, as hee did, in his amendment vnto the end of his life. Touching the former of these arguments, I see no reason, why the sinnes of Manasses might not be distin∣guished from his repentance in his old age, by calling them workes of his youth, which appeared when he was twelue yeeres old; though it were granted that hee continued in them (according to that of Rabbi Kimbi ) vntill he was but fifteene yeeres from death. Touching the second; howsoeuer it be a fearefull thing, to cast off vnto the last those good motions vnto repentance, which we know not whether euer God will offer vnto vs againe; yet were it a terrible hearing, That the sinnes, which are not forsaken before the age of two and fiftie yeeres, shall bee punished with finall impenitencie. But against these two collections of Torniellus, I will lay two places of Scripture, whence it may be inferred, as not vnlikely, That Manasses continued longer in this wickednesse, than Bellarmine hath intimated, if not as long as Rabbi Kimbi hath affirmed. In the second Booke of Kings, the euill which Ma∣nasses did, is remembred at large, and his repentance vtterly omitted; so that his a∣mendment may seeme to haue taken vp no great part of his life, the storie of him being thus concluded, in the one and twentieth Chapter. Concerning the rest of the . Kings 21. 17. acts of MANASSES, and all that he did, and his sinne that hee sinned, are they not writ∣ten in the booke of the Chronicles of the Kings of Iuda? The other place is in the foure and twentieth Chapter of the same Booke, where in rehearsing the calamities with which that Nation was punished in the time of Iehoiakim, the great Grand-child of this Manasses, it is said; Surely by the commandement of the Lord came this vpon Iuda, 2. Kin. 24. 3, 4. that hee might put them out of his sight, for the sinnes of MANASSE, according to all that hee did, and sor the innocent bloud that hee shed (for he filled Ierusalem with innocent bloud) therefore the Lord would not pardon it. Whose considers well these places, may finde small cause to pronounce it most false, That the repentance and amendment of Ma∣nasses was no earlier then fifteene yeeres before his death; or most probable, That when he was twenty seuen yeeres old, he repented, and becomming a new man, li∣ued in the feare of God fortie yeeres after. I will no longer dispute about this mat∣ter, seeing that the truth can not be discouered. It sufficeth to say, that two yeeres of ciuill dissension in Aegypt, fourteene or fifteene yeeres following, wherein that Kingdome was weakened, by partition of the Soueraignetie: the warre of Psammi∣ticus against his Associates: and foure and twentie yeeres, of the nine and twentie, wherein the siege of Azotus continued, being all within the time of Manasses, did leaue no one part of his raigne (after the first yeeres) free from the danger of being oppressed by the Babylonian, whose men of warre had continuall occasions of visiting his Countrie. All which I will adde hereto is this; that the fifteenth of Manasses, was the last yeere of Sethon in Aegypt, and the one and thirtieth of Me∣ro his raigne, or (accounting from the death of ) the twentieth: The seuen and twentieth of Manasses was the tenth of the twelue Princes, and the three and fortieth of Merodach: his fortieth, was the twentie third of Psammiticus, and the fift of Nabulassar, the sonne of Merodach in Babylon: but which of these was the yeere of his imprisonment, or whether any other, I forbeare to shew mine opi∣nion, lest I should thereby seeme to draw all matters ouer violently to mine owne computation. This was the first great mastrie that the Babylonians had of the Kingdome of Iu∣da. For though Achaz promised Tribute to , yet neuer payed it. True it is, that hee hoped to stay Sennacheribs enterprise against him, by presen∣ting 2. Kings 18. him with three hundred talents of siluer, and thirtie of , besides the plate which couered the doores and pillars of the Temple. But Manasses being pressed with greater necessitie, could refuse no tolerable con∣ditions, that the would impose vpon him; among which it seemes, that this was one, (which was indeede a point of seruitude) that hee might not hold peace with the Aegyptians, whilest they were enemies to . This appeares not onely by his fortifying with men of warre all the strong Cities of after his returne (which was rather against , whose partie hee had forsaken, than against the Babylonian, with whom hee had thenceforth no more ) but likewise by that opposition, which Iosias made afterwards to Pharao , in fauour of , which had beene against all reason and policie, if it had not beene his dutie by couenant. Of this I will speake more in conuenient place. †. IIII. Of the first and second Messenian Warres, which were in the raignes of EZEKIA, and MANASSES Kings of Iuda. NOw concerning such actions as were performed abroad in the world, about these times of Manasses, the most remarkeable were the Messe∣nian Warres; which happening in this age, and being the greatest a∣ction performed in Greece, betweene the Troian and Persian Warres, deserue not to be passed ouer with silence. The first Warre beganne and ended in the daies of Ezekia; the second in the raigne of Manasses: but to auoide the trouble of interrupting our Historie, I haue thought it best, to rehearse them both in this place. Other introduction is needlesse, than to say, that the of Hercules, driuing the issue of Pelops, and the Achaeans, out of their seates, diuided their lands betweene themselues, and ere∣cted the Kingdomes of Lacedaemon, Argos, Messene, and Corinth; all which agreeing well together a while, did afterwards forget the bond of Kindred, and sought one anothers ruine with bloudie Warres; whereof these Messenian were the greatest. The pretended grounds of the Messenian Warre, are scarce worth remembrance; they were so sleight. Ambition was the true cause of it; wherewith the Lacedae∣monians were so transported, that any thing serued them as a colour, to accomplish their greedie desires. Yet other matter was alleaged; namely, that one Polychares a Messenian had slaine many Lacedaemonians, for which the Magistrates of Sparta de∣siring to haue him yeelded into their hands, could not obtaine it. The Messenians on the other side, excused Polychares, for that he was growne frantick, through inju∣ries receiued from Euaephnes a Lacedaemonian. This Euaephnes had bargained to giue pasture to the Cattell of Polychares, and was therefore to receiue part of the increase: but not contented with the gaine appointed, hee sold the Cattaile, and Slaues that kept them, to Merchants, which done, he came with a faire tale to his friend, saying, that they were stollen. Whilest the lye was yet scarce out of his mouth, one of the slaues that had escaped from the Merchants, came in with a true report of all. The being thus deprehended, confessed all, and promised large amends; which to receiue, he carried the Sonne of Polychares home with him; but hauing him at home, hee villanously slew him. Wherefore, the Lacedaemonians hauing refused, after long sute made by the wretched Father, to doe him right against this Theefe and Murderer, ought not to pick matter of quarrell, out of those things, which hee did in that madnesse, whereinto they themselues had cast him. So said the Messeni∣ans, & further offered to put the matter to compromise, or to stand vnto the judge∣ment of the , who were as the generall Counsaile of Greece, or to any o∣ther faire course. But the Lacedaemonians, who had a great desire to occupy the faire Countrie of Messene, that lay close by them, were not content with such allegations. They thought it enough, to haue some shew for their doings, which the better to colour, they reckoned vp many old injuries, and so without sending any defiance, secretly tooke an oath to hold warre with Messene, till they had mastered it: which done, they seized vpon Amphia, a frontier Towne of that Prouince, wherein they put all to the Sword without mercie, very few escaping. Hereupon the Messenians tooke Armes, and were met by the Enemie. A furious battaile was fought betweene them, which ended not vntill darke night, with vn∣certaine victorie. The did strongly encampe themselues; The , vnable to force their Campe, returned home. This Warre beganne in the second yere of the ninth Olympiad, and ended in the first of the fourteenth Olympiad, hauing lasted twentie yeeres. The two enemie Nations tried the matter, for a while, with their proper forces; the Lacedaemonians wasting the inland parts of Mes∣sene; and the , the Sea-coast of Laconia. But it was not long ere friends, on both sides, were called in to helpe. The Arcadians, Argiues, and Sicyonians, tooke part with Messene; the Spartans had, besides many Subjects of their owne, aide from Corinth, and hired Souldiers out of Crete. So a second, third, and fourth battaile were fought, with as great obstinacie as the first; sauing that, in the fourth battaile, the Lacedaemonians were enforced to turne their backs; in the other fights, the victo∣rie was stil vncertaine, though in one of them the Messenians lost Euphaes their King, in whose stead they chose Aristodemus. Many yeeres were spent ere all this bloud was shed; for pestilent diseases, and want of monie to entertaine Souldiers, caused the Warre to linger. And for the same reasons, did the Messenians forsake all their inland Townes, excepting Ithome, which was a mountaine with a Towne vpon it, able to endure more, than the ene∣mies were likely to doe. But, as some Authors tell vs, the Lacedaemonians were so ob∣stinate, Strabo. l. 6. . c. 21. in this Warre, because of their vow, that hauing absented themselues ten yeeres from , their wiues sent them word, that their Citie would grow vn∣peopled, by reason that no children had beene borne them in that time: Where∣vpon they sent back all their ablest yong men, promiscuously to accompanie the yong women, who got so many of them with child, as they became a great part of their Nation, and were called Parthenians. referres the begetting of these Diod l. 15. to a former time. But in processe of this Messenian Warre, when the De∣uill in an Oracle had aduised the Messenians to sacrifice a Virgin of the stock of This was the yong∣est Sonne of by , the daughter of of : of which the chiefe no∣bilitie of the was propagated. Aegytus, that so they be victorious against the Lacedaemonians; the lot fal∣ling vpon the Daughter of one Lyciscus, the Priest, willing to saue her, said, shee was only a fostered child, and not borne of the wife of : which answere giuing delay to the execution of the Maide, Lyciscus secretly fled away with her into Sparta. Then Aristodemus, which afterwards was King, voluntarily offered his owne Daughter: but a yong Noble man, being in loue with the Maide, when other∣wise he could not preuaile, said openly that shee was no Virgin, but that he had de∣floured her, and got her with child: whereupon the Father in a rage ripped vp his innocent Daughters belly, to disproue the Louers slander: at the graue of which Daughter of his, afterward falling, by other superstitions, into despaire of against the , he slew himselfe, to the great hurt of his Countrie, which he loued most dearely. For after his death the lost their courage, and finding themselues distressed by many wants, especially of victuals, they craued peace; which they obtained vnder most rigorous conditions. Halfe the yeerely fruits of their Land they were bound to send vnto ; and they, with their Wiues, to make solemne lamentations, at the death of euery Spartan King; they were also sworne to liue in true subjection to the ; and part of their Territorie was taken from them, which was giuen to the , and such as had followed the Spartans in this Warre. This peace being made vpon so vneuen termes, was not like to hold long. Yet nine and thirtie yeeres it continued (the Messenians not finding how to help them∣selues) and then brake out into a new and more furious Warre, than the former. The able yong men, that were growne vp in the roome of those , whom the former Warre had consumed, beganne to consider their owne strength and multitude, thinking themselues equall to the , and therefore scorning to serue such Masters, as had against all right, oppressed their Fathers. The chiefe of these was Aristomenes, a noble Gentleman, of the house of Aepytus; who per∣ceiuing the vniforme desires of his Countrie-men, aduentured to become their Leader. He therefore sounding the affections of the , and , which he found throughly answerable to his purpose, began open warre vpon the State of . This was in the fourth yere of the three and twentieth Olympiad; when the Lacedaemonians, hasted to quench the fire before it should grow too hot, with such forces as they could raise of their own, without troubling their friends, meaning to deale with their Enemies, ere any succour were lent them. So a strong battaile was fought betweene them, and a doubtfull; saue that the Messenians were plea∣sed with the issue, forasmuch as they had thereby taught their late proud Lords, to thinke them their equalls. Particularly, the valour of Aristomenes appeared such in this fight, that his people would haue made him their King: but he, refusing the honour of that name, accepted of the burthen, and became their Generall. Within one yeere another battaile was fought, whereunto each part came better prouided. The Lacedaemonians brought with them the , and some other friends to helpe: the Messenians had the , , and . This also was a long and bloudie fight; but Aristomenes did so behaue himselfe, that finally hee made the Enemies runne for their liues. Of such importance was this victory, that the Lacedaemonians beganne to bethinke themselues, of making some good agree∣ment. But one Tyrtaeus an Poet, whom by appointment of an Oracle they had gotten to direct them, reenforced their Spirits with his Verses. After this, A∣ristomenes tooke by surprise a Towne in Laconia and vanquished in fight King of Sparta, who did set vpon him, in hope to haue recouered the bootie. But all these victories of Aristomenes perished, in the losse of one battaile, whereof the honour (if it were honour) or surely the profit, fell vnto the , through the treason of Aristocrates, King of Arcadia, who being corrupted by the enemies with mony, fled away, and left the exposed to a cruell butcherie. The losse was so great, that together with their principal Citie, al the towns in Messene, standing too farre from the Sea, were abandoned, for lack of men to de∣fend them, and the Mount Era fortified, whither the multitude, that could not bee safe abroad, was conueied, into a place of safetie. Here the found a tedious worke, that held them eleuen yeeres. For besides that Era it selfe was a strong peece, Aristomenes with three hundred stout Souldiers, did many incredible exploits, that wearied them, and hindred their attendance on the siege. Hee wasted all the fields of Messene, that were in the enemies power, and brake into Laconia, ta∣king away Corne, Wine, Cattaile, and all prouisions, necessarie for his owne peo∣ple; the Slaues and houshold he changed into monie, suffering the owners to redeeme them. To remedie this mischiefe the Lacedaemonians made an Edict, that neither Messene, nor the adjoyning parts of their owne Countrie, should bee tilled or husbanded; which bred a great tumult among priuate men, that were almost vndone by it. Yet the Poet appeased this vproare with pleasing Songs. But grew so bold, that he not onely ranged ouer all the fields, but aduen∣tured vpon the Townes, surprised, and sackt , and finally caused the ene∣mies to encrease and strengthen their Companies; which done, there yet appeared no likelihood of taking Era. In performing these and other seruices, thrice Aristomenes was taken prisoner; yet still hee escaped. One escape of his deserues to bee remembred, as a thing very strange and maruailous. Hee had with too much courage aduentured to set vpon both the Kings of Sparta; and being in that fight wounded, and felled to the ground, was taken vp senselesse, and carried away prisoner, with fiftie of his Com∣panions. There was a deepe naturall Caue into which the Spartans vsed to cast head-long, such as were condemned to die for the greatest offences. To this pu∣nishment were and his companions adjudged. All the rest of poore men dyed with their falls; Aristomenes (howsoeuer it came to passe) tooke no harme. Yet was it harme enough to be imprisoned in a deepe Dungeon, among dead , where he was like to perish through hunger and stench. But after a while by some small glimmering of light (which perhaps came in at the toppe) a Foxe that was gnawing vpon a dead bodie. Hereupon hee bethought himselfe, that this beast must needs know some way, to enter the place and get out. For which cause he made shift to lay hold vpon it, and catching it by the taile with one hand, saued himselfe from biting with the other hand, by thrusting his coate into the mouth of it. So letting it creepe whither it would, hee followed, holding it as his guide, vntill the way was too strait for him; and then dismissed it. The Foxe being loose, through an hole, at which came in a little light; and there did Aristomenes delue so long with his , that at last he clawed out his passage. When some fugitiues of Messene brought word to Sparta, that Aristomenes was re∣turned home, their sounded alike, as if they had said, that a dead man was reui∣ued. But when the forces, that came to helpe the Lacedaemonians in the siege of Era, were cut in peeces, their Captaines , and their Campe taken; then was it easily beleeued, that Aristomenes was aliue indeede. Thus eleuen yeeres passed whilest the enemies houering about Era, saw no like∣lihood of getting it; and Aristomenes with small forces did them greater hurt than they knew how to requite. But at the last, a slaue, that had fled from Sparta, betrai∣ed the place. This fellow had enticed to lewdnesse the wife of a Messenian, and was entertained by her, when her husband went to watch. It happened in a rai∣nie-winter-night, that the husband came home vnlooked for, whilest the Adulterer was within. The Woman hidde her Paramour, and made good countenance to her husband, asking him, by what good fortune he was returned so soone. He told her, that the storme of foule weather was such, as had made all his fellowes leaue their Stations, and that himselfe had done as the rest did; as for Aristomenes, he was wounded of late in fight, and could not looke abroad; neither was it to bee feared, that the enemies would stirre, in such a darke-rainie-night, as this was. The slaue that heard these tidings, rose vp secretly out of his lurking hole, and got him to the Campe with the newes. There hee found Emperamus his Master, commanding in the Kings absence. To him hee vttered all; and obtaining pardon for his running away, guided the Armie into the Towne. Little or nothing was done that night. For the Allarme was presently taken; and the extreme darke∣nesse together with the noise of winde and raine, hindred all directions. All the next day was spent in most cruell fight; one part being incited, by neere hope of ending a long worke; the other inraged by meere desperation. The great aduan∣tage that the Spartans had in numbers, was recompensed partly by the assistance; which women and children (to whom the hatred of seruitude had taught con∣tempt of death) gaue to their husbands and fathers; partly by the narrownesse of the streets and other passages, which admitted not many hands to fight at once. But the were in continuall ; their enemies in course, refreshing themselues with meat and sleepe, and then returning supplyed the places of their wearie fellowes, with fresh Companies. Aristomenes therefore, perceiuing that his men for want of reliefe were no longer able to hold out, (as hauing beene three daies, and three nights, vexed with all miseries, of labour, watchings, fighting, hun∣ger, and thirst, besides continuall raine and cold) gathered together all the weaker sort, whom he compassed round with armed men, and so attempted to breake out through the midst of the enemies. Generall of the was glad of this: and to further their departure, caused his Souldiers to giue an open way, leauing a faire passage to these desperate madmen. So they issued , and arriued safe in , where they were most louingly entertained. Vpon the first bruit of the taking of Era, the had prepared themselues to the rescue: but their false hearted King, said it was too late, for that all was alreadie lost. When Aristomenes had placed his followers in safetie, he chose out fiue hundred the lustiest of his men, with whom he resolued to march in all se∣cret haste vnto Sparta, hoping to find the Town secure, and ill manured, the people being runne forth to the spoile of Messene. In this enterprise, if he sped well, it was not doubted, that the Lacedaemonians would be glad to recouer their owne, by re∣stitution of that which they had taken from others; if all failed, an honourable death was the worst that could happer. There were three hundred that offered to ioyne with him; but Aristocrates marred all, by sending speedie aduertise∣ment hereof, to Anaxander King of Sparta. The Epistle which Anaxander sent backe to Aristocrates, was intercepted, by some that mistrusted him to whom it was directed. Therein was found all his falsehood, which being published in open assembly, the Arcadians stoned him to death, and casting foorth his body vnburied, erected a monument of his treacherie, with a note: That the Periurer cannot de∣ceiue God. Of Aristomenes no more is remaining to be said, than that committing his peo∣ple to the charge of his sonne Gorgus and other sufficient Gouernours, who should plant them in some new seat abroad, he resolued himselfe to make abode in those parts, hoping to finde the Lacedaemonians worke at home. His daughters be∣stowed honourably in marriage. One of them Demagetus, who raigned in the Ile of Rhodes, tooke to wife, being willed by an Oracle, to marrie the daughter of the best man in Greece. Finally Aristomenes went with his daughters to Rhodes, whence he purposed to haue trauailed vnto Ardys the Son of Gyges King of Lydia, and to Phraortes King of Media: but death preuented him at Rhodes, where hee was ho∣nourably buried. The Messenians were inuited by (whose great Grandfather was a Messe∣nian and went into Italie after the former war) being Lord of the Rhegians in Italie, to take his part against the in Sicilie, on the other side of the Straights. They did so; and winning the Towne of Zancle, called it Messene, which name it keepes to this day. This second Messenian warre ended in the first yeere of the twentie eight Olym∣piade. Long after which time, the rest of that Nation, who staying at home serued the Lacedaemonians, found meanes to rebell; but were soone vanquished, and being driuen to forsake Peloponnesus, they went into Acarnania; whence likewise, after few ages they were expelled by the Lacedaemonians, and then followed their ancient Countrimen into Italie and Sicilie; some of them went into Africa, where they chose vnto themselues a seat. It is verie strange, that during two hundred and foure score yeeres, this banished Nation retained their name, their ancient customes, language, hatred of Sparta, and loue of their forsaken Countrie, with a desire to returne vnto it. In the third yeere of the hundred and second Olympiad, that great Epaminondas, hauing tamed the pride of the Lacedaemonians, reuoked the Messenians home, who came flocking out of all quarters, where they dwelt abroad, into Peloponnesus. There did Epaminon∣das restore vnto them their old possession, and helpe them in building a faire Citie; which, by the name of the Prouince, was called Messene, and was held by them euer after, in despight of the Lacedaemonians, of whom they neuer from thenceforth stood in feare. §. V. Of the Kings that were in Lydia and Media, MANASSES raigned. Whether DEIOCES the Mede were that AR∣PHAXAD which is mentioned in the Booke of IVDITH. Of the historie of IVDITH. ARDYS King of Lydia, and Phraortes of the Medes, are spoken of by Pausanias, as raigning shortly after the Messenian warre. Ardys suc∣ceeding vnto his father Gyges, beganne his raigne of nine and fortie yeeres, in the second of the fiue and twentieth Olympiad. He fol∣lowed the steppes of his father, who encroaching vpon the Ionians in Asia, had taken Colophon by force, and attempted Miletus and Smyrna. In like manner Ardys wanne Priene, and assailed Miletus; but went away without it. In his raigne, the Cimmerians, being expelled out of their owne Countrie by the Scythians, ouerranne a great part of Asia, which was not freed from them be∣fore the time of Alyattes this mans Grand-child, by whom they were driuen out. They had not onely broken into Lydia, but wanne the Citie of Sardes; though the Castle or Citadell thereof was defended against them, and held still for King Ardys; whose long raigne was vnable, by reason of this great storme, to ef∣fect much. Phraortes was not King vntill the third yeere of the nine and twentieth Olym∣piad, which was sixe yeeres after the Messenian warre ended; the same being the last yeere of Manasses his raigne ouer Iuda. Deioces the father of this Phraortes, was King of Media, three and fiftie of these fiue and fiftie yeeres in which Manasses raigned. This Deioces was the first that ru∣led the Medes in a strict forme, commanding more absolutely than his predecessors had done. For they, following the example of Arbaces, had giuen to the people so much licence, as caused euery one to desire the wholesome of a more Lordly King. Herein Deioces answered their desires to the full. For he caused them to build for him a stately Palace; he tooke vnto him a Guard, for defence of his per∣son; he seldome gaue presence, which also when he did, it was with such austerity, that no man durst presume to spit or cough in his sight. By these and the like ce∣remonies he bred in the people an awfull regard, and highly vpheld the , which his Predecessours had almost letten fall, through neglect of due comporti∣ments. In execution of his Royall Office, he did vprightly and seuerely admini∣ster iustice, keeping secret spies to informe him of all that was done in the King∣dome. Hee cared not to enlarge the bounds of his Dominion, by encroaching vp∣on others; but studied how to gouerne wel his own. The difference found between this King, and such as were before him, seemes to haue bred that opinion which Herodotus deliuers, that Deioces was the first who raigned in Media. . . This was he that built the great City of Ecbatane, which now is called Tauris; and therefore he should be that King Arphaxad, mentioned in the of Indith, as also Ben Merodach, by the same accompt, should bee Nabuchodonosor the Assyrian, by whom Arphaxad was slaine, and Holophernes sent to worke wonders, vpon Phud and Lud, and I know not what other Countries. For I reckon the last yeere of Deioces to haue beene the nineteenth of Ben Merodach; though others place it otherwise, some earlier in the time of Merodach Baladan, some later, in the raigne of Nabulas∣sar, who is also called Nabuchodonosor. In fitting this Booke of Iudith to a certaine time, there hath much labour beene spent with ill successe. The raignes of Cambyses, Darius, Hystaspis, Xerxes, and Ochus, haue beene sought into; but affoord no great matter of likelihood: and now of late, the times, foregoing the destruction of Ierusalem, haue beene thought vpon, and this age that we haue in hand, chosen by Bellarmine, as agreeing best with the storie; though others herein cannot (I speake of such as faine would) agree with him. Whilest Cambyses raigned, the Temple was not rebuilt, which in the storie of Iudith, is found standing and dedicated. The other two Persian Kings, Darius and Xerxes are acknowledged to haue been very fauourable to the Iewes; therefore neither of them could be Nabuchodonosor, whose part they refused to take, and who sent to de∣stroy them. Yet the time of Xerxes hath some conueniences, aptly fitting this ; & aboue al, the opinion of a few Ancient writers (without whose iudgement the authoritie of this Booke were of no value) hauing placed this argument in the Per∣sian Monarchie, inclines the matter to the Raigne of this vaine-glorious King. As for Ochus, very few, and they faintly, entitle him to the businesse. Manifest it is, and granted, that in the time of this Historie, there must be a returne from capti∣uitie lately foregoing; the Temple rebuilt; Ioacim High Priest; and a long peace, of threescore and ten yeeres or thereabout, ensuing. All these were to bee among the Iewes. Likewise on the other side, we must finde a King that raigned in Niniuie, eighteene yeeres at the least; that vanquished and slew a King of the Medes; one whom the Iewes refused to assist; one that sought to bee generally adored as God, and that therefore commanded, all temples, of such as were accounted gods, to be destroyed; one whose Viceroy or Captaine Generall knew not the Iewish Nation, but was faine to learne what they were of the bordering people. Of all these circumstances; the Priesthood of Ioacim, with a returne from Cap∣tiuitie, are found concurring, with either the time of Manasses before the destructi∣on of Ierusalem, or of Xerxes afterward: the rebuilding of the Temple a while be∣fore, and the long peace following, agree with the raigne of Xerxes; the rest of cir∣cumstances requisite, are to be found all together, neither before nor after the Cap∣tiuitie of the Iewes, and desolation of the Citie. Wherefore the briefe decision of this controuersie is, That the Booke of Iudith is not Canonicall. Yet hath Torniellus done as much, in fitting all to the time of Xerxes, as was possible in so desperate a case. For he supposeth, that vnder Xerxes there were other Kings, among which Arphaxad might be one (who perhaps restored and reedified the Citie of Ecbatane, that had formerly beene built by Deioces ) and Nabuchodonosor might be another. This gran∣ted; he addes, that from the twelfth yeere to the eighteenth of Nabuchodonosor, that is fiue or sixe yeeres, the absence and ill fortune of Xerxes, in his Graecian expedition (which he supposeth to haue beene so long) might giue occasion vnto Arphaxad, of rebelling: and that Nabuchodonosor hauing vanquished and slaine Arphaxad, might then seek to make himselfe Lord of all, by the Armie which he sent forth vn∣der Holofernes. So should the Iewes haue done their dutie, in adhering to Xerxes their Soueraigne Lord, and resisting one that rebelled against him; as also the other cir∣cumstances rehearsed before, be well applyed to the argument. For in these times, the affaires of Iurie were agreeable to the Historie of Iudith, and such a King as this supposed Nabuchodonosor, might well enough bee ignorant of the Iewes, and as proud as we shall need to thinke him. But the silence of all Histories, takes away beliefe, from this coniecture: and the supposition it selfe is very hard, that a rebell, whose King was abroad, with an Armie consisting of seuenteene hundred thou∣sand men, should presume so farre, vpon the strength of twelue hundred thousand foot, and twelue thousand Archers on horsebacke, as to thinke that hee might doe what he list, yea that there was none other God then himselfe. It is indeed easie to find enough that might be said against this deuice of Torniellus: yet if there were any necessitie, of holding the booke of Iudith, to bee Canonicall, I would rather choose to lay aside all regard of prophane Histories, and build some defence vpon this ground; than, by following the opinion of any other, to violate, as they all doe, the text it selfe. That Iudith liued vnder none of the Persian Kings, Bellarmine (whose workes I haue not read, but finde him cited by Torniellus ) hath prooued by many arguments. That shee liued not in the Raigne of Manasses, Torniellus hath prooued very substantially, shewing how the Cardinall is driuen, as it were to breake through a wall, in saying that the text was corrupted, where it spake of the destruction of the Temple foregoing her time. That the Kings Arphaxad and Na∣buchodonosor, found out by Torniellus, are the children of meere fantasie, it is so plaine that it needs no proofe at all. Wherefore we may truly say, that they, which haue contended about the time of this Historie, being well furnished of matter, wherewith to confute each other, but wanting wherewith to defend themselues (like naked men in a stony field) haue chased Holofernes out of all parts of time, and him and his great expedition, Extra anni solisque vias, in an age that neuer was, and in places that were neuer knowne. Surely, to find out the borders of IAPHETH, which were towards the South, and Iudith c. 2. ver. 23. & 25. ouer against Arabia; or the Countries of Phud and Lud, that lay in Holofernes his way; I thinke it would as much trouble Cosmographers, as the former question hath done Chronologers. But I will not busie my selfe herewith; hauing already so farre digressed, in shewing who liued not with Manasses, that I think it high time, to returne vnto mine owne worke, and rehearse what others I finde, to haue had their part, in the long time of his Raigne. §. VI. Of other Princes and actions that were in these times. THE first yeere of Manasses was the last of Romulus; after whose death, one yeere the Romans wanted a King. Then was Numa Pompilius a Sabyne chosen; a peaceable man and seeming verie religious in his kinde. He brought the rude people, which Romulus had employed onely in warres, to some good ciuilitie, and a more orderly fashion of life. This he effected by filling their heads with superstition; as perswading them, that he had familiarite with a Nymph called Egeria, who taught him a many of Ceremonics, which hee deliuered vnto the Romans as things of great importance. But all these deuices of Numa were, in his owne iudgement, no better then meere delusions that serued onely as rudiments to bring the Sauage multitude of theeues and out-lawes, gathered into one bodie by Romulus, to some forme of milder dis∣cipline, then their boysterous and wilde natures was otherwise apt to entertaine. This appeared by the Bookes that were found in his graue, almost sixe hundred yeeres after his death, wherein the Superstition taught by himselfe was condem∣ned as vaine. His graue was opened by chance, in digging a piece of ground that belonged to one L. Petilius a Scribe. Two Coffines or Chests of stone were in it, with an inscription in Greeke and Latine letters, which said, That Numa Pompilius the sonne of Pompo, King of the Romans lay there. In the one Coffin was nothing ; his bodie being vtterly consumed. In the other were his Bookes, wrapped vp in two bundels of wax; of his owne constitutions seuen, and other seuen of Phy∣losophie. They were not onely vncorrupted, but in a manner fresh and new. The Pretour of the Citie desiring to haue a sight of these Bookes, when hee perceiued whereunto they tended, refused to deliuer them back to the owner, and offered to take a solemne oath that they were against the Religion then in vse. Hereupon the Senate, without more adoe, commanded them to bee openly burnt. It seemes that Numa did meane to acquite himselfe vnto wiser ages, which he thought would fol∣low, as one that had not beene so foolish as to the Doctrine wherein he in∣structed his owne barbarous times. But the poyson wherewith hee had infected Rome, when he sate in his Throne, had not left working, when hee ministred the Antidote out of his graue. Had these Bookes not come to light, vntill the dayes of Tully and Caesar, when the mist of ignorance was somewhat better discussed; likely it is that they had not onely escaped the fire, but wrought some good (and perad∣uenture generall) effect. Being as it was, they serued as a confutation, without re∣medie, of Idolatrie that was inueterate. Numa raigned three and fortie yeeres in continuall peace. After him Tullus Ho∣stilius the third King was chosen, in the six and fortieth of Manasses, and raigned two and thirtie yeeres, busied, for the most part in warre. Hee quarrelled with the Albanes, who met him in the field; but in regard of the danger, which both parts had cause to feare, that might grow vnto them from the Thuscanes, caused them to be∣thinke themselues of a course, whereby without effusion of so much bloud, as might make them too weake for a common enemie, it might bee decided, who should command, and who obey. There were in each Campe three Brethren, Twinnes borne at one birth ( Diony∣sius sayes that they were Cosen Germans) of equall yeeres and strength, who were appointed to fight for their seuerall Countries. The end was, that the Horatij, Champions for the Romans, got the victory, though two of them first lost their liues. The three Curatij that fought for (as Liuie tels it) were all aliue, and able to fight, yet wounded, when two of their opposites were slaine; but the third Hora∣tius, pretending feare, did away, and thereby drew the others, who by reason of their hurts, could not follow him with equall speede, to follow him at such di∣stance one from another, that returning vpon them, he slue them, as it had beene in single fight, man after man, ere they could ioyne together and set vpon him all at once. Dionysius reports it somewhat otherwise, telling verie particularly, what wounds were giuen and taken, and saying, that first one of the Horatij was slaine, then one of the Curatij, then a second Horatius, and lastly the two Curatij, whom the third Horatius did cunningly seuer one from the other as is shewed before. This is one of the most memorable things in the old Roman Historie, both in re∣gard of the action it selfe, wherein Rome was laid, as it were in wager, against Al∣ba, and in respect of the great increase which thereby the Roman State obtained. For the Citie of Alba did immediately become subiect vnto her owne Colonie, and was shortly after, vpon some treacherous dealing of their Gouernour, vtterly ra∣zed, the people being remoued vnto Rome, where they were made Citizens. The strong Nation of the Latines; whereof Alba, as the mother Citie, had beene chiefe, became ere long dependant vpon Rome, though not subiect vnto it, and diuers pettie States adiacent, were by little and little taken in: which additions, that were small, yet many, I will forbeare to rehearse (as being the works of sundrie ages, and few of them remarkeable considered apart by themselues) vntill such time as this fourth Empire, that is now in the infancie, shall grow to bee the maine subiect of this Historie. The seuenth yeere of Hippomenes in Athens, was current with the first of Manas∣ses. Also the three last Gouernours for tenne yeeres, who followed Hippomenes, were in the same Kings time. Of these I find onely names, Leocrates, Apsander, and Erizias. After Erixias yeerely Rulers were elected. These Gouernours for tenne yeeres, were also of the race of Medon and Codrus, but their time of rule was shortned, and from tearme of life reduced vnto tenne yeeres; it being thought likely that they would gouerne the better, when they knew that they were afterwards to liue priuate men vnder the command of others. I follow Dionysius of Halicarnassus, in applying their times vnto those yeeres of the Olympiads, wherein the Chronological table, following this worke, doth set them. For he not onely professeth himselfe to haue taken great care in ordering the rec∣koning Dion. Halic. l. 1. fol. 43. & 45. of times; but hath noted alwaies the yeeres of the Greeks, how they did an∣swere vnto the things of Rome, throughout all the continuance of this Historie. Whereas therefore he placeth the building of Rome, in the first yere of the seuenth Olympiad, and affirmes, that the same was the first yeere of Charops his gouerne∣ment in Athens; I hope I shall not need excuse, for varying from Pausanias, who sets the beginning of these Athenians some what sooner. In the Raigne of Manasses it was, that Midas, whom the Poets fained to haue had Asses eares, held the Kingdome of Phrygia. Many fables were deuised of him; e∣specially that he obtained of Bacchus, as a great gift, that all things which he should touch, might immediately be changed into Gold: by which meanes he had like to haue beene starued (his meat and drinke being subiect to the same transformation) had not Bacchus deliuered him from his miserable facultie, by causing him to wash himselfe in the Riuer Pactolus, the streame wherof hath euer since, forsooth, aboun∣ded in that precious Metall. Finally, it is said hee died by drinking Buls bloud; being inuaded by the Scythians. In this age flourished that Antimachus, who (saith Plutarch in the life of Romulus ) obserued the Moones Eclipse at the foundation of Rome. The Milesians, or, (as Eusebius hath it) the Athenians hauing obtayned some power by Sea, founded Macicratis a Citie on the East of Aegypt. Psammiticus herein seemes to haue assisted them, who vsed all meanes of drawing the Greekes into Ae∣gypt, accounting them his surest strength. For neither Miletus nor Athens were now of power sufficient to plant a Colonie in Aegypt by force. About this time Archias with his companion Miscellus, and other Corinthians, Plut. & Euseb. founded Syracusae in Sicily, a Citie in after-times exceeding famous: The Citie of Nicomedia sometime Whence in Strabo there is Sinus Astacenus a part of Pro∣pontis where this Citie stan∣deth. Paus. l. 5. Astacus, was enlarged and beautified in this age by Zipartes natiue of Thrace. Sybilla of Samus according to Pausanias liued about this time. About these times also was Croton founded vpon the Bay of Tarentum by Mis∣cellus, the companion of Archias that built Syracusae. Strabo makes it somewhat more ancient: and so doth Pausanias. Hal. l. 3. About the same time the Parthenians being of age and banished Lacedaemon, were Strabo l. 6. conducted by Phalantus into Italie: where it is said they founded Tarentum: but Iu∣stine . l. 3. and Pausanias find it built before, and by them conquered and amplified: and Paus. l. 10. about the same time Manasse yet liuing, the Citie Phaselis was founded in Pamphylia, Gela in Sicily, Interamne in the Region of the Vmbri, now Vrbin in Italie. About which time also Chalcedon in Asia, ouer against Byzantium (now Constantinople ) was founded by the Megarcuses: who therefore were vpbraided as blind, because they chose not the other side of Bosphorus. It were a long worke to rehearse all that is said to haue beene done in the fiue and fiftie yeeres of Manasses: that which hath al∣readie beene told is enough: the rest being not greatly worth remembrance, may well be omitted, reseruing onely Ben Merodach, and Nabulassar, to the businesse that will shortly require more mention of them. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the times from the death of MANASSES to the destruction of Jerusalem. §. I. Of AMMON and IOSIAS. AMMON the sonne of Manasse, a man no lesse wicked then was his Father before his conuersion, restored the exercise of all sorts of Idolatrie: for which God 2. King. 21. hardened the hearts of his owne seruants against 2. Chron. 33. him: who slew him after he had raigned two yeeres: Philo, Eusebius and Nicephorus giue him tenne yeeres, following the Septuagint. Iosias succeeded vnto Ammon, being but a childe 2. King. . of eight yeeres old. Hee beganne to seeke after the 2. Chron. 34. God of Dauid his Father; and in his twelfth yeere he purged Iuda and Ierusalem from the high places, and the groues, and the carued and molten Images: and they brake downe in his sight the Altars of BAALIM: He caused all the Images as well those which were grauen, as mol∣ten, to be stampt to powder, and strewed on their graues that had erected them, and this he commanded to be done throughout all his Dominions. Hee also slew those that sacrificed to the Sunne and Moone, and caused the Chariots and Horses of the Sunne to be burnt. Of Iosias it was prophecied in the time of Ieroboam the first, when he erected the Golden Calfe at Bethel, that a child should be borne vnto the house of Dauid, Iosias by name, and vpon thee (said the Prophet speaking to the Altar) shall he sacrifice the Priests of the high places, that burne in censes vpon thee: a prophecie very remarkeable. 1. King. 13. In the eighteenth yeere of his raigne, hee rebuilt and repaired the Tem∣ple, at which time Helkiah the Priest found the Booke of Moses, called Deu∣teronomie, or, of the Law, which hee sent to the King: which when hee had caused to bee read before him, and considered of the seuere commaundements therein written, the prosperitie promised to those that obserue them, and the sor∣row and extirpation to the rest, he rent his garments, and commaunded Helkiah, and others, to aske counsell of the Prophetesse Huldah, or, Olda, concerning the Booke, who answered the messengers in these words. Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring euill vpon this place, and vpon the inhabitants thereof, euen all the curses that are written 2. Chron. 34. 24. in the Booke, which they haue read before the King of Iuda, because they haue for saken mee, and burnt incense to other Gods. Onely for the King himselfe, because he was a louer of God and of his Lawes, it was promised that this euill should not fall on Iuda 2. King. 22. 15. and Ierusalem in his dayes, but that hee himselfe should inherit his graue in 2. Chron. 34. peace. Iosias assembled the Elders, caused the Booke to bee read vnto them, made a couenant with the Lord, and caused all that were found in Ierusalem and Beniamin to doe the like, promising thereby to obserue the Lawes and commaundements in the Booke contained. The execution done by Iosias vpon the Altar, idols, monuments, and bones of the false Prophets, at Bethel, argueth his Dominion to haue extended vnto those Countries, that had beene part of the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes. Yet I doe not thinke, that any victorie of Iosias in warre got possession of these places; but ra∣ther that Ezekias, after the flight and death of Senacherib, when Merodach opposed himselfe against Asarhaddon, did vse the aduantage which the faction in the North presented vnto him, and laid hold vpon so much of the Kingdome of Israel, as hee was able to people. Otherwise also it is not improbable, that the Babylonian finding himselfe vnable to deale with Psammiticus in Syria (as wanting power to raise the siege of Azolus, though the Towne held out nine and twentie yeeres) did giue vn∣to Manasses, together with his libertie, as much in Israel as himselfe could not easily defend. This was a good way to breake the amitie that the Kings of Iuda had so long held with those of Aegypt, by casting a bone betweene them, and withall by this benefit of enlarging their Territorie with addition of more than they could challenge, to redeeme the friendship of the Iewes, which had beene lost by iniuries done, in seeking to bereaue them of their owne. When it is said, that Manasses did after his deliuerance from imprisoment, put Captaines of warre in all the strong Cities 2. Chron. 33. 14. of Iuda; it may be that some such businesse is intimated, as the taking possession, and fortifying of places deliuered into his hands. For though it be manifest that he tooke much paines, in making Ierusalem it selfe more defensible; yet I should rather beleeue, that he, hauing already compounded with the Babylonian, did fortifie him∣selfe against the Aegyptians, whose side hee had forsaken, than that hee trauailed in making such prouisions, onely for his minds sake. The earnestnesse of Iosias in the King of Babel his quarrell, doth argue, that the composition which Manasses had made, with that King or his Ancestor, was vpon such friendly tearmes, as required not only a faithfull obseruation, but a thankfull requitall. For no perswasions could suffice to make Iosias sit still, and hold himselfe quiet in good neutralitie, when Pha∣rao Neco King of Aegypt passed along by him, to warre vpon the Countries about the Riuer of Euphrates. The last yeere of Iosias his raigne it was, when as Neco the sonne of Psammiticus, came with a powerfull Armie towardes the border of Iudaea, determining to passe that way being the neerest toward Euphrates, either to strengthen the passages of Chron. 35. 20. that Riuer, about Carchemish or Cercusium, for the defence of Syria (as long after this; Dioclesian is said by Ammianus Marcellinus to haue done) or perhaps to inuade Syria it selfe. For it seemeth that the trauaile of Psammiticus had not beene idlely consumed about that one Towne of Azotus, but had put the Aegyptians in posses∣sion of no small part of Syria, especially in those quarters, that had formerly be∣longed vnto the Adades Kings of Damasco. Neither was the industrie of Neco lesse than his Fathers had beene, in pursuing the warre against Babel. In which warre, two things may greatly haue auailed the Aegyptians, and aduanced their affaires and hopes: the extraordinarie valour of the mercenarie Greekes, that were farre better Souldiers than Aegypt could of it selfe afford; and the danger wherein Assyria stood, by the force of the Medes, which vnder the command of more absolute Princes, began to feele it selfe better; and to shew what it could doe. These were great helpes, but of shorter endurance than was the warre; as in place more conuenient shall be noted. At the present it seemes, that either some preparation of the Chaldaeans to reconquer, did enforce, or some disabilitie of theirs to make resistance, did inuite the King of Aegypt, into the Countries bordering vpon Euphrates; whither Pharao Neco ascended with a mighty Armie. These two great Monarchs, hauing their swords drawne, and contending for the Empire of that part of the World, Iosias aduised with himselfe to which of these he might adhere, hauing his Territorie set in the mid way betweene both, so as the one could not inuade the other, but that they must of necessitie tread vpon the very face and body of his Countrie; Now though it were so that Neco him∣selfe desired by his Embassadors, leaue to passe along by Iudaea, protesting that hee . Chron. 35. directed himselfe against the Assyrians onely, without all harmefull purpose against Iosias; yet all sufficed not, but the King of Israel would fight with him. Many examples there were, which taught, what little good the friendship of Aegypt could bring to those that had affiance therein: as that of Hosea the last King of Israel, who when he fell from the dependance of the , and wholly tru∣sted to Sabacus or Sous King of Aegypt, was vtterly disappointed of his hopes, and in conclusion lost both his life and estate, which the Assyrian, so rooted vp and tare in pieces, as it could neuer after be gathered together or replanted. The calamities also that fell vpon Iuda in the thirteenth and foureteenth yeeres of Ezekia, whilest that good King and his people relied vpon Sethon; and more lately, the imprison∣ment of Manasses, were documents of sufficient proofe, to shew the ill assurance, that was in the helpe of the Aegyptians, who (neere neighbours though they were) were alwayes vnready; when the necessities of their friends required their assi∣stance. The remembrance hereof might be the reason Neco did not seeke, to haue the Iewes renew their ancient league with him, but onely craued that they would be contented to sit still, and behold the pastime betweene him and the Assy∣rians. This was an easie thing to grant; seeing that the countenance of such an Ar∣mie, as did, soone after this, out-face Nabulassar, vpon his owne borders, left vnto the Iewes, a lawfull excuse of feare, had they forborne to giue it any checke vpon the way. Wherefore I beleeue, that this religious and vertuous Prince Iosias, was not stirred vp onely by politike respects, to stop the way of Neco; but thought him∣selfe bound in faith & honour, to doe his best in defence of the Babylonian Crowne; whereunto his Kingdome was obliged, either by couenant made at the enlarge∣ment of Manasses, or by the gift of such part as hee held in the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes. As for the Princes and people of Iuda, they had now a good occasion to shew, both vnto the , of what importance their friendship was, and to the Aegyptians what a valiant Nation they had abandoned, and thereby made their enemie. Some thinke, that this action of Iosias, was contrarie to the aduice of Ieremie the Prophet; which I doe not finde in the Prophecie of Ieremie, nor can finde rea∣son to beleeue. Others hold opinion, that he forgat to aske the counsell of God: and this is very likely; seeing hee might beleeue that an enterprise grounded vpon fidelitie and thankfulnesse due to the King of Babel, could not but be displeasing vn∣to the Lord. But the wickednesse of the people (in whom the corruptions of for∣mer times had taken such roote, as all the care of Iosias in reforming the Land, could not plucke vp) was questionlesse farre from harkning how the matter would stand with Gods pleasure, and much farther from enquiring into his secret will, wherein it was determined, that their good King, whose life stood betweene them and their punishment, should now bee taken from among them, and that in such sort, as his death should giue enterance to the miseries ensuing. So Iosias leauying all the strength hee could make, neere vnto Megiddo, in the halfe Tribe of Manasses, encountered Necho: and there he receiued the stroke of death, which lingring about him till hee came to Ierusalem, brought him to the Sepulchers of his Ancestors. His losse was greatly bewailed of all the people and Princes of Iuda, es∣pecially of Ieremie the Prophet: who inserted a sorrowfull remembrance thereof . c. 4. v. 20. into his booke of Lamentations. §. II. Of PHARAO NECO that fought with IOSIAS: Of IEHOAHAZ and IEHOIAKIM Kings of Iuda. OF these warres, and particularly of this victorie, Herodotus hath men∣tion, among the acts of Neco. He tels vs of this King, that hee went about to make a channell, whereby Ships might passe, out of Nilus into the Redsea. It should haue reached aboue a hundred miles in length, and beene wide enough for two Gallies to row in front. But in the middest of the worke, an Oracle foretold that the Barbarians should haue the benefit of it, which caused Neco to desist when halfe was done. There were consumed in this toilesome businesse twelue hundred thousand Aegyptians; a losse great enough to make the King for sake his enterprise, without troubling the Ora∣cle for admonition. Howsoeuer it were, he was not a man to be idle; therefore hee built a Fleet, and leauied a great Armie, wherewith hee marched against the King of Babel. In this expedition he vsed the seruice, as well of his Nauie, as of his land∣forces; but no particular exploits of his therein, are found recorded, saue onely this victorie against , where Herodotus cals the place Magdolus, and the Iewes Sy∣rians; which is a small errour, seeing that Iudaea was a Prouince of Syria, and Magdo∣lus or Magdala is taken to haue beene the same place (though diuersly named) in which this battaile was fought. After this, Necus tooke the Citie of Cadytis, which Ios. Ant. Iud. . 10. cap. 7. was perhaps Carchemish, by Euphrates, and made himselfe Lord, in a manner, of all Syria, as Iosephus witnesseth. Particularly we finde, that the Phoenicians, one of the most powerfull Nations in Herod. l. 4. Syria, were his Subjects, and that by his command they surrounded all Africa, set∣ting saile from the gulfe of Arabia, and so passing along all the Coast, whereon they both landed, as neede required, and sowed corne for their sustenance, in that long voyage which lasted three yeeres. This was the first nauigation about Africa, wherein that great Cape, now called, Of good hope, was discouered; which after was forgotten, vntill Vasco de Gama the Portingall found it out, following a contrarie course to that which the Phoenicians held; for they, beginning in the East, ranne the way of the Sunne, South and then Westward, after which they returned home by the pillars and streights of Hercules (as the name was then) called now the straights of Gybraltar, hauing Africke still on the right hand: but the Portingals, beginning their voyage not farre from the same straights, leaue Africke on the Larboord, and bend their course vnto the East. That report of the Phoenicians, which Herodotus durst not beleeue, how the Sunne in this journie was on their right hand, that is, on the Northside of them, is a matter of necessarie truth; and the obseruation then made hereof, makes mee the better to beleeue, that such a Voyage was indeede performed. But leauing these discourses of Neco his magnificence, let vs tell what hee did, in matters more importing his Estate. The people of Iuda, while the Aegyptians were busie at , had made Iehoahaz their King, in the roome of his father Iosias. The Prophet Ieremie cals this new King Shallum, by the name of his younger bro∣ther; . c. 22. v. 32. alluding perhaps to the short Raigne of Shallum King of the tenne Tribes: for Shallum of Israel raigned but one moneth; no more than three. Hee was not the eldest sonne of Iosias: Wherefore it may seeme that he was set vp as the best affected vnto the King of Babel; the rest of his house being more inclined to the 2. Kin c 34. . 32. Aegyptian, as appeares by the sequell. An Idolater he was, and thriued according∣ly. For when as Neco had dispatched his businesse in the North parts of Syria, then did he take order for the affaires of Iudaea. This Countrie was now so farre from making any resistance, that the King himself came to Riblah in the Land of Hamath, where the matter went so ill on his side, that Neco did cast him into bonds and car∣ry him prisoner into Aegypt, giuing away his Kingdome to Eliakim his elder bro∣ther, to whom of right it did belong. This Citie of Riblath, in after times called Antiochia, was a place vnhappie to the Kings and Princes of Iuda, as may bee obser∣ued in diuers examples. Yet here Iehoiakim, together with his new name, got his Kingdome; an ill gaine, since he could no better vse it. But how-euer thri∣ued by the bargaine, Pharao sped well, making that Kingdome Tributarie, without any stroke stricken, which three moneths before was too stoute to giue him peace, when he desired it. Certaine it is, that in his march outward, Neco had a greater taske lying vpon his hands, than would permit him to wast his forces vpon Iudaea: but now the reputation of his good successe at Megiddo, and , together with the dissension of the Princes Iosias his sonnes (of whom the eldest is probably thought to haue stormed at the preferment of his yonger brother) gaue him power to doe, euen what should please himselfe. Yet hee did forbeare to make a conquest of the Land; perhaps vpon the same reason, which had made him so earnest, in see∣king to hold peace with it. For the Iewes had suffered much, in the Aegyptians quar∣rell, and being left by these their friends, in time of need, vnto all extremities, were driuen to forsake that party, and joyne with the enemies; to whom if they shewed themselues faithfull, who could blame them? It was therefore enough to reclaime them; seeing they were such a people, as would not vpon euery occasion shift side, but endure more, than Pharao, in the pride of his victories, thought that any hence∣forth should lay vpon them: so good a Patron did he meane to be vnto them. Ne∣uerthelesse he laid vpon them a Tribute, of an hundred Talents of siluer, and one Talent of gold; that so he might both reape at the present, some fruit of his paines taken, and leaue vnto them some document in the future, of greater punishment then verball anger, due to them, if they should rebell. So hee departed, carrying a∣long with him into Aegypt the vnfortunate King Iehoahaz, who died in his Capti∣uitie. The raigne of Iehoahaz was included in the end of his Fathers last yeere; o∣therwise it would hardly be found, that Iehoiakim, his successour, did raigne tenne whole yeeres; whereas the Scriptures giue him eleuen, that is current and incom∣plete. If any man will rather cast the three moneths of this short raigne, into the first yeere of the brother, than into the fathers last; the same arguments that shall maintaine his opinion, will also proue the matter to bee vnworthy of disputation; and so I leaue it. Iehoiakim in impietie was like his brother, in faction he was altogether Aegypti∣an, as hauing receiued his Crowne at the hand of Pharao. The wickednesse of these last Kings, being expressed in Scriptures none otherwise, than by generall wordes, with reference to all the euill that their Fathers had done; makes it apparent, that the poyson wherewith Ahaz and Manasses had infected the Land, was not so expel∣led by the zealous goodnesse of Iosias, but that it still cleaued vnto the chiefe of the people, Yea vnto the chiefe of the Priests also; and therefore it was not strange, that 2. Chron. cap. 36. . 14. the Kings had their part therein. The Royall authoritie was much abased by the dangers wherein the Countrie stood, in this troublesome age: the Princes did in a manner what they listed; neither would the Kings forbeare to professe, that they could denie them nothing. Yet the beginning of Iehoiakim had the countenance of the Aegyptian to grace it, which made him insolent & cruell; as we find by that ex∣ample of his dealing with Vria the Prophet: though herein also the Princes doe ap∣peare to haue beene instigators. This Holy man denounced Gods judgements a∣gainst the Citie and Temple, in like sort as other Prophets had formerly done, and did in the same age. The King with all the men of power, and all the Princes, hea∣ring of this determined to put him to death. Hereupon the poore man fled into Aegypt: but such regard was had vnto Iehoiakim, that Vria was deliuered vnto his Embassadour, and sent backe to the death; contrary to the custome vsed, both in those dayes, and since among all Ciuill Nations of giuing refuge vnto strangers, that are not held guiltie of such inhumane crimes, as for the generall good of man∣kind should be exempted from all priuiledge. It concerned Pharao to giue all contentment possible to Iehoiakim: for the Assy∣rian Lyon, that had not stirred in many yeeres, beganne about these times, to roare so lowd vpon the bankes of Euphrates, that his voice was heard vnto Nilus, threat∣ning to make himselfe Lord of all the Forrest. The causes that hitherto had with∣drawne the house of Merodach, from opposing the Aegyptian in his conquest of Sy∣ria, require our consideration in this place; before we proceed to commit them to∣gether at Charchemish, where shortly after this, the glory of Aegypt is to fall. §. III. Of the Kings of Babylon and Media. How it came to passe that the Kings of Babel could not giue attendance on their businesse in Syria; which caused them to loose that Prouince. MERODACH the sonne of Baladan, who taking the aduantage that Sen∣nacheribs misaduenture and death, together with the dissension be∣tweene his children presented, made himselfe King of Babylon, was e∣leuen yeeres troubled with a powerfull Enemie Asarhaddon the sonne of Senacherib, raigning ouer the Assyrians in Niniuie; from whom whilest he could not any other way diuert his cares, he was faine to omit all businesse in Syria, and (as hath beene formerly shewed) to make ouer vnto Ezekia, some part of the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes. From this molestation, the death of Asarhaddon did not onely set him free, but gaue vnto him some part of Assyria, if not (as is commonly but lesse probably thought) the whole Kingdome. How greatly this was to the liking of the Assyrians, I wil not here stand to enquire: his long raigne following, and his little entermedling in matters of Syria, make it plaine, that he had worke enough at home, either in defending or in establishing that which he had gotten. Iosephus giues him the honour of hauing wonne Niniuie it selfe; which we may beleeue; but surely he did not hold it long. For in the times soone follow∣ing, that great Citie was free, and vanquished Phraortes the Median. Perhaps it yeelded vpon some capitulation: and refused afterwards to continue subject, when the Kings being of the Chaldaean race, preferred Babylon before it. Some thinke that this was the Assyrian King, whose Captaines tooke Manasses prisoner; but I rather beleeue those that hold the contrarie; for which I haue giuen my reasons in due place. To say truth, I find little cause why Merodach should haue looked into those parts, as long as the Iewes were his friends, and the Aegyptians, that maligned the Northerne Empire, held themselues quiet at home, which was vn∣till the time of Psammiticus, about the end of this Kings Raigne, or the beginning of his sonne. Ben the sonne and successour of this King, is not mentioned in the Scriptures; yet is hee named by good consent of Authours, and that speake little of his doings. The length of his Raigne is gathered by inference to haue beene one and twentie yeeres, for somuch remaineth of the time that passed betweene the be∣ginning of his Fathers and his Nephewes Raignes (which is a knowne summe) de∣ducting the yeeres of his Father, and of his sonne Nabulassar. This (as I take it) was he that had Manasses Prisoner and released him. He sped ill in Syria; where Psammiticus, by the vertue of his Mercinarie Greekes, did much preuaile. This may haue beene some cause that he released Manasses, and did put into his handes some part more of the Kingdome of Samaria: which is made probable by circumstan∣ces alleaged before. Nabulassar that raigned in Babylon after his Father Ben Merodach, had greater busines in his own Kingdome, than would permit him to looke abroad: insomuch as it may bee thought to haue beene a great negligence or ouer-sight of Psammi∣ticus and Neco, that they did not occupie some good part of his Dominions beyond Euphrates. For it was in his time, that Phraortes King of the Medes inuaded , and besieged Niniue; from whence he was not repelled by any force of Nabulassar, but constrained to remoue by the comming of Scythians, who in these ages did o∣uer-flow those parts of the World, laying hold vpon all, that they could master by strong hand. Of these Scythians, and the Lordship that they held in Asia, it is conue∣nient that I speake in this place; shewing briefly afore-hand, how the Medes, vpon whom they first fell, were busied in the same times with hopes of conquering Assyria. Phraortes, the sonne of Deioces, King of the Medes, hauing by many victories en∣larged his Dominions, conceiued at length a faire possibilitie of making himselfe Lord of Niniue. That Citie (as Herodotus reports it) hauing beene a Soueraigne Ladie, was not Herod. lib. 1. forsaken of all her dependants; yet remained in such case, that of her selfe shee was well enough. This makes it plaine, that howsoeuer Merodach had gotten possession of this im∣periall seat, and made it subiect as was the rest of the Countrie; yet it found the meanes to set it selfe at libertie: as after this againe he did, when it had been regai∣ned by Nabulassar his Grand-childe. Sharpe warre, and the very nouelty of suddaine violence, vse to dismay any State or Countrie, not inured to the like: but custome of danger hardeneth euen those that are vnwarlike. Niniue had been the Palace of many valiant Kings lately raign∣ing therein; it had suffered, and resisted, all the furie, wherewith either Domesti∣call tumults betweene the sonnes of Senacherib, or forraigne warre of the Babyloni∣ans, could afflict it: and therefore it is the lesse wonderfull, that Phraortes did speed so ill in his iourney against it. He and the most of his Armie perished in that expe∣dition: whereof I find no particular circumstances (perhaps he vnderualued their forces, and brought a lesse power than was needfull) It is enough, that we may here∣in beleeue Herodotus. Cyaxares the sonne of Phraortes, a brauer man of warre then his Father, wanne as much of Asia the lesse, as lay Eastward, from the Riuer of Halys; he sought reuenge vpon the Assyrians for the death of his Father, and besieged Niniue it selfe, hauing a purpose to destroy it. I rather beleeue EVSEBIVS, That he tooke the Citie, and ful∣filled his displeasure vpon it, than HERODOTVS, That the Scythian Armie came vpon him whilest he lay before it. For where equall authorities are contradictorie (as Euse∣bius, though farre later then Herodotus, yet hauing seene other Authors, that are now lost, is to be valued according to his great reading) there doe I hold it best, to yeeld vnto the best likelihoods. To thinke that the Scythians came vpon Cyaxares, whilest hee lay before Niniue, were to accuse him of greater improuidence, then ought to bee suspected in one commended as a good Souldier. But to suppose that hee was faine to leaue the Towne, when a warre so dangerous fell vpon his owne Countrie, doth well agree both with the condition of such businesse as that Scythian expedition brought into those parts, and with the State of the Chaldaean and Assyrian affaires en∣suing. The destruction of this great Citie is both foretold in the Booke of Tobit, and there set downe as happening about these times; of which Booke whosoeuer was the Authour, hee was ancient enough to know the Storie of those ages, and hath committed no such errour in reckoning of times, as should cause vs to distrust him in this. As for the Prophesie of Nahum, though it be not limited vnto any certaine tearme, yet it appeares to haue taken effect, in the finall destruction of Niniue by Nabuchodonosor, according to the common opinion. For the Prophet hath menti∣on of a Conquest of Aegypt, this calamitie, whereof we will speake in due place. Some that ascribe more authoritie then the reformed Churches yeelde, to the Booke of Tobit, are carefull, as in a matter of necessitie, to affirme, that about these times Niniue was taken; but they attribute (coniecturally) the victorie ouer it, to Ben Merodach: a needlesse coniecture, if the place of Eusebius be well conside∣red. Yet I hold it probable, that Nabulassar the sonne of Ben Merodach, did seize vp∣on it, and place a King or Viceroy therein, about such time as the Countrie of As∣syria was abandoned by Cyaxares, when the Scythian warre ouerwhelmed Media. For then was the Conquest wrought out readie to his hand; the swelling spirits of the Niniuites were allayed, and their malice to Babylon so asswaged, that it might be thought a great fauour, if Nabulassar, appointing vnto them a peculiar King, took him and them into protection: though afterwards to their confusion, this vnthank∣full people and their King, rebelled againe, as shall be shewed in the Raigne of Na∣buchodonosor. § IIII. The great expedition of the Scythians, who ruled in Asia eight and twentie yeeres. †. I. The time of this expedition. NOW that I haue shewed what impediment was giuen by the Assy∣rians and the Medes, to the , who thereby were much dis∣abled to performe any action of worth vpon the Aegyptians in Syria; it is time that I speake of that great Scythian expedition, which afflicted not only the Babylonians, but the Medes and Lydians, with the Countries adiacent, in such wise, that part of the trouble redounded to the Aegyptians themselues. Of the Scythian people in generall, Herodotus makes very large discourse, but interlaced, as of matter ill knowne, with many Fables; of this expedition he tels many particulars, but il agreeing, with consent of time. Con∣cerning his fabulous reports, it will be needlesse to recite them, for they are farre enough distant from the businesse in hand. The computation of times which by inference out of his relations, may seeme very strange, needeth some answer in this place: lest otherwise I should either seeme to make my selfe too bold with an Au∣thour, in citing him after a manner different from his owne tale; or else to bee too forgetfull of my selfe, in bringing to act vpon the Stage, those persons, which I had already buried. Eight and twentie yeeres, he saith, that the Scythians Raigned in A∣sia, before Cyaxares deliuered the Countrie from them. Yet he reports a warre be∣tweene Cyaxares and Halyattes the Lydian, as foregoing the siege of Niniue; the siege of Niniue being ere the Scythians came. And further he tels, how the Scythians, ha∣uing vanquished the Medes, did passe into Syria, and were encountred in Palestina by Psammiticus King of Aegypt, who by gifts and procured them to de∣part from him. These narrations of Herodotus may, euery one of them, bee true; though not in such order of time, as hee hath marshalled them. For Psammiticus was dead before Cyaxares beganne to Raigne: and Cyaxares had spent halfe of his fortie yeeres, Halyattes was King of Lydia; so that he could not, after those Ly∣dian warres, Raigne eight and twentie yeeres together with the . It is true, that Eusebius doth also call Psammis the sonne of Pharao Neco, by name of Psam∣miticus; and this King Psammis may, by some strained coniecture, thought to haue beene he that met with the Scythians: for liued with both Cyaxares and Ha∣lyattes. But Eusebius himselfe referres all that businesse of the Scythian irruption in∣to Palaestina, to Psammiticus the Father of Neco, whom dead before the of Halyattes. Therefore I dare not vpon Herodotus, in this matter, o∣therwise then to him, that such things were in these ages, though not in such order as he sets them downe. It remaines, that I collect as well as I can, those memorials which I finde of this expedition scattered in diuers places: a worke necessarie, for that the greatnesse of this action was such, as ought not to bee omitted in a generall Historie; yet not easie, the consent of those that haue written thereof, being nothing neere to vni∣formitie. I haue noted before, that in the Raigne of Ardys King of Lydia, the Cimmerians ouer-ranne that Kingdome, and were not expelled, vntill Halyattes the Nephew of Ardys got the vpper hand of them. In these times therefore of Ardys, Sadiattes, and Halyattes, are we to find the eight and twentie yeeres, wherein the Scythians raigned ouer Asia. Now forasmuch as Psammiticus the Aegyptian had some dea∣lings with the Scythians, euen in the height of their prosperitie, wee must needs al∣low more then one or two of his last yeeres vnto this their Dominion. But the be∣ginning of Halyattes his Raigne in Lydia, being three and twentie yeeres compleat after the death of Psammiticus, leaues the space very scant, either for the great vi∣ctories of the Scythians, necessarily supposed before they could meet the Aegyptian in Syria, or for those many losses, which they must haue receiued they could be driuen quite away. To increase this difficultie, the victorious Raigne of Nabucho∣donosor in Babylon, is of no small moment. For how may we thinke it possible, that he should haue aduentured the strength of his Kingdome against the Aegyptians and Iewes, had hee stood in daily feare of losing his owne; to a more mightie Nati∣on, that lay vpon his necke? To speake simply as it appeares to me; the victories a∣scribed to Cyaxares & Halyattes ouer these warlike people, were not obtained against the whole body of their Armie, but were the defeatures of some troupes, that in∣fested their seuerall Kingdomes; other Princes, and among these, Nabulassar hauing the like successe, when the pleasures of Asia had mollified the courages of these hardie Northerne Laddes. Wherefore wee may probably annexe the and twentie yeres of the Scythians rule, to as many almost the last of Nabulassars Raigne, in compasse whereof their power was at the greatest. This is all that I can say of the time, wherein Asia suffered the violence of these oppressors. † II. What Nations they were that brake into Asia; with the cause of their Iournie. TOuching the expedition it selfe, Herodotus tels vs, that the Cimmerians being dri∣uen out of their Countrie by the Scythians, inuaded and wasted some part of Asia; and that the Scythians not contented with hauing wonne the land of the Cim∣merians, did follow them, I know not why, into farre remooued quarters of the world, so (as it were by chance) falling vpon Media and Aegypt, in this pursuit of men that were gone another way into Lydia. Hereby we may gather that the Cim∣merians were an odious and base people; the Scythians, as mischieuous and foolish; or else Herodotus, and some other of his Countrimen, great slanderers of those, by whom their Nation had beene beaten, and Ionia, more then once, grieuously ran∣sackt. The great valour of the Cimmerians or Cimbrians is so well known, and their manic Conquests so well testified in Histories of diuers Nations, that the of the Greekes is in sufficient to staine them with the note of Cowards. These were the of Gomer, who peopled the greatest part of our Westerne World; and whose reflow did ouerwhelme no small portion of Greece and Asia, as well before and after, as in the age whereof wee doe now . He that would more largely informe himselfe of their originall and actions, may peruse his A∣mazonica; of many things in which Booke, that may be verified, which the learned Ortelius is said to haue spoken, of all Goropius his works, that it is easie to laugh at them, but hard to confute them: There wee find it proued, by such arguments and authori∣ties, as are not lightly to be regarded, that the Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians, were all of one Linage and Nation; how soeuer distinguished in name, by reason of their diuers Tribes, professions, or perhaps dialect of speech. Homer indeede hath mention of the Cimmerians; whose Countrie whether he place in the West, as neer vnto the Ocean and boundes of the Earth, Or in the North, as being farre from the Sunne, and couered with eternall darknesse; certaine it is that he would haue them neere neighbours to Hell: for he had the same quarrell to them, which Herodotus had, and therefore belike would haue made them seeme a kinde of Goblins. It was the manner of this great Poet (as Herodotus writing his life affirmes) to insert into his workes the names of such as liued in his owne time, making such mention of them, as the good or ill done by them to himselfe deserued. And for this reason it is proued by Eustathius, that the Cimmerians were so disgraced by him, because they had wasted his Countrie. Perhaps that inuasion of Phrygia by the Amazons, where∣of Homer puts a remembrance into Priamus his discourse with Helen, was the very same, which Eusebius noteth to haue happened somewhat before the age of Homer, at what time the Cimmerians with the Amazons, together inuaded Asia. This is certaine, that both the Amazons and the (who in after-times were called Cimbri ) did often breake into Greece and Asia; which though it bee not in expresse tearmes written, that they did with ioynt forces, yet seeing they inua∣ded the selfe same places, it may well be gathered, that they were companions. One iourney of the Amazons into Greece, mentioned also by Eusebius, was by the Diod. lib. 4. c. 2. straights of the Cimmerians, as we finde in Diodore, who further telleth vs, that the Scythians therein gaue them assistance. The same Authour, before his entrie into those discourses of the Amazons, which himselfe acknowledgeth to bee fabulous, Diod. lib. 2. c. 11. doth report them to haue beene of the Scythians, and no lesse warlicke than their Husbands; alleadging the example of that Queene, who is said to haue slaine the great Persian Cyrus. That it was the manner of the Cimbri to their wiues along with them to the warres; and how desperate the courage was of those wo∣men; the terrible descent of them into Italie, when Marius the Roman ouerthrew them, giues proofe sufficient. I will not here enter into a discourse of the Amazons; other place will giue mee better leisure to speake of them: but seeing that they are noted by diuers Historians to haue belonged vnto the Cimmerians, to the Scythi∣ans, and to the Sarmatians, wee may the better approouc Goropius his conclusion, That these three Nations were one, at least that they were neere allies. Now concerning the expulsion of the Cimmerians by the Scythians, it appeares to haue beene none other than the sending a Colonie of them forth into Asia, with an Armic of Scythians to helpe them, in purchasing a new seat, and establishing the plantation. The Sarmatians also were companions in this . For the Citie of Nouo∣grad in Russia (which Countrie is the same that was called Sarmatia ) stood in their way homewards, as shall anon be further shewed. So that all the North was vp in Armes: and therefore it is no maruaile though many Countries felt the weight of this great inundation. Such another voiage was that, which the same people made fiue hundred yeeres and more after this, when they were encountred by the Ro∣mans. For they issued from the parts about the Lake Maeotis; they were then like∣wise assisted (saith Plutarch in the most likely report of them) by the Scythians their Plutarch in the life of . neighbours; they had in their Armie aboue hundred thousand fighting men, besides a huge multitude of women & children; they wandered ouer many Coun∣tries, beating all down before them; and finally, thinking to haue setled themselues in Italie, they diuided their companie, for the more passage thither, and were consumed in three terrible battailes by the Roman Consuls. Meere necessitie enfor∣ced these poore Nations, to trouble the World, in following such hard aduentures. For their Countrie, being more fruitfull of men than of sustinance, and shut vp on the North side with intolerable cold, which denied issue that way to their ouer∣swelling multitudes; they were compelled to discharge vpon the South, and by right or wrong to driue others out of possession, as hauing title to all that they had power to get, because they wanted all, that , but more ciuill, people had. Their sturdie bodies, patient of hunger, cold and all hardnesse, gaue them great aduantage ouer such as were accustomed vnto a more delicate life, and could not be without a thousand superfluites. Wherefore commonly they preuailed very farre; their next neighbours giuing them free passage, that they might the sooner be ridde of them; others giuing them, besides passage, victuals and guides to con∣duct them to more wealthie places; others hiring them to depart with great pre∣sents; so as the farther they went on, the more pleasant Lands they found, and the more effeminate people. †. III. Of the Ciminerians warre in Lydia. THE first Companie of these, consisting for the most part of Cimmerians, held the way of the Euxine Seas, which they had still on the right hand; leauing on the other side, and behinde them, the great Mountaines of Caucasus. These ha∣uing passed through the Land of Cholchis, that is now called Mengrelli, entered the Countrie of Pontus, and being in Paphlagonia, fortified the Promontorie Herod. lib. 4. whereon Sinope, a famous Hauen Towne of the Greekes, was after built. Here it seemes that they bestowed the weakest and most vnseruiccable of their traine, to∣gether with the part of their carriages, vnder some good gard: as drawing neere to those Regions, in conquest whereof they were to trie the vtmost hazard. For in like sort afterwards did the Cimbri (of whom I spake euen now) dispose of their impediments, leauing them in a place of strength, where Antwerpe now stands, when they drew into Gaule, vpon which they determined to aduenture themselues in the purchase. From Synope, the way vnto Phrygia, Lydia, and Ionia, was faire and open to the Cimmerians, without any ledge of Mountaines or any deepe Riuers to stay their march: for Iris and Halys they had already passed. What battailes were fought betweene these inuaders and the Lydians, and with what variable successe the one or other part wanne and lost, I finde not written nor am able to coniecture. This I find, that in the time of Ardys, the Cimmerians got pos∣session of Sardes the Capitall Citie of Lydia; onely the Castle holding out against them. Further I obserue, that whereas Herodotus tels of the acts performed by Gyges and Ardys Kings of Lydia, before this inuasion, and by Halyattes and Croesus in the times following; all that Ardis did against the Cimmerians, and all, saue burning the Milesians Corne fields, that was done in twelue yeres by Sadiattes his Son (who per∣haps had his hands so full of this businesse, that he could turne them to nothing else) is quite omitted: whereby it may seeme, that neither of the two did any thing worthie of. remembrance in those warres, but were glad enough that they did not loose all. Certainly, the miseries of warre are neuer so bitter and manie, as when a whole Nation, or great part of it, forsaking their owne seates, labour to roote out the esta∣blished possessours of another Land, making roome for themselues, their wiues and children. They that fight for the masterie, are pacified with tribute, or with some ouer seruices and acknowledgements, which had they beene yeelded at the first, all had beene quiet, and no sword bloudied. But in these migrations, the assai∣lants bring so little with them, that they need all which the defendants haue, their Lands and Cattell, their houses and their goods, euen to the cradles of the sucking infants. The mercilesse tearmes of this controuersie arme both sides with despe∣rate resolution: seeing the one part must either winne, or perish by famine; the other defend their goods, or loose their liues without redemption. Most of the Countries in Europe haue felt examples thereof; and the mightie Empire of Rome was ouerthrowne by such inuasions. But our Isle of Britaine can best witnesse the diuersitie of Conquests; hauing by the happie victorie of the Romans, gotten the knowledge of all Ciuill arts, in exchange of libertie, that was but slenderly instru∣cted therein before; whereas the issue of the Saxon and Danish warres, was, as were the causes, quite contrarie. For these did not seeke after the Dominion onely, but the entire possession of the Countrie, which the Saxons obtained, but with horrible crueltie, eradicating all of the British Race, and defacing all memoriall of the anci∣ent inhabitants through the greater part of the Land. But the Danes (who are al∣so of the Cimmerian bloud) found such end of their enterprise, as it may seeme that the Cimmerians in Lydia, and Scythians in the higher Asia, did arriue vnto. So that by considering the processe of the one, we shall the better conceiue the fortune of the other. Many battailes the Danes wonne; yet none of such importance, as sufficed to make them absolute Conquerours: Manie the Saxons wonne vpon the Danes, yet not so great, as could driue them quite away, and backe from hence, after they had gotten firme footing. But in course of time, the long continuance euen of vt∣ter enmitie, had bred such acquaintance betweene them, as bowing the natures of both these people, made the one more plyant vnto the other. So their disagreeable qualities, both ill and good, being reduced into one milde temper, no small number of the Danes became peaceable cohabitants with the Saxons, in England, where great slaughter had made large roome; others returning home, found their owne Countrie wide enough to receiue them, as hauing disburthened it selfe of many thousands, that were sent to seeke their graues abroad. And such (as I thinke) was the end of the Cimmerian warre in Lydia; whereunto though some victorie of Haly∣attes may haue hastened the conclusion, yet the wearisome length of time seemes to haue done most, in compelling them to desire of rest. I know not why I should feare to adde hereunto my further coniecture; which is, that the matter was so compounded between the Cimmerians and Halyattes, that the Riuer of Halys should diuide their Territories. For Halys was henceforth the border of the Lydians, and on the Easterne side of the Riuer was the Countrie of the Amazons, that is indeed, of the Cimmerians and other Scythian people; whose wiues and daughters these war∣like women are supposed to haue beene. And hereunto the quarrell ensuing, betweene Halyattes and Cyaxares the Mede, hath very good reference. For Halyattes (as is said) fought in defence of certaine Scythians, vpon whom the Median sought reuenge. And it stands with reason, that the Lydians and Cimmerians, being much weakened with mutuall slaughters, should haue joyned in a league of mutuall defence for their common safetie: though o∣therwise it had beene dangerous to Halyattes, if he had permitted the Median to ex∣tend his Kingdome so farre Westward, whatsoeuer the pretences might be, of ta∣king reuenge vpon such as had spoiled each of their Countries. As for that occasi∣on of the warre betweene these two Kings, which Herodotus relates, I find it of little waight, and lesse probabilitie. He tels of Scythians, that being chased out of their Countrie by faction, came vnto Cyaxares; who committed vnto them certaine Boyes, to be instructed in the Scythian tongue, and of . Now it so Herod. lib. 1. fell out (saith he) that these Scythians vsing much to hunt, and commonly bringing home some what with them, did neuerthelesse other whiles misse of their game, and come home as they went. Hereupon the King being froward and cholericke, reuiled them; and they, as impatient as he, killed one of the Boyes that was vnder their charge, whom dressing like Venison, they presented vnto him; which done, they fled vnto Halyattes. This Herodotus deliuers, as the ground of a warre that lasted sixe yeeres betweene the Medes and Lydians; the one King demanding these Fugitiues to be deliuered into his hand, the other refusing to betray such men as were become his suppliants. To this I will say no more, than that I see no cause that might induce the Scythians, to betake themselues to either of these Kings, vnto whom their Nation had wrought so much displeasure. Particularly they had reason to distrust Cyaxares, for the treacherie that he shewed in the massacring of their Countrie men, that were in his Kingdome; of whom it is now meet that wee should speake. †. IIII. The warre of the Scythians in the higher Asia. AS the Cimmerians held their course Westerly, along the shores of the Euxine Sea: so the Scythians and Sarmatians tooke the other way, and hauing the Cas∣pian Sea on their left hand, passed betweene it and Caucasus through Albania, Col∣thene, and other obscure Nations, where now are the Countries of Seruan and Geor∣gia, and so they entered into Media. The Medes encountered them in Armes; but were beaten, and thereupon glad to come to any agreement with them. This was in the time of Phraortes, whilest Psammiticus raigned in Aegypt. If it were in the sixt yeere of Nabulassars Raigne ouer Babylon (supposing him to haue raigned fiue and thirtie; otherwise we must allow to Ben Merodach what we take from him) then doe the eight and twentie yeeres of their Dominion end, one yeere before the great Nabuchodonosor was King; so giuing him good leaue to prouide securely, for the inuasion of Syria, which expedition he began while his Father yet liued, as Iose∣phus out of Berosus relates the Historie. Now the Medes, desirous to saue themselues as well as they might, from this terrible Nation, which when they had no lust to a second triall of the sword, refu∣sed not to vndergoe the burthen of a Tribute, but thought nothing dishonourable, that would serue to remooue these troublesome guests into some other lodging. On the other part, the Scythians finding still the Countries pleasanter & better, the further that they marched into the South, did suffer themselues to bee perswaded, that a little more trauaile, would adde a great deale more to their content. For they relied so much vpon their owne valour, that they feared no resistance; and being the brauest men, they thought it reason that they should dwell in the best Region. That Phraortes perswaded them into Aegypt, I doe not thinke: Babylon was neere enough; whither if hee could send these Locusts to graze, then should not his vn∣friendly Neighbours haue cause to laugh at his misfortune. What shift Nabulassar made with them, or that at all had any dealings with them, I doe not reade. But it is well knowne, that his Dominions lay in the middest betweene Media and Ae∣gypt; as also, that they made all those parts of Asia Tributarie; wherefore we may very well beleeue, that they watered their horses in his Riuers, and that hee also was content to giue them prouender. Psammiticus hearing of their progresse (like the jealous Husband of a faire Wife) tooke care that they might not looke vpon Aegypt; lest the sight thereof should more easily detaine them there, than any force or perswasion, that hee could vse, would send them going. Therefore he met them in Syria, presuming more on the great gifts which he meant to bestow vpon them, than on his Armie that should keepe them backe. Aegypt was rich; and halfe the riches thereof had not beene ill spent in sauing all. Yet Psammiticus tooke the most likely course, whereby to make his part good against them by strong hand, in case they had beene so obstinate as to refuse all indifferent composition. For hee lay close vpon the edge of the Wilder∣nesse in Gaza (as I take it) the Southermost border of Palaestina: whence hee neuer aduanced to meet with the Scythians; but gaue them leaue to feele as much of the Sunne-beames, ill agreeing with their temper, as all the length of Syria could beat vpon them. When they were come as farre as Ascalon, the next Citie to Gaza, then did he assay them with goodly words, accompanied with gifts, which were likely to work so much the better, by how much the worse they were pleased with the heate of a Climate so farre different from their owne. Psammiticus had at his backe a vast wildernesse, ouer the scorching sands whereof, the Scythians more patient of cold and wet, than of the contrarie distempers, could ill haue indured to pursue him, through vnknowne wayes, had they fought with him and preuailed: especially the Kingdome of Aegypt being ready to entertaine him with reliefe, and them with new trouble at the end of their wearie journie. Wherefore they were content to be intreated, and taking in good part his courteous offers, returned back to visite their acquaintance in the high Countries. The Aegyptian King (besids that he preserued his owne Estate from a dangerous aduenture, by hyring this great Ar∣mie to depart from him) found all his Cost well repayed in the processe of his wars in Syria, where the Nations beyond Euphrates had no power to molest him, being more then euer troubled themselues, with the returne of their oppressors. For the Scythians, resoluing now to no further, beganne to demaund more than the Tribute formerly imposed. And not contented to fleece the Naturals with grie∣uous exactions, they presumed to liue at discretion vpon the Countrie, taking what they listed from the Owners; and many times (as it were to saue the labour of ta∣king often) taking all at once. This Tyrannous Dominion they long vsed ouer the higher Asia, that is, ouer the Countrie lying betweene the Caspian and Red Seas; and betweene India and Asia the lesse. Happie it was for the poore people, that in so large a space of ground, there was roome enough for these new comers; other∣wise the calamitie that fell, as it were by chance, vpon those priuate men, to whose wealth any Scythian did beare a fancie, would haue lighted in generall vpon all at one clap, leauing few aliue, and none able to relieue their fellowes. Yet it seemes that the heauiest burthen lay vpon Media; for it was a fruitfull Countrie not farre from their owne home, and lay vnder a Climate well agreeing with the constituti∣on of their bodies; there also it was that they had the fatall blow, by which their insolent Rule was taken from them. Cyaxares King of the Medes, who in this extremitie was no better then a Rent∣gatherer Herod. lib. 1. for the Scythians, perceiuing that his Land lay vnmanured and waste, through the negligence of his people, that were out of heart by daily oppressions, and that the matter could not be remedied by open force, resolued to proue what might be done by stratagem. The managing of the businesse is thus deliuered in briefe; That he, and his Medes, feasted the better part of the Scythians; made them drunke; and ssew them; recouering heereby the possession of all that they had lost. Such another slaughter was committed vpon the Danes in England; but it was re∣uenged by their Countrimen, with greater cruelties than euer they had practised before. That the Scythians, which escaped this bloudy feast, made any stirre in Me∣dia, I doe not find; neither doe I read that either in reuenge hereof, or vpon other pretence, the Medes were troubled by inuasion from Scythia in time following. This is the more strange, for that the Armie returning home out of Media, was very strong, and encountred with opposition (as Herodotus reports it) no lesse then Herod. lib. 4. it had found abroad. Wherefore it may be, that the deuice of Cyaxares to free his Country, tooke good effect, with lesse bloud-shed than hath beene supposed. For if hee surprised all the chiefe of them, it was no hard matter to make a good com∣position. Many of them doubtlesse in eight and twentie yeeres had so well settled themselues, that they were desirous of rest, and might be permitted, without any danger, to remaine in the Countrie; many (of whom I shall speake anon) hauing done what they could in the businesse, for which they came forth, were willing to returne home, with what they had gotten; such as were not pleased with either of these two courses, might goe joyne with the Cimmerians in Lydia, or seeke their for∣tunes in other prouinces, among their owne Companions. Whereas all the Fami∣lies of the North are said to haue beene with Nabuchadnezzar, it may be vnderstood, that a great part of the Scythians, vpon hope of gaine, or desire to keepe what they had already gained, were content to become subject vnto Nabulassar: mens loue of their wealth being most effectuall, in taming the more vnquiet loue of inordinate libertie. This is certaine, that Nabuchadnezzar, as after, so in his first beginning Ier. 25. 9. of warre, did beate the Aegyptians, who in ages foregoing had beene accustomed to deale with the Babylonians after another fashion: and this new successe of that King may be imputed, in regard of humane meanes, to such addition as this of new forces. Of the Scythian Armie returning out of Media, diuers Authours report a Storie, which confirmes mee in the opinion, that this Companie went forth to assist their kindred and friends, in acquiring a new seate, and establishing their plantation. For these had left their wiues behinde them; a good argument to proue that they meant to come againe. The Scythian women, to comfort themselues in their hus∣bands absence, became bed-fellowes to their slaues. These got a lusty brood of youths, that were loth to be troubled with Fathers in Law, and therefore prepa∣red to fight with them at their returne. If they were only the children of slaues, which compounded an Armie (as Herodotus would haue it, who tels vs, that the Scythians were wont to pull out all their Bond-mens eies) it must needs be that they were very Boyes, or else that the Women did very little while continue . Wherefore I rather beleeue that tale as it is told by the Russes themselues, who a∣greeing in the rest with the consent of Histories, make that report of their Ance∣stors returning homewards, which I will set downe, as I finde it, in M r . Doctor Flet∣cher his exact discourse of the Russe Common-wealth. They vnderstood by the way, that Rus. . cap. 4. their Cholopey, or Bond-slaues whom they left at home, had in their absence possessed their Townes, Lands, Houses, Wiues, and all. At which newes being somewhat amazed, and yet disdayning the Villanie of their seruants, they made the more speed home: and so not farre from Nouograd met them in warlike manner marching against them. Whereupon aduising what was best to be done, they agreed also to set vpon them with no other shew of weapon but with their horse-whips (which as their manner is, euery man rideth withall) to put them in remembrance of their seruile condition, thereby to terrifie them, and abate their courage. And so marching on, and lashing all together with their whips in their , they gaue the onset. Which seemed so terrible in the eares of their Villaines, and strooke such a sense into them of the smart of the whip, which they had felt before, that they fled all together like Sheepe before the Driuers. In memorie of this victorie, the since haue stamped their Coine (which they call a Dingoe Nouogradskoy, carrant through all Russia) with the figure of a Horseman shaking a whip aloft in his hand. It may seeme, that all the women of that Countrie, haue fared the worse euer since, in regard of this vniuer∣sall fault: for such a Pudkey or whip, as terrified those slaues, curiously wrought by her selfe is the first present that the Moscouian Wife, euen in time of wooing, sends to him that shalbe her husband, in token of subjection; being well assured, to feele it often on her owne loines. But this was a Document vnto the Scythians, or rather Sarmatians (for Nouograd stands in the Countrie that was called Sarmatia ) to beware of absenting themselues any more so long from their Wiues; which after this, I find not that they did. Thus much I thought good to set downe of the Scythian expedition; not only because it is the most memorable act performed abroad by that Nation, famous in Histories, and terrible to many Countries; but for that it appeares to haue beene a great cause, of the Aegyptians preuailing hitherto in Syria, and about , which continues yet a while the centre of our discourse. §. V. Of Princes liuing in diuers Countries, in these ages. HAuing thus farre digressed from the matters of Iuda, to auoide all fur∣ther occasion of doing the like, I will here insert a note of such Kings and men of marke, as were betweene the death of Manasses, and the ruine of Ierusalem. Of the Aegyptians, Babylonians, Medes, and Lydians, I haue spoken as much, as I thought needfull. In Rome, Tul∣lus Hostilius held the Kingdome, vntill the one and twentieth yeere of Iosias; at which time Ancus Martius succeeding, raigned foure and twentie yeeres. After him L. Tarquinius Priscus, a new-come stranger, but very rich, preuailed so farre by his graciousnesse among the people, that he got the Kingdome to himselfe, dis∣appointing the sonnes of Ancus, ouer whom he was Tutor. He began in the fourth yeere of Zedekia, and Raigned eight and thirtie yeeres. In this time it was, namely, in the second yeere of the thirtieth Olympiad, that the Lacedaemoni∣ans, bethinking them how to bee auenged of the Arcadians, who gaue succour to the Messenians against them in the former warre, entred the Territorie, tooke the Citie of Phigalia or Phialia, from whence their Garrisons were soone after beaten out. Cypselus expelling the race of the Bacida, made himselfe Lord of Corinth about these times, and gouerned it in peace thirtie yeeres; leauing for successour his sonne Periander, one of the seuen Sages, but a cruell Tyrant: who among other vile acts, slew his owne wife, and afterwards, as in her honour, stripped all the Corinthian wo∣men starke naked, burning their apparell, as an acceptable offering to her Ghost. Hereby we may perceiue, that the wisedome of the Greekes was not excellent in those dayes; when such a one as this could bee admired as excelling all the Coun∣trie. In these times also were Zaleucus, and Draco, famous Lawgiuers, the one among the in Italie, the other in the Citie of Athens. The Lawes of Draco were so rigorous, that he was said to haue written them with bloud: for hee rewarded eue∣rie small offence with death. Wherefore his constitutions were soone abrogated, and power giuen to Solon, by the Athenians, to make new in their stead. But the Lawes of Zaleucus were very milde. He forbad any Gentlewoman to walke abroad with more than one Bond-woman attending on her, vnlesse it were when shee was drunke; or to goe forth of the Towne by night, vnlesse it were to some sweet-hearts bed; or to dresse herselfe vp in immodest brauerie, vnlesse it were to inueigle alo∣uer. By which pleasant Ordinances, he effected his desire: for none would seeme, in breaking the Statutes, to be in such case as challenged the dispensation. It is no∣ted in this man as a singular example of justice, that when his owne sonne had committed , and was therefore to loose both his eyes, he did not cause him to be pardoned, but gaue one eye of his owne to saue the yong man (who also lost one) from vtter blindnesse. I shall not henceforth need, so farre to wander, as hitherto I often haue done; in pursuing of actions collaterall to the Historie, for inserting them in their order of time. The Chaldaeans will soone fall vnder the Persians; the Persians, long, en∣counter with the Greekes; the Greekes, with the Romans; the Romans, with many Na∣tions. Concerning all these, as they shall successiuely present themselues, in their flourishing Estate; it will be enough to recapitulate the most memorable accidents, that befell them in their Minoritie. But in the long space of more than thirteene hundred yeeres, which passed betweene the calling of Abraham, and the destructi∣on of Ierusalem, we finde little matter, wherein the Historie of Israel had any dea∣ling with other Nations, than the very neerest borderers. Yet reade we of many Kingdomes, that in these many ages were erected, and throwne downe; as like∣wise, many memorable acts were performed in Greece and elsewhere, though not following one another at any neere distance; all which must haue beene quite omit∣ted, or else reserued vnto a very vnseasonable rehearsall, had they not beene dis∣posed in this method, whereof he that will not allow the conueniencie, may pardon the necessitie. §. VI. The of Iudaea, and destruction of Ierusalem by the Chaldaeans. NOW to returne to the Iewish Storie, from whence wee haue so farre digressed. In the third yeere of Iehoiakim, Nabuchodonosor the second, his Father yet liuing, entred Iudaea with a great Armie, who besieging and forcing Ierusalem, made Iehoiakim his Vassall in despight of Neco, that had established him King, and tooke with him for pledges Daniel, being as yet a childe, with Ananias, Misael, and Azarias. Also hee tooke a part of the Church treasures; but staied not to search them throughly; for Necho hasted to the succour of Iehoiakim, hoping to finde Nabuchodonosor in Iudaea: wherein this Babylonian had no disposition to hazard himselfe and his Armie, it being Countrie of an euill affection towards him, as also farre off from any succour or sure place of retrait. If he had, as may be supposed, any great strength of Scythian horse∣men in his Armie; it was the more wisely done of him, to fall backe, out of the rough, mountainous, and ouer-hot Countrie, into places that were more euen and temperate. But besides all these reasons, the death of his father, happening at the same time, gaue him iust occasion to returne home, and take possession of his owne Kingdome, before he proceeded further in the second care, of adding more vnto it. This he did at reasonable good leisure: for the Aegyptian was not ready to follow him so farre and to bid him battailc, vntill the new yeere came in; which was the fourth of Iehoiakim, the first of Nabuchodonosor, and the last of Neco. In this yeere the Babylonian lying vpon the Banke of Euphrates (his owne Territorie bounding it on the North-side) attended the arriuall of Necho. There, after a resolued conten∣tion for victorie. Necho was slaine, and his Armie remaining forced to saue it selfe, which full ill it did, by a violent retrait. This victorie Nabuchodonosor so well pur∣sued, as he recouered all Syria, and what socuer the Aegyptians held out of their pro∣per Territorie towards the North. The Aegyptians being in this conflict beaten, and altogether for the present discouraged, Iehoiakim held himselfe quiet, as being friend in heart vnto the Aegyptian, yet hauing made his peace with the Chaldaean the yeere before; who contented with such profit as hee could then readily make, had for∣borne to lay any Tribute vpon Iuda. But this coole reseruednesse of Iehoiakim, was, on both sides, taken in ill part. The King Psammis, who succee∣ded vnto Necho, beganne to thinke vpon restoring , taken Prisoner by his Father, and setting him vp, as a Domestical Enemie, against his vngratefull brother. Against all such accidents, the Iudaean had prepared the vsuall remedy, practised by his fore-fathers: for he had made his owne sonne Iechonia King with him long be∣fore, 2. . 36. 9. in the second yeere of his owne Raigne, when the Boy was but Eight yeeres olde. As for this rumour of Iehoahaz his returne; the Prophet Ieremie foretold, that it should proue idle, saying: he shall not returne thither, but hee shall die in the place whi∣ther . 22. 11. & 12 they haue led him captiue, and shall see this Land no more. The Aegptians indeed, hauing spent all their Mercinarie forces, and receiued that heauie blow at Carche∣mish, had not remaining such proportion of sharpe steele, as of faire gold, which without other helpe, is of little effect. The valour of Neco was not in Psammis. A∣pries who raigned after Psammis, did once aduenture to shew his face in Syria; but after a bigge looke, he was glad to retire, without aduenturing the hazard of a bat∣taile. Wherefore this decaying Nation fought only with braue words, telling such friuolous tales, as men, that meane to doe nothing, vse, of their glorious acts fore∣passed, against Iosias and Iehoahaz. In this case it was easie for Iehoiakim to giue them satisfaction, by letting them vnderstand the sinceritie of his affection towardes them, which appeared in time following. But Nabuehodonosor went to worke more roundly. He sent a peremptorie to Iehoiakim, willing him not to stand vpon any nice points, but acknowledge himselfe a Subject, and pay him Tribute: adding hereunto such fearefull threats, as made the poore Iudaean lay aside all thought of Pharaoh, and yeeld to doe, as the more mighty would haue him. So he continued . Antiq. lib. 10. cap. 7. in the obedience of Nabuchodonosor three yeeres. At this time Ieremie the Prophet cried out against the Iewes, putting them in mind that he had now three and twen∣tie yeeres exhorted them to repentance, but because they had stopt their cares a∣gainst him, and the rest of the Prophets, hee now pronounced their captiuitie at hand, and that they should endure the yoke of bondage full seuentie yeeres. The same calamitie threatned to all the neighbouring Nations, to the Aegyptians, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumaeans, and the rest; foretelling that they should all drinke out of the Babylonian Pitcher, the wine of His furie, whom they had forsaken, and after the seuenty yeeres expired, that the Babylonians themselues should taste of the . 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. cup, and be vtterly subuerted by the Medes, & the Iudaeans permitted to return againe into their owne fields and Cities. The first imprisonment of the Prophet Ie∣remie seemes to haue beene in the fourth yeere of this Ieboiakim, at which time Ba∣ruch the Scribe wrote all his Prophecies out of his mouth, whom hee sent to reade them vnto the people, and after ward to the Princes, who offered them to the King: but fearing the Kings furie, they had first set Ieremie at libertie, and aduised him and Baruch to hide themselues. Iehoiakim, after he heard a part of it and perceiued the ill newes therein deliuered, made no more adoe, but did cut the Booke in pieces and cast it into the fire. All which Ieremie caused to be new written, with this addition; that the dead body of Iehoiakim, should be cast out, exposed in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost, and that there should be none of his seede to sit on the Throne of Dauid. Time thus running on, while Iehoiakim rested secure of all danger, as Tributarie to the Babylonian, yet well thought of by the Aegyptian; the mightie Citie of Tyre opposed it selfe against the Chaldaean forces; and vpon just confidence of her owne strength, despised all preparation that could be made against her. Now forasmuch as the terme of seuenty yeeres was prescribed vnto the desolation, as well of Tyre, as of Ierusalem, and other Townes and Countries; it is apparent, that they which referre the expugnation of this Citie vnto the nineteenth yeere of Nabuchodono∣sor, haue sure authoritie for their warrant. Whereupon likewise it followes of ne∣cessitie, that the siege thereof beganne in the seuenth of his Raigne; as hauing lasted thirteene yeeres. Here I will take leaue to intrude a briefe note, concerning the seuerall begin∣nings that arc reckoned of this great Prince his Rule, whereupon hath risen much disputation. The third yeere of Iehoiakim, was the last of Nabulassar, who being deliuered from other cares, tooke notice of such as had reuolted from him vnto Pharao Neco, and sent this Noble Prince, his sonne, with an Armie into Syria, to re∣claime them. In this expedition was Daniel carried away, who therefore makes Dan. c. 1. v. 1. Ierem. 25. 1. mention of the same yeere. The yeere next following, being the fourth of Ichoia∣kim, was the first of Nebuchadnezzar; which Ieremie affirmeth in expresse wordes; and from this we reckon all his time and actions that follow. In his three and twen∣tieth yeere he conquered Aegypt; and then beganne to raigne as a great Monarch, finding none that durst offend him. The second from this yeere it was, wherein he saw that vision, of the Image consisting of sundrie Metals; which did presigurate the succession of great Kingdomes, that should rule the Earth, before the com∣ming of Christ. I will not stand to dispute about this, which is the best conclusion that I find, of long disputations: but returne vnto the siege of Tyre, which beganne in the seuenth of his Raigne. The Citie of Tyre couered all the ground of an Island, that was diuided from the maine, by a deep & broad channell of the Sca. The Chaldaeans had no Fleet, and were no -men; the Tyrians, in multitude of goodly Ships, and skill to vse them, excel∣led all other Nations; and euery wind, from one part or other, brought needfull prouisions into the Citie. Wherefore neither force, nor famine could greatly hurt the place; where of the iudgements of God ( against it by Esay 23. Esay, Ieremie, Ezechiel, ) had threatned the destruction; and the obstinate resolution . 25. . 26. of Nabuchodonosor, had fully determined to performe it. This high-minded King, impatient of resistance, vndertooke a vast piece of worke; euen to fill vp the Sea, that parted the Island from the Continent. The Citie of olde Tyrus, that stood op∣posite to the new, vpon the firme Land, and the mountaine of Libanus neere adjoy∣ning that was loaden with Cedars, and aboundance of other trees, might furnish him with materials. Thirteene yeeres were spent, in this laborious, and almost hopelesse businesse. Which needeth not seeme strange: for Alexander working vpon that foundation which was remayning of Nabuchodonosors Peere; and being withall assisted by a strong Fleet, was yet seuen moneths erc he could make way in∣to the Citie. Wherefore, if the raging of the Sea was able to carrie away that wherewith Alexander laboured to couer a shelue; with much more violence could it ouerturne, and as it were consume, the worke of Nabuchodonosor, who laid his foundations in the bottome of the deepe; striuing as it were, to fill the emptie belly of this Cormorant; whereas the Macedonian did only stop the throat of it. Euerie man knowes, God could haue furthered the accomplishment of his owne threats, against this place (though it had not pleased him to vse, eyther miracle, or such of his more immediate weapons, as are Earth-quakes, and the like) by making at least the Seas calme, and adding the fauourable concurrence of all second helpes. But so it pleaseth him oftentimes, in chastising the pride of man, to vse the hand of man; euen the hand of man striuing, as may seeme, against all resistance of nature and fortune. So in this excessiue labour of the , Euerie head was made bald, and : 29. Ioseph. Antiq. euerie shoulder was made bare. Yet Nabuchodonosor would not giue ouer till hee was master of the Towne. When he was entred vpon this desperate seruice; whether it were so, that some losses receiued, some mutinie in his Armie, or (which is most likely; and so Iosephus Iud. l. 10. c. 7. reports it) some glorious rumours of the Aegyptians, gaue courage to his euill willers; Iehoiakim renounced his subjection, and beganne to hope for the contrarie of that which quickly fell out. For Nabuchodonosor gaue him no leisure to doe much hurt: but with part of his Armie marched directly into ; where the amazed King made so little resistance (the Aegyptians hauing left him, as it were in a dreame) that he entred Ierusalem, and laied hands on Iehoiakim: whom hee first bound and determined to send to Babylon, but changing counsell, hee caused him to be slaine in the place, and gaue him the Sepulchre of an Asse, to bee deuoured by beasis and ra∣uenous birds, according to the former Prophecies: leauing in his place, Iehoiakim or Iechonias his sonne; whom after three moneths and ten dayes, Nabuchodonosor re∣moued, and sent Prisoner to Babylon, with Ezekiel, Mardochaeus, and Iosedech, the high Priest. The mother of Iechonias, together with his seruants, Eunuchs, and all the ablest men, and best Artificers of the Land, were also then carryed away Captiues. This Iechonias, following the counsell of the Prophet, made no re∣sistance, but submitted himselfe to the Kings will: wherein hee both pleased God, and did that which was best for himselfe; though at the present it might seeme o∣therwise, to such as considered the euill that befell him, rather then the greater euill that he thereby auoided. This onely particular act of his is recorded; which was good. But it seemes that he was partaker, at least, of his Fathers faults, if not an : which was the cause, that his submitting himselfe to Gods pleasure did not his Estate: for so we reade in generall wordes, that he did in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Father had done. In his stead Nabuchodonosor esta∣blished his Vncle in the Kingdome of Iuda, and called him Zedechias, which is as much to say, as the Iustice of God. For like as Neco, King of Aegypt, had formerly displaced , after his Father Iosias was slaine, and set vp Iehoiakim, the sonne of another Mother; so Nabuchodonosor slue Iehoiakim, who depended on the Aegyptians, and carrying his sonne Iechonias Prisoner to Babel, gaue the King∣dome to this Zedechias, that was whole Brother to that Iehoahaz, whom Neco tooke with him into Aegypt. From Zedechias hee required an oath for his faithfull obe∣dience, which Zedechias gaue him, and called the liuing God to witnesse in the same, that he would remaine assured to the Kings of Chaldea. In the first yeere of Zedechias, Ieremie saw and expounded the Vision of the ripe and rotten Grapes, the one signifying those Iudaeans that were carried away captiue, the other those that stayed, and were destroyed. In the fourth of Zedechias, Ieremie wrote in a Booke all the euill that should fall vpon Babylon, which Book or scrole he gaue to Sheraia, when he went with the King Zedechias to Babylon, to visit Nabuchodonosor; willing him first to reade it to the Cap∣tiue Iewes, and then to bind it to a stone, and cast it into Euphrates, pronouncing these wordes: Thus shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise from the euill that I will bring vpon . This iournie of Zedechias to Babel is probably thought to haue beene in way of visitation, carrying some presents. But I further thinke, that hee had some suite there to make, which his Lordly Master refused to grant, and sent him away discon∣tented. Zer. 27. For at his returne all the bordering Princes sent Messengers to him, inciting him (as it seemes) to those vnquiet courses, from which Ieremie dehorted both him and them. The Prophet, by Gods appointment, made bonds and yokes; one of which he wore about his owne neck, others hee sent vnto the fiue Kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, and Zidon, by those Messengers which came to visite Zede∣chias: making them know, that if they and the Kings of Iuda abode in the obedience of Babylon, they should then possesse and enioy their owne Countries; if not, they should assuredly perish by the sword, by fire, and by pestilence. Hee also fore-told them, that those Vessells, which as yet remayned in Ierusa∣lem, should also trauaile after the rest, and at length they should bee restored a∣gaine. The same yeere Ananias, the false Prophet, tooke off the woodden Chaine which ware, in signe of the Captiuitie of the Iewes, and brake it: Vaunting, that in like manner, after two yeeres, God would breake the strength of Babel, and the yoke which he layed on all Nations; restore Iechonias, and all the Iewes, with the Vessells and riches of the Temple, and giue an end to all these troubles. But Ieremie in stead of his woodden Yoke ware a Coller of yron: and in signe that Ananias had giuen a deceitfull and false hope to the people, hee fore-told the death of this cold Prophet, which seized vpon him in the second moneth. After this, when Zedechias had wauered long enough betweene Faith and Passion, in the eight yeere of his Raigne he practised more seriously against Nabuchodonosor, with his Neighbours the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, Tyrians, and others that were promised great aides of the Aegyptians: in confidence of whose resistance, he determined shake off the Babylonian yoke. Hereof when Nabuchodonosor had knowledge, hee mar∣ched with his Armie in the dead Winter, toward Ierusalem, and besieged it. Iere∣mie perswaded Zedechias to render the Citie and himselfe: but being confident of the helpe from Aegypt, and being perswaded by his Counsellors, and false Prophets, that it was vnpossible that the Kingdome of Iuda should bee extirpate, vntill the comming of Silo (according to the Prophecie of Iacob ) hee despised the wordes of Gen 49. 10. Ieremie, and imprisoned him. For Ieremie had told the King, that the Citie should be Ier. 32. & 34. taken and burnt; that the King should not escape, but bee taken Prisoner, and brought to the presence of Nabuchodonosor; that he should not perish by the sword, but being carried to Babel, die his naturall death. Ierusalem being, the following yeere, surrounded by Nabuchodonosors Armie; the King of Aegypt, Pharao Hophra, according to Ieremie ( Herodotus calleth him Apries ) Jer. 44. entred the border of Iuda, with his Armie, to succour Zedechias, of whose reuolt he Herod. lib. 2. had beene the principall Author. But Ieremie gaue the Iewes faithfull counsell, wil∣ling them not to haue any trust in the succours of Aegypt: for hee assured them, that they should returne againe, and in no sort relieue them. And it fell out accor∣dingly. For when the Chaldaeans remoued from Ierusalem to encounter the Aegyp∣tians, these vaunting Patrons abandoned their enterprise, and taking Gaza in their way homeward returned into Aegypt, as if they had already done enough; leauing the poore people of Ierusalem to their destined miseries. In the meane while the Iewes, who, in their first extremitie, had manumised their Hebrew Bond-men (as Gods Law required at the yere of Iubile ) and made them free, Leuit. 25. 39. 40. &c. thereby the better to encourage them to fight; did now vpon the breaking vp of the Chaldaean Armie, repent them of their Charitie: and thinking all had beene at an end, held them perforce to their former slauerie. But the Chaldees being returned Ier. 34. to the siege, the Prophet Ieremie, when the State of Ierusalem beganne now to grow to extremitie, counselled Zedechias to render himselfe vnto them; assuring Ier. 39. him of his owne life, and the safetie of the Citie, if he would so doe. But his obsti∣nate heart conducted him to that wretched end, which his neglect of God, and his infidelitie and periurie, had prouided for him. Three and twentie Moneths (as some doe reckon it) or according to Iosephus Ier. 39. eighteene; the Babylonian Armie lay before Ierusalem, and held it exceeding straight∣ly besieged. For they built Forts against it round about, or (as P. Martyr hath it) ex∣truxerunt 2. King. 25. 1. contra eam turrem ligneam per circuitum: They surrounded the Citie with wood∣den Towers, so as the besieged could neither sally out, nor receiue into the Citie any supply of men or victualls. Iosephus reports, that they ouer-topped the Walls, Ioseph. Ant. Iud. lib. 10. cap. 11. with high Towers raised vpon mounts; from which they did so beat vpon the Wall with their Engines, that the defendants were compelled to forsake their sta∣tions. Now although it were so that the besieged also raised Counter-buildings, like vnto these, Yet the great King of Babel, who commanded all the Regions therea∣bouts, and had the Woods and Riuers to obey him, found meanes to ouer-throw all the Citizens endeuours; and to beat downe as fast from without, as they raised from within; the body and foundation of his owne workes being guarded, by the Walls of Ierusalem interposed; and theirs within, layed open to their enemies distur∣bance. Besides, both famine and pestilence (which commonly accompanie men streightly besieged) grew on fast vpon them, whereby, when the number, strength, and courage of the Iewes failed, the Chaldaeans made a breach, and forcing an entry, their Princes did seat themselues, as Lords of the Towne, in the middle gate. Zede∣chias beholding this vncomfortable sight, and finding no remedie of the danger present, lost both his courage and his hope at once; and shifted himselfe together with his Wiues, Children, Princes, and principall Seruants, out of the Citie, by a way vnder ground; leauing his amazed & guidelesse people, to the merciles swords of their enemies. Thus he, who, when Ieremie the Prophet perswaded him to ren∣der , despised both the Counsell of God, and the force of ; vsed now that remedie, which Wolphius truly termeth: triste, turpe, & : Wo∣full, shamefull, and vnfortunate. By this secret subterrane vault, Zedechias making his stealth, recouered (by the helpe of the darke night) the Plaines or Desarts of Iericho: but by reason of the traine, that followed him and his, (euery one leading with him those whom they most deare vnto them) hee was easily traced and pursued. How great soeuer the companie was that attended on him, yet, as Iosephus reports it, they on whose Ioseph. Antiq. l 10. cap. 11. fidelitie hee most reposed himselfe, no sooner beheld the Chaldaeans approch, but they all abandoned his defence, and shifted themselues into the Defarts as they could. For whom God had forsaken, no man followed, but the Ministers of his vengeance; by whom Zedechias being made Prisoner, with his Children, and Prin∣ces, he was conueighed to Rebla or Reblath a Citie (as some thinke) of Nephtalim, where Nabuchodonosor then lay, as a place indifferent Ierusalem and Tyre, with both which at once he had to doe. Now after Nabuchodonosor had laied before Zedekias the many graces and bene∣fits conferred vpon him, together with the notable falsehood and periurie, where∣with he had requited them; he commanded his Children, Princes, and Friends, to be slaine before his face. This being done, to the end that so lamentable a spectacle should be the last, that euer hee should behold in the World, hee caused his eyes to be torne out of his head, and so carried him in a slauish manner to Babel, where hee consumed the rest of his wretched life in perpetuall imprisonment. Herein this most maruailous Prophecie of Ezechiel was performed; Adducam in Babylo∣nem Ezech. 12. & ipsam non . I will bring him into Babylon, and he shall not see it. Thus in the Eleuenth and last yeere of Zedekias, which was the eighteenth of Nabuchodonosor, the Chaldaeans entred the Citie by force, where sparing no sexe nor age, they committed all to the sword that they therein found. In the yeere next following, Nabuzaradan, Generall of the Armie, burnt the Kings 3534. Palace, and the rest of Ierusalem: and after this fire had lasted from the seuenth to the tenth day, he also burnt the Temple of God to the ground, when it had stood foure hundred thirtie and one yeeres. After this vpon a second search, Nabuzaradan (not yet satiated with bloud) commanded seuentie and two others to bee slaughtered, which had hidden them∣selues from the first furie, to wit, the chiefe and the second Priest, two Commanders of Zedechias his men of Warre, fiue of his House-hold seruants, and others to 2. Kings last. that number; carrying away to Babylon the ablest of the people throughout all Iu∣daea; and leauing the poorest labouring soules, with some that followed the partie of Nabuchodouosor, to till the ground: ouer whom hee left Gouernour, the Ne∣phew of that Saphan, whom Iosias had formerly employed in the reformation of Religion, who is, for his iustice and equitie, by Iosephus highly commended. This man, a Iew by Nation, left Zedechias, as it seemeth, in the beginning of the warre: and by Ieremies desire to liue with him, it appeareth that he had embraced the same aduice, which the Prophet gaue vnto Zedechias; which was, to submit himselfe alto∣gether to the Babylonian, who being ordayned by God to exercise his iustice, was therefore resistlesse. The Prophet Ieremie being left to his owne choice, either to liue in Chaldaea, or elsewhere, he made election of , to whom he was recom∣mended; who not onely embraced Ieremie, but gaue comfort to all the other Iewes, that were left vnder his charge, promising them fauour and libertie, so long as they remained obedient Subiects to Nabuchodonosor, by whom hee was established Prouinciall Gouernour of his owne Nation. But ere that yeere was expired, a Prince of the late Kings house (who during the siege of Ierusalem, had kept himselfe out of the storme, with Baalis, King of the Am∣monites ) being followed by ten other chosen men, while feasted them in Maspha or Mitspa, the Citie of his residence, trayterously slue him, together with diuers Chaldaeans and Iewes that accompanied him. This done, hee made an escape, and in his way encountring with eightie persons, repairing towards Godoliah with presents, hee slue the most of them, and spared the rest, because they promised to discouer vnto him some Treasures, hidden in the fields during the warre. Hee also tooke with him a Daughter of Zedechias, committed to the care of Godoliah by Na∣buchodonosor. This practice and intent of Ismael had beene formerly discouered vn∣to by Iohanan, one of the Leaders of the few remayning Iewes; but Godoliah was incredulous. Iudaea being now left without a Gouernour (for Ismael durst not take it vpon him, but retired himselfe, or rather fled as fast as he could to the Ammonites ) the residue of the Iewes, fearing the reuenge of the Chaldaeans, resolued to flie away into Aegypt, and besought Ieremie to aske counsell of God for them: who readily made them answere, that if they remained in Iudaea, God would prouide for them, and shew them mercy; but if they sought to saue themselues in Aegypt, that they should then vndoubtedly perish. Notwithstanding this aduice, the Iewes held their deter∣mination; and despising the Oracle of God, and constrayning Ieremie and Baruch to accompanie them, they trauailed into Aegypt, and inhabited by the of Pharao, neere vnto Taphnes: where, when Ieremie often reprehended them for their Idolatrie, foretelling both the destruction of them∣selues, and the Aegyptians also, he was by these his owne hard∣hearted and vngratefull Countrimen, stoned to death; and by the Aegyptians, who greatly reueren∣ced him, buried neere the Se∣pulchre of their owne Kings. Finis Libri secundi. THE FISRT PART OF THE HISTORIE OF THE WORLD: INTREATING OF THE TIMES FROM the destruction of Ierusalem, to the time of PHILIP of Macedon. THE THIRD BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of the time passing betweene the destruction of , and the fall of the Assy∣rian Empire. §. I. Of the connexion of Sacred and Historie. THE course of Time; which in prophane Histo∣ries might rather bee discerned through the greatest part of his way, hitherto passed in some out-worne foot-steps, than in any beaten path, hauing once in Greece by the Olympiads, and in the Easterne Countries by the accompt from Nabonassar, left surer marks, and more applia∣ble to actions concurrent, then were the warre of Troy, or any other token of former date; be∣gins at length in the ruine of to disco∣uer the connexion of antiquitie fore-spent, with the storie of succeeding ages: Manifest it is, that the originall and progresse of things could ill bee sought in those that were ignorant of the first creation: as likewise that the affaires of Kingdomes and Empire afterwards growne vp, are not to be found among those, that haue now no state nor policie remaining of their owne. Hauing therefore pursued the storie of the world vnto that age, from whence the memorie of succeeding accidents is with little in∣terruption of fabulous discourse deriued vnto vs, I hold it now conuenient briefly to shew, by what meanes and circumstances the Historie of the Hebrewes, which of all other is the most ancient, may bee conioyned with the following times, wherein that Image of sundrie metalls, discouered by God vnto Nebu∣chadnezzar, did raigne ouer the earth, when Israel was either none, or an vnregar∣ded Nation. Herein I doe not hold it , to insist vpon those authotities, which giue, as it were by heare-say, a certaine yeere of some old Assyrian King vnto some action or euent, whereof the time is found expressed in Scripture: for together with the end of Ninus his line in Sar danapalus, if not before, all such computations were blotted out; the succession of Belochus and his issue that occupied that kingdome after∣wards, depending vpon the vncertaine relations of such, as were neither constant in assigning the yeeres of his beginning, of credit enough for others to relie vp∣on. Let it therefore suffice, that the consent and harmonie, which some haue found in the yeeres of those ouer-worne Monarchs, doth preserue their names, which o∣therwise might haue beene forgotten. Now concerning the later Kings of that Nation, howsoeuer it be true that we find the names of all or most of them in Scri∣ptures, which are recorded by prophane Historians, yet hereby could wee onely learne in what age each of them liued, but not in what yeere his raigne beganne or ended, were it not that the raigne of Nebuchadnezzar is more precisely applyed to the times of Iehoiakim and Zedekia. Hence haue we the first light whereby to the meanes of connecting the sacred and prophane Histories. For vnder Nebu∣chadnezzar was the beginning of the captiuitie of Iuda, which ended when 70. yeeres were expired; and these 70. yeeres tooke end at the first of Cyrus, whose time being well knowne, affoords vs meanes of looking backe into the ages past, and forwards into the race of men succeeding. The first yeere of Cyrus his raigne in Persia, by generall consent, is ioyned with the first yeere of the 55. Olympiad, where, that he raigned three and twenty yeeres before his Monarchie, and seuen yeeres af∣terwards, it is apparent, and almost out of controuersie. Giuing therefore foure hundred and eight yeeres vnto the distance betweene the fal of Troy, and the instau∣ration of the Olympiads by Iphitus; we may easily arriue vnto those antiquities of Greece, which were not meerely fabulous. As for Princes ruling the whilest in sun∣drie parts of the world, S. Augustine and others may be trusted in setting downe their times, which they had by Tradition from authors of wel-approued faith and industrie. From Cyrus forwards, how the times are vnto Alexander, and from him to the battaile of Actium, it were (peraduenture) in this place impertinent to set down. But seeing that the beginning and end of the are the markes whereby wee are chiefely directed, in passing from the first vnto the latest yeeres of the world, through any storie, with least interruption, it is very expedient that wee take some paines to informe our selues truely of the 70. yeeres, during which it continued, euen from Nebuchadnezzar vnto Cyrus. §. II. A briefe rehearsall of two opinions, touching the beginning of the captiuitie: with an answere to the cauills of PORPHYRIE, inueighing against S. MATTHEW, and DANIEL, vpon whom the later of these opinions is founded. MAny Commentators, and other Historians and Chronologers finde, that the captiuitie then beganne, when Iechonias was carried prisoner into Babylon, eleuen yeere before the finall destruction of Ierusalem Ezech. c. 1. v. 2. c. 3. v. 11. & 15 vnder Zedekias. This they proue out of diuers places in Ezekiel, espe∣cially out of the fourteenth chapter, where he makes a plaine distin∣ction betweene the beginning of the Captiuitie, and vtter destruction of Ierusalem by Nabuzaradan, in these wordes: In the fiue and twentieth yeere of our being in captiuitie, in the beginning of the yeere, in the tenth day of the moneth, in the foureteenth yeere after that the Citie was smitten. In which words hee beginneth the captiuitie in plaine termes, eleuen yeeres before the Citie was destroyed. Beroaldus is of opinion that it beganne in the first of Nabuchodonosor, and the fourth of Ioakim, which hee ende∣uours to proue out of the second of Chronicles, but more especially out S. Matthew, and Daniel, whose words afford matter of long disputation, but serue not to make good so much as Beroaldus would enforce. That place of S. Matthew, and the whole booke of Daniel, haue ministred occasion of scoffing and railing at the to that wretched man Porphyrie, who, not vnderstanding how the sonnes of King Iosias were called by diuers names, as Epiphanius hath shewed at large, thought that the Apostle had spoken hee knew not what in reckoning the sonnes, or, according to some translations, the Sonne and Nephewes of that good King, begotten about the time of the captiuitie. Vpon Daniel also the same Por∣phyrie doth spend the twelfth of his malicious books written against the Christians, affirming that these prophecies & visions remembred by Daniel, were written long after his death, and at, or neere the time of Antiochus Epiphanes. This fond sup∣position of his, , Apollonius, and others, haue sufficiently answered. For the seuentie Interpreters, who conuerted the old Testament about an hundred yeere before Epiphanes, did also turne this booke of Daniel out of Hebrew into Greeke, as a part of Scripture receiued. And were there no other argument to confound Por∣phyrie, than that of Alexander Macedon, it were sufficient, who liued diuers yeeres Mac. 1. . before Antiochus Epiphanes. For Iaddus the high Priest shewed that great Con∣queror, when he came towards Ierusalem to haue destroyed it, this booke of Da∣niel, Ioseph. ant. . wherein he beheld his owne glorie foretold, as the same was plainely expoun∣ded vnto him; which not only staied his hand from the harme of that Citie and people, but his assurance and resolution was so confirmed and strengthened there∣by, as despising all future peril and , he conquered Darius, and the Easterne Empire in a shorter time than Nabuchodonosor had done one Citie, to wit, Tyre in Phoenicia. It is true indeed that the Iewes them selues giue lesse authoritie to Daniel, than to Moses, and the Prophets, accompting his booke among those which they call Ceta∣phim, or Hagiographa, or holy Writings, which they say Esdras and the Seniors of the Synagogue compiled after their returne from Babylon. But first, that the book of Daniel (I meane so much as is found in the Hebrew ) is Canonicall: secondly, that it was written by Daniel himselfe, and not by Esdras and the Seniors; we may assure our selues by testimonie of Councels, and Fathers. For in the Councell of held about the yeere of our Lord 368. after the death of Iouinian the Emperour, and after the Nicene Councell three and fortie yeeres, this booke of Daniel was re∣ceiued verified and confirmed among the other Scriptures, as in the Epitomie of the same Councell it may be seen, and so doth Meliton the most ancient Bishop of Sardis number it, witnesse Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical historie, the fourth booke, and fiue and twentieth chapter, so doth the same in the Catalogue of Canonical bookes vpon Origen, so doth Hilarius in his Preface vpon the , and Epiphanius in his booke of Waights and , &c. To these I may adde S. Hierome, Gregorie Nazianzene, and others. For the Hagiographae bookes or holy Writings, the and Rabbines to be these, Daniel, Psalmes, Prouerbs, Iob, Canticles, Ruth, , Ecclesiastes, Hester, Esra, Nehemiah, and the Chronicles. And that it was Daniel, and not Esdras, that wrote this booke, Gods commande∣ment vnto him by his Angell, to seale vp the same to the time appointed, is an vn∣answerable testimonie. Yea that which exceedeth all strength of other proofe, our Math. 24. 15. Sauiour Christ who citeth no Apocryphal Scripture, in Mathew & Marke alleageth Mark. 13. 14. Daniel the Prophet, to wit, the last verse of his nineteenth chapter. Further, in the fift of Iohn, Christ distributeth the risen from the dead, as in Daniel the twelfth, verse the second. S. Paul describeth Antichrist out of Daniel, and the Reuelation is wholly an interpretation of Daniels visions. Dan. 12. §. III. That the 70. yeeres of captiuitie are to be numbred from the of Ierusalem; not from the migration of IECHONIA. HAuing thus farre digressed, in maintaining that authority, which must often be cited in the present argument, it is now conuenient, that wee returne vnto the differences of opinion, concerning the beginning of these 70. yeeres. Neither will I stand to trouble my selfe and others with laying open the grounds or weakenesse of that which Eusebius and some few namelesse Authors, haue sometimes held in this point, which is late∣ly reuiued by Beroaldus; but will foorth-with enter into consideration of that opinion, which many both ancient and late Writers haue so earnestly maintained, that it wants not much of being common. Foure Kings of Iuda were carried away captiues to Babylon: First, Manasses; then Iehoiakim, and with him among others, Daniel the Prophet: thirdly, Iechonias, and with him Ezekiel: lastly, Zedekias, at which time the Citie and Temple were de∣stroyed. To the first of these captiuities the beginning of the 70. yeeres is referred by none that I haue read; to the second by few and with weake proofe; to the third by very many and with much confidence. For those places of Ezekiel al∣readie cited, there is a strong argument gathered out of Ieremie, which may seeme to make the matter plaine. For the Prophet in comforting the people that were carried away with Iechonias, vseth these words: Thus saith the Lord, After 70. yeeres . 29. 10. be accomplished at Babel, I will visit you, and performe my good promise towards you, and cause you to returne to this place. But it stands indeed with little reason that we should seeke the interpretation of a prophecie out of circumstances, when the prophecie is such as doth sufficiently expound it selfe. Ieremie had alreadie, in the fourth yeere of Iehoiakim, denounced the iudgement of God against the Land, for the sinnes and impoenitencie of that obstinate people, in these wordes: Behold, I will send and take to me all the families of the North, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babel, my seruant, and will bring them against this Land, and against the Inhabitants thereof, and against all these Na∣tions round about, and I will destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an , and a continuall desolation. Moreouer, I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladnesse, the voice of the Bridgroome, and the voice of the , the of the mill stones, and the light of the candle, and this whole Land shall be desolate, and an astonish∣ment, and these Nations shall serue the King of 70. yeeres. And when 70. yeeres are expired, I will visit the King of Babel. Here wee see prescribed vnto the captiuitie the terme of 70. yeeres, which were to commence, neither when the was vttered; nor when Iehoiakim, who then raigned, was taken by ; nor yet in the time of Iechonia; but with the vtter desolation of the Citie, whereof Ieremie did againe giue notice to those that were alreadie in Babylon, at such time as he sent them the comfort of deliuerance before rehearsed. And so did the peo∣ple vnderstand this , in those times when they saw it accomplished, be∣ginning the 70. yeeres at the time of the desolation, as manifestly appeares in the 29. v. 16. 17. & 18. end of the Historie of Iuda, where it is said thus: They burnt the house of God, and brake downe the wall of Ierusalem, and burnt all the Places thereof with fire, and all the pre∣cious vessells thereof to destroy all: And they that were left by the sword, he away to 2. Chron. 36. 19. Babel, and they were seruants to him and to his sonnes, vntill the Kingdome of the had rule, to fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of IEREMIA, vntill the Land had her fill of her Sabbaths: for all the daies that she lay desolate, she kept Sabbath, to fulfill 70. yeeres. But in the first yeere of CYRVS King of Persia (when the word of the Lord, spoken by the mouth of IEREMIA, was finished) the Lord stirred vp the spirit of CYRVS. We seldome find one piece of Scripture so precisely and plainely expounded by another as in this prophecie, to haue afterwards beene the subiect of altercation. one can hardly deuise, how either the desolation could haue beene expressed more sensibly than it was by the Prophet, or the euent of the prophecie haue been more exactly set downe, than it was in the place now last of all cited. If it bee re∣quisite that we bring more proofe in so euident a case, the ninth Chapter of Daniel yeelds testimonie sufficient, vnto this exposition of Ieremia his prophecie, that Ie∣rusalem was to lie waste 70. yeeres. For in the first yeere of Darius the Mede, which was the last of the 70. Daniel obtained of God the that had been promised by praier, which he made vpon consideration of the time that was expi∣red: as he telleth vs in these wordes: In the first yeere of his raigne, 1 DANIEL vn∣derstood Dan. 9. . by bookes the number of the yeeres, whereof the Lord had spoken vnto IERE∣MIAH the Prophet, that he would accomplish 70. yeeres in the desolation of Ierusalem. So that howsoeuer the time of Daniel his owne captiuitie bee reckoned from the taking of Iehoiakim, and that the people carried away with Iechonia, did accompt, as well they might, the yeeres of their owne captiuitie; yet with the generall deso∣lation of the Countrie, wherein were few or none of the Israelites left remaining to inhabite, beganne in the nineteenth yeere of the great captiuitie, which by Gods appointment continued vnto the end of 70. yeeres. This I will not further seeke to proue, by the authoritie of Iosephus and others affirming the same; for as much as that which alreadie hath beene produced, is enough to satisfie any man that hath not fully determined to hold the contrarie. §. IIII. Sundrie opinions of the Kings which raigned in Babylon during the 70. yeeres. WHat Kings raigned in Babylon, during these 70. yeeres of the captiuity, and how long each of them did weare the , it is a of no great importance to know, for as much as neither their acts were notable in the age wherin they , nor the length of their raignes, any way helpefull to the concordance of times, fore-going or succee∣ding. The conquests recounted by Xenophon of Syria, Arabia, (or rather some part . . . 1. of it) Hyrcania, Bactria, and perhaps of some other Countries, may seeme fruits of the victories obtained by the Great (or by some of his Ancestors) in the former part of his life, before he betooke himselfe to ease, and to the sump∣tuous building of his great Babel, for the house of his Kingdome, and for the honor of his Maiestie, where it may seeme that he and his Heires kept a great state, and did very little. The idle behauiour of the Assyrian Souldiers, in such skirmishes as af∣terwards they had with the Medes, doth argue no lesse. For whereas vnder , they were so stout and industrious, that (to omit other proofes) they attempted, and finished, that hardie of worke, of winning the strong Citie of Tyre, by ioyning it vnto the continent, filling vp the deepe and broad channel of the Sea, it from the maine with a mole, or of , and other matter, the reparation whereof, when the Sea had washed it away, was the very greatest of Alexanders works in the times following, they became timorous, that they durst not approach to the enemy than their bowes would carrie, but were readie to turne their backs, as soone as any, though inferiour in numbers, aduenturing with∣in the distance offered to charge them. Now as their actions from the end of Nebuchadnezzars warres, till the ruine of . Cyro∣pag. lib. 1. & 1. 3 their Empire, were not worthie to be recorded; so was the distinction of their times, and raigne of their seuerall Kings, vnworthy of the great labour that hath in vaine been taken in that businesse. For when it is granted, that the captiuitie of Iuda, ending with that Empire, lasted 70. yeeres, we may as reasonably forbeare to search into the particular continuance of two or three slouthfull Kings, as we are to be ignorant of the ages of the Patriachs, and their children, liuing in the Aegyptian seruitude; resting satisfied in both with the generall assured summe. Yet for as much as many haue trauelled in this , vpon desire (as I take it) to approue the beginning and end of the 70. yeeres, not only by the raignes of o∣ther Princes, ruling else-where, but by the times of the themselues: I wil not refuse to take a little paines in collecting their opinions, and shewing what I thinke, may best be held for likely, if the certaine truth cannot be found. The opinions are many, and greatly repugnant, both in recounting the Kings themselues, and in setting downe the yeeres of their seuerall raignes. The first (as I take it) the surest, is theirs, who meerely follow the authoritie of the Scriptures, without borrowing any helpe from others. These name onely three Kings, Ne∣buchadnezzar, Euilmerodach, and Balthasar. Neither haue they only the silence of Daniel, who names none other to be their warrant, but the prophecie of Ieremie , and in a manner purposely teaching the very same. For God, by the mouth of that Prophet, shewing that he being absolute Lord of all, would dispose of all, according to his owne will, and making it knowne that he had some Coun∣tries here named, into the hands of the King of , saith thus: And all Nations . 27. v. 7. shall serue him, and his Sonne, and his Sonnes Sonne, vntill the very time of his Landcome also; then many Nations and great Kings shall serue themselues of him. These wordes expressing the continuance of the Chaldaean Empire, and number of the Kings, will hardly be qualified with any distinction. But indeede I finde no other of qualification to be vsed herein, than such as may grow out of mens desire to recon∣cile the Scriptures vnto profane authors. And this desire were not vniust, if the con∣sent of all histories were on the one side, and the letter of the holy Text were single on the otherside. But contrariwise, the Authors which are cited in this case, are so repugnant one to the other, and the proofes of their different reports are so slender and vnsuffici∣ent, that the succession of these Princes, had it not bin thus deliucred in Scriptures, but onely set downe by some Author of equall credite with the rest, might verie well haue found and deserued as good beliefe, as any of those things which they Iosephus . lib. 10. cap. . haue deliuered in this point. For some there are, who following Iosephus, deriue that Empire, as by descent from father to sonne, through fiue generations; begin∣ning with Nabuchodonosor the great, and giuing to him 43. yeres, to Euilmerodach 18, to Niglisar the sonne of Euilmerodach 40, to Labosardach the sonne of Niglisar 9. mo∣neths, and lastly to (whom Iosephus intimates to be of the race of Nabu∣chodonosor, without naming his father) 17. yeeres. And this opinion (saue that he forbeares to reckon the yeeres, and plainely calls Balthasar the sonne of Labo∣sardach ) Saint Hierome doth follow, alledging Berosus, and Iosephus as a sectator of Berosus for his Authors; though Berosus, as he is cited by Iosephus, report the matter farre otherwise. For he tells vs that Euilmerodach the sonne of Nabuchodonosor did Ios. . Ap∣pian. lib. 1. raigne but 2. yeeres, being for his and lust, slaine by his sisters husband , who occupied the kingdome after him 4. yeeres, and left it to his owne sonne Labosardach, who being an -conditioned boy, was at the end of 9. moneths slaine by such as were about him, and the kingdome giuen to one Naboni∣dus, who held it by the election of the , and left it vnto Cyrus after 17. yeeres. This relation ill agrees with that of , and both of them as bad with the Scriptures, in number either of yeeres, or of generations; yet the particularities which they handle, haue procured vnto them some authoritie, so that the names which they haue inserted, are taken as it were vpon trust. There is a third opinion, which makes the three last kings brethren, and sonnes of Euilme∣rodach; and this may well enough agree with the Scripture: though I had rather beleeue Xenophon, who saith that the last king of Babylon was immediate successour . . libr. 4. to his father. But whereas the Author of the Scholasticall Historie, who is foun∣der of this opinion, placeth betweene him that tooke Ierusalem, and , another Nabuthodonosor: plaine it is that he hath, out of any Historie sacred or pro∣fane, as little warrant to guide him, as we haue reason to follow him. Eusebius, , Seuerus, and Theodoret, vpon better ground, haue supposed, that and Balthasar were brethren and sonnes of the great Nabuchodonosor. This is built on the fift chapter of Daniel, wherein Balthasar (for of Euilmerodach there is none that euer doubted) is often called Nabuchodonosor his sonne. And so common grew this explication, that Saint Hierome called it the vulgar opinion. But the place of Ie∣remie before cited, prooues that Balthasar was not the sonne indeede, but the grand∣child of that great conquerour, though by the phrase very common in Scriptures, and familiar in those Easterne languages, he was called the sonne. Annius his Metasthenes hits very rightly the 70. yeres of captiuity, giuing to Nabu∣chodonosor 45. yeeres, to Euilmerodach 30. yeeres, and to the three sonnes of , nephews of Nabuchodonosor 14. yeeres; that is, to Reg-Assar the eldest sonne three yeeres, to Lab-Assar Dach the sonne sixe yeeres, and to the third sonne fiue. To this accompt with the Scriptures, both in the whole summe of yeeres, and in the number of generations, I haue sometime subscribed, as not da∣ring to reiect an appearance of truth, vpon no greater reason than because the Au∣thor was of Annius his edition. Yet could I not satisfie my selfe heerein; both for that none of the Ancient, and few such of the moderne Writers as deserue to be re∣garded, haue consented with this Metasthenes; and for that in making succeede vnto his brother in the kingdome, and not vnto his father, he is wholly a∣gainst , whose Historie of the elder Cyrus in his Assyrian warre I can not slightly value in many respects, and especially because it is very agreeable to the Scriptures, in the taking of Babylon, while the king was at his drunken feast. Seeking therefore diligently into all circumstances that might giue any light in this obscuritie, I found manifest proofe, that the time allotted vnto Balthasar, by Annius his Metasthenes, was farre short of the truth, which is enough to render all . . verse 1. & 27. suspected that he hath said in distributing what part of the 70. yeeres hee pleased a∣mong the rest. For in the third yeere of Balthasar, Daniel saw a vision, after which he was sicke certaine dayes, but when hee rose vp, he did the kings businesse: from which businesse, that hee did afterwards withdraw himselfe, and liue retired, so long that he was forgotten in the Court, it appeares plainely, both by the many words which the old Queene vsed to set out his sufficiencie, and by the Kings asking of him, when he came into his presence, whether he were Daniel. Now to thinke Dan. c. 5. v. 11, 12, & 13. that a man of such account and place as Daniel had held, could in two yeeres haue beene worne out of remembrance, were in my iudgement a very conceipt, which rather than I would entertaine, I can well be contented, to thinke the whole Dan. 2. 49. storie (thus related) a part of Annius his impostures. Out of these reports of Iosephus, Berosus, and others, many new opinions are fra∣med, by coniectures of late Writers. For the endurance of the captiuitie being 70-yeeres, and these yeeres extending vnto the first of Cyrus, in which course of time Nebuchadnezzar, his sonne and grand-child, must haue raigned; it seemed need∣full to supply the yeeres of these three descents, by inserting some, whose raignes might fill vp the whole continuance of the captiuitie, with which the time allotted by Berosus and others, to Euilmerodach and Balthasar, ioyned vnto the yeeres fol∣lowing the nineteene of Nebuchadnezzar, (wherein Ierusalem was laid desolate) are nothing euen. Therefore Mercator and others following him, fashion the yeeres of Euilmero∣dach in this sort. They say, that the 18. yeeres giuen to him by Iosephus in the tenth of his Antiquities, should be read and numbred 28. yeeres, and the two yeeres that Berosus hath allowed to Euilmerodach should be written 23. in the first number the figure of (1) is mistaken for the figure of (2) and in the latter there should haue bin added the figure of (3) to that of (2:) this granted (to wit) that Euilmerodach raigned 28. yeeres, whereof fiue together with his father, and 23. after his death, and the same number of 23. added to the 25. which Nabuchodonosor liued after the destruction of Ierusalem, make 49, then 4. yeeres of Niglisar according to Berosus, 9. moneths of Labassardach his sonne, and 17. yeeres of Labonidus or Balthasar make vp the number of 70. yeeres to the first of Cyrus. But whether by errour in figures, or in words, the numbers be vtterly mistaken, in all copies extant; vpon how weake a foundation doe they build, who haue nothing to helpe them, saue onely the bare names of two vnknowne Kings, found in Authors manifestly corrupted, and such as if they had beene entirely extant, were not worthy, to haue that place of Ieremie called into dispute, in regard of their authoritie? §. V. A more particular examination of one opinion touching the number, persons, and raignes of the Babylonian Kings. OTher suppositions, little different in substance from this of Mercator, I purposely forbeare to rehearse, as falling vnder the same answere. That of Ioseph Scaliger I may not forget, as deseruing to be consi∣dered apart from the rest. He giues to Nebuchadnezzar 44. yeres, to Euilmerodach 2, to Belsazer, 5: and to Nabonidus 17. So that from the 19. of Nabuchadnezzar, in which Ierusalem was destroyed, vnto the time of Cyrus he accompteth onely 59. yeeres; beginning (as many doe) the captiuitie 11. sooner, from the transportation of Iechonia. But hereof enough hath beene said al∣ready. That which we are now to consider, is his distribution of the time running betweene the 19. of Nabuchadnezzar, and the fall of the Caldoean Empire: wherein if he haue , then is all further inquisition friuolous. Concerning the length of Nabuchadnezzars raigne, I shall hereafter vpon better occasion my opinion. The time which he giues to , is very short, and more precisely with Berosus than with the Scriptures. For wee find in Ieremie, that this Euilmerodach in the first of his raigne, shewing all fauour to Iechonia, did among other things take order for him at his table; and that he did con∣tinually eate bread before him all the dayes of his life. His portion was a continuall portion giuen him of the King of Babel, euery day a certaine, all the dayes of his life . 52. 33. & 34. vntill he died. The very sound of these words (which is more to be esteemed, than the authoritie of Berosus, were he perfectly extant) imports a farre longer time than two yeeres, wherin Iechonia, vnder this gentle Prince, enioyed the comfort sent by God, whose commaundement he had obeyed in yeelding himselfe to Nabuchadnez∣zar. Indeed how long Iechonia did liue it can not be proued; but plaine it is hereby, that all his remaining daies hee did cate bread before this King. Now that hee li∣ued not so short a while after this as 2. yeeres, it is more than likely, for he was but 55. yeeres old when he was set at liberty, hauing bin 37. yeeres in the prison, where∣into he was cast at the age of 18. yeeres; after which time it seemes plaine that hee begat Salathiel, as well by the age of Zorobabel, who is said to haue beene but a yong man, and one of Darius his Pages threescore yeeres after this, as by other circum∣stances of his imprisonment it selfe. Of Belsazer, to whom Scaliger giues the next fiue yeeres, naming him also Labo∣rosoardoch, I should wonder why he calls him Nabuchadnezzars daughters sonne, were it not that herein I find him very carefull to helpe out Berosus, by shifting in his Niriglissoroor, as husband to Nabuchadnezzars daughter, and Protector of his son foure of these yeeres; by which meanes there remaines about one yeere to Bel∣sazer alone, agreeing neerely with the 9. moneths assigned by Berosus to the sonne of Niglisar. But Ieremie hath told vs that it was to Nabuchadnezzar, and to his son, and to his sonnes sonne (not to his daughters sonne) that the Empire was promi∣sed: which difficultie if Scaliger could not helpe, it was well done of him, to passe it ouer with silence. Nabonidas the last of these (whome others, desirous to reconcile Berosus to the Scriptures) haue iudged to be all one with Balthasar, is by thought to bee Darius of the Medes. But herein Scaliger is no firme Berosian: for Berosus makes him of the same stocke or race a Babylonian. I speake not this to disgrace the trauaile of that most learned man (for it highly commends his diligence and iudgement, that he was not so wedded to any author, as affected with the loue of truth) but to shew that he himselfe hauing in some points disliked those Writers, whome in generall he approueth, might with greater reason haue wholly reformed them by the Scrip∣tures, wherein can be no errour. Two things there are which chiefly did breed or confirme this opinion in Scaliger, that hee whome calls Nabonidus, was the same whom Daniel had called Darius of the Medes: First, the phrase of Scrip∣ture, which signifies vnto vs, that Darius tooke the kingdome, not saying that hee wanne it by force ofarmes; Secondly, a fragment of Megasthenes found in Eusebius, wherein this Nabonidus is called the Median. Touching the word of the Originall, or of the Greeke translation, which expressing no force of armes, doth only signifie, that Darius tooke or receiued the kingdome; I see no reason why we should ther∣upon inferre, that the next king entred by Election: seeing Daniel relateth not the meanes and circumstances of Balthasars death, but onely the swift accomplishment of his owne prophecie. Neither could it indeede haue properly beene said (if Da∣niel had cared to vse the most expressiue termes) that Darius of the Medes breaking into the citie, did win the kingdome; seeing this was performed by Cyrus in the ab∣sence of Darius, though by his forces, and to his vse. Now concerning the fragment of Megasthenes, true it is, that in Eusebius his workes printed at Basile, in the yeere 1559. I finde onely thus much of Megasthenes, cited out of ; That Nabu∣chodonosor was more valiant than Hercules; that hee subdued all Lybia, and the rest of Asia as farre as to the Armenians; and that as the Chaldoeans report, being re∣turned into his kingdome, and rapt with a diuine furie, he cried with a loude voice: O Babylonians, I foretell yee of a great calamitie that shall come vpon you, which neyther Bel, nor any of the Gods shall auert: There will come a Persian, halfe an Asse, that shall bring slauery vpon yee: and that, this and the like when he had spoken, he vanished. Of all this I beleeue little or nothing, sauing that Nabuchodonosor knew before-hand, that his Empire should be translated, as Daniel had foretold from the golden head, to the siluer brest. But that he wan all Africa or Lybia, I hold it neither true nor pro∣bable. If Scaligers copy of Eusebius were the more perfect, out of which Megasthenes tells vs that Nabuchodonosor wanne both Afrike and Spaine, I beleeue the fragment so much the lesse: and am as little moued with the authoritie of it, where it calls a Median the pride and confidence of the Assyrians, as where it tells of Nebuchad∣nezzar his owne vanishing away. Indeed that same title of halfe an Asse, by which he calleth Cyrus, makes me to suspect the fable as cunningly forged out of Apollo his Oracle, wherein he termeth him a Mule, because his parentage was more noble on the mothers side, than on the fathers; as Mules are begotten by Asses vpon Mares. And thus much in answer of the two principall foundations whereon this opinion is built. As for the concinnitie and coherence which it hath within it selfe, I easily allow it. But this proues nothing, for meere fictions haue not wanted these com∣mendations: neither can any man beleeue that one so iudicious, industrious and deepely learned as Ioseph Scaliger, would ouer-shoote himselfe in setting downe re∣pugnancies. It now remaineth to examine the agreement of this with the Scriptures, from which there is no appeale. And herein it seemes that Scaliger, well knowing his owne sufficiencie, hath beene little carefull to satisfie men that would frame Argu∣ments against him. For if the prophecie of Daniel were true, that the kingdome of Balthasar was diuided, and giuen to the Medes and Persians, either wee must thinke that Darius of the Medes was not Nabonidus, or else wee must bethinke our selues what Persian it might be that shared the kingdome with him. For it is not more certaine, that Balthasar lost his life and kingdome, than that his kingdome was diui∣ded and giuen to the Medes and Persians. Neither did the Medes and Persians fall out and fight for it, as by supposing Nabonidus to haue beene Darius, they should be thought to haue done; but these two Nations did compound the body of that Empire, and were accounted as Lords ouer all the subiect prouinces, in so much that the Greeke Historians did commonly call those warres which Darius, and after him Xerxes, made vpon Greece, The warres of the Medes. Yea to cleare this point, Daniel himselfe resembles that King, with whom Alexander fought, vnto a Ramme Dan. 8. 20. with two hornes, calling him the King of the Medes and Persians. Wherefore the whole Nation of Chronologers were not to haue been condemned by Ioseph Scaliger, for maintaining vpon such good grounds, that Darius of the Medes, was partner with Cyrus in his victories, and not a Chaldoean King by him subdued. Neither was Iosephus to be the lesse regarded, for affirming that Balthasar was destroyed by Dari∣us of the Medes, and his nephew Cyrus, though herein hee varied from Berosus, and others, whose authoritie elsewhere he gladly citeth. For Iosephus had no reason to beleeue any mans faith or knowledge of those times, halfe so well as Daniels, whom I beleeue that hee vnderstood as farre as was needefull in this case. Lawfull it was for him to alleage all Authors that had any mention, though vnperfect of the same things that were contained in the writings of the Iewes, to whose histories thereby he procured reputation in the Roman world, where they were strangers, and might seeme fabulous. so Eusebius, and other Writers, willingly em∣brace the testimonies of heathen bookes making for the truth in some particulars; yet will they not therefore be tried in generall by the selfe same Ethnicke philoso∣phers, but leaue them where they are against the truth; as Iosephus in this case hath left Berosus. And thus much I thought it meete to say of Scaligers opinion in this point; holding neuerthelesse in due regard his learning and iudgement, which if in some things it had not failed, the miracle had beene very great. §. VI. What may be held as probable of the Persons and Times of NABVCHO∣DONOSOR his successors. IT now remaines that I freely acknowledge mine owne weaknes, who cannot find how the 70. yeeres of captiuitie are to be diuided among them which raigned in Babylon, though I finde that the distribution made of them, in such wise as already is rehearsed, be ill agreeable to the holy Scriptures. Wherefore I may truely say with Pererius, that wee ought liberally to pardon those whose haue failed them in the slipperie wayes of Chronologie, wherein both learning and diligence are subiect to take a fall at one time or other, by ignorance, forgetfulnesse, or heedelesse reckoning. Yet will I aduenture to deliuer my opinion, wherein the iudgement of Lyra and others (holding those onely to haue raigned ouer Chaldoeans, whose Names are found in the Scriptures) appeares more conformable to reason and account of time, than any of the other Sentences or Coniectures before rehearsed. Not that I will take vpon me to defend Lyra his Coniectures, when hee supposeth by and Labosardach to be meant the same persons which are called in Scrip∣tures Euilmerodach and Balthasar (for this can by no good colour be maintained) but onely to shew that the Kings by him cited, are likely to haue occupied the whole time of seuenty yeeres. First therefore let vs consider the raigne of Nebuchadnezzar, in whose eighteenth yere Ierusalem was taken and sackt, but in his nineteenth layd vtterly desolate. Most of Writers haue giuen to him 43. yeeres of raigne, following therein Bero∣sus. There are who haue added one yeere more; and some haue made it vp 45. To dispute about the certainety were needlesse: in shewing by what length of time the Scriptures measure him, we shall shew the certaine truth. Manifest it is, that the 19. yeere of Nebuchadnezzar, is ioyned with the 11. of 2. Kin 2. 5. 8. & Ierem. 51. 12. Zedekia; as also that his eight yeere, was the first yeere of Iechonia his captiuitie; the raigne of Zedekia occupied all the meane space being of 11. yeeres. This is generally 2. King. 24. 12. agreed vpon, so that it needes no further proofes: As for the beginning of his suc∣cessor 2. King. 25. 27. & . 52. . Euilmerodach, it was in the seuen and thirtieth yeere of his captiuitie; so that Nebuchadnezzar after his eight yeere (which was the first of Iechonia his bon∣dage) raigned 35. whole yeeres, and peraduenture a good part of the sixe and thir∣tieth, forasmuch as Iechonia was inlarged with so great fauour, not vntill the end of the yeere. Substracting therefore out of these foure and forty, which raigne did wel-neere occupie, those eighteene yeeres of his which passed a∣way before the captiuitie of Iuda, and ruine of the citie, we haue remaining sixe and twenty yeeres of the seuentie, that were almost wholy spent, when his sonne be∣ganne to raigne. It is now to be considered how the remainder of the seuentie yeeres were diuided betweene the kings ruling in vntill the first of Cyrus. A question more dif∣ficult (as I said before) than greatly needefull: the whole summe being certaine, and the distinction of times affording no benefit in knowledge of their actions, who were slouthfull Princes. Neither can any man the more iustly suspect the begin∣ning or end of the whole 70. yeeres, for that the distribution of some part of them is only coniecturall; seeing that none who giues any other termes to their begin∣ning or end, hath refused to follow both vnlikely and desperate coniectures in diui∣ding them. I will therefore be bold to doe as others haue done; knowing well be∣fore-hand, that whosoeuer shall discouer my errour, must doe mee the pleasure (which I could rather wish in a case more materiall) of making mee to vnderstand the truth. Of the foure and forty yeeres remayning in accompt at death, we are to take away the last, which was the first of Darius the Mede, and then ha∣uing authority good enough to warrant vs from blame of presumption, in giuing vs seuenteene yeeres to Balthasar, we finde left in our hands to bestow vpon sixe and twenty yeeres. Of the yere belonging to Darius the Mede, I haue already spoken what I thought sufficient, in deliuering my opinion of the begin∣ning & continuance of this captiuity. That Balthasar did raigne seuenteene yeeres, we haue the authority of Iosephus, before cited in expresse words; We haue also the generall consent of all, or the most late Writers, interpreting Berosus his Nabonidus, who raigned so long; and Balthasar to haue beene one. But nothing moueth me so much to beleeue this Tradition, as first those euident places in Daniel, shewing that Dan. c. 8. v. 1. & 27. &c. 5. v. 11, 12. & 13. in the third yeere of Balthasar he followed the Kings businesse, and yet was forgot∣ten ere the end of his raigne, (a proofe sufficient of no few yeeres, passing vnder this man, especially seeing it is no where found that Daniels emploiments tooke end ei∣ther that yeere or the next.) Secondly, the consideration of Cyrus his warres against the Assyrians, which beginning with the death of this mans father, and being al∣waies prosperous, could hardly haue occupied any longer time, though wee make large allowance to his deedes in the lower Asia, which fell out in the mid-way: I haue already shewed, that there appeares in the Scriptures likelihood enough to make it credible, that the raigne of Euilmerodach was not short: and that men of great iudgement haue found it most probable, that he was King three and twentie yeeres. More, I thinke, they would haue allowed him, had not the desire of satis∣fying Berosus caused them to rest content with this. And surely it were greatly to be wished, that bookes of such antiquitie, as those of Berosus, were extant without corruption; a great light (no doubt) they would yeeld in many darke passages of Antiquitie. I will yet confesse, that were his workes neuer so excellent, and in all things else vnquestionably true, I would not therefore condescend vnto him in some one point, wherein the Scriptures were his open enemie. How much lesse ought I to obey a broken fragment of his, containing only seuen or eight lines, and part euen of the title corrupted, as they beleeue that follow him in the rest? The Scriptures haue told vs that God gaue the Empire to Nebuchadnezzar, to his sonne, Ierem. 27. 7. and to his sonnes sonne: How long each of them held it, wee finde not expressed; yet would we gladly know it of Berosus, or of any other that would teach vs; proui∣ded alwaies, that helping vs in a particularitic, he destroy not thereby the generall truth. More words are needlesse. It is enough to say with others, that Berosus or Iosephus who cited him, hath bin wronged by the carelesnesse of Scribes; and that it was as easie for those Scribes to erre in writing two for sixe & twentie, as for three and twentie, or perhaps more easie. For the omission of the second figure, was as likely the one way as the other; and the Character 5. signifying 6. hath a neerer re∣semblance of β that stands for 2. than hath γ which is vsed for 3. So that the nu∣merall notes β 5. expressing 26. were not safe enough from being mistaken in the true copie, and might be altered, as ill written, if some crooked hand, or other mis∣chance not vnusuall, had omitted the first stroke of the former letter, or added a dash to the latter, which might cause them to seeme not two different figures, but the one a correction of the other, which how it could be supposed in βγ standing for 23. I doe not well perceiue. As for the arithmeticall figures now in vse, they were long after the time of Iosephus brought in by the Arabians, and therefore doe not appertaine to this businesse; vnlesse we should ghesse that his works were cor∣rupted in that vnlearned age, which following the Saracen conquest, was little occu∣pied in the studies of humanitie, but in a sort wholly giuen ouer to the doctrine of Aristotle. If this will serue to make Berosus our friend, so let it be; if not, I will not purchase the fauour of his authoritie, by forsaking Ieremie and Daniel, when they seeme his opposites. §. VII. Of the victories which NABVCHODONOSOR obtained betweene the destruction of Ierusalem and conquest of Aegypt. WIth what actions this time of 70. yeeres was entertained by the Baby∣lonian Kings, few haue written, or little is remaining in record. Which may peraduenture haue bin some cause that the time it selfe was, and is yet sought to bee abridged, as not hauing left sufficient matter to witnesse the length of it. But by such an argument wee might as well deny to many people euen their being. For euery Nation (I know not whom I should except) betweene the beginning and last end of it, hath in some slothfull age rather dreamt away the time, than spent it. It is therefore no maruell, if the posteritie of Nabuchodonosor, finding all things readie to their hand, which their hearts could haue desired, betooke themselues to their ease and pleasures, thinking perhaps, like the prodigall sonnes of fathers, their owne wisedome greater, which how to enioy, than that of their Ancestors, which wearied away their daies in the restlesse trauell of purchasing: Though indeede the raigne of Nabu∣chodonosor was so diuided, that his youthfull and stronger yeeres hauing beene ex∣ercised in victorious armes, no small part of his life was remaining to be spent in e∣stablishing what was gotten, and gathering the fruit of his worthie labours past. The nineteenth yeere of his raigne it was, when destroying vtterly the great and mightie Citie of Ierusalem, hee enriched himselfe with abundance of spoyle, and terrified all that would offer to resist him, by that fearefull example. From that time forward, he, vntill his three and twentieth yeere, laboured in the conquest of those adioyning Regions, which God had exposed vnto his sword, & commanded to weare his yoke; namely, the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Tyrians, Sidonians, and Aegyptians, though some of these were already become his followers, and ser∣ued vnder him, when Ierusalem was beaten down and burnt. But the Tyrians, whose Citie was founded on an Iland, safe enough from any danger of a Land armie, and whose fleet was so strong, that they needed not to feare any enemy at sea, were nei∣ther danted with the fall of their neighbour Cities, nor with the obstinate resoluti∣on of this mightie Prince, imploying all his power to their subuersion. That the Citie of Tyre was rather well pleased, than any way discouraged with the fall of Ierusalem (which had held the same course that Tyrus did, and endured all that might be in the same quarrell against the common enemy) it appeares by the words which Ezechiel condemneth as the common voice of Tyrus; AHA, the gate Ezech. 26. 2. of the people is broken, it is turned vnto me; for seeing shee is desolate, I shall be replenished. Yet at the length, euen in the nineteenth yeere of Nabuchodonosor, that great worke of his, whereof we haue alreadie spoken, began to appeare aboue the waters, and threaten them with ineuitable mischiefe. But those prophecies of Ieremie and of Esay, which appoint vnto this desolation Ier. 25. of Tyre the same terme of 70. yeeres, that was prescribed vnto the raigne of the Esai. 23. 15. Chaldaeans, doe plainely shew, that shee followed Ierusalem, the same nineteenth yeere of Nabuchodonosor, in the same, or a very like fortune. The particularities, which doubtlesse were memorable in the issue of so great and laborious a siege, are in a manner vtterly lost. Thus much we finde, That the Citizens perceiuing the Towne vnable to hold out, embarked themselues, and fled into the Isle of Cyprus. Neuerthelesse it seemes that this serued only the principall men, who esca∣ping with their goods, abandoned the poorer sort vnto the enemies furie. For not only such people of Tyre as dwelt on the Continent (who are called her Daughters in the field) were put to the sword; but the like execution was done in the streets, into which, with excessiue labour, the Assyrian made way for his Horses and Cha∣riots. Thus NABVCHODONOSOR caused his Armie to serue a great seruice against Ezech. c. 2. v. 8. 10. 11. TYRVS, wherein euery head was made bald, and euery shoulder was made bare, yet had he . 29. 18. no wages, nor his Armie; but was faine to rest contented with the Honor of hauing destroied that Citie, which in all mens iudgements had beene held inuincible. The destruction of these two great and powerfull Cities, hauing made the name of the dreadfull in the eares of all the Nations thereabout, Nabuchodono∣sor vsed the aduantage of that reputation which hee had obtained by victories al∣readie gotten, to the getting of more, and more profitable, with lesse paine. The Kingdome of Aegypt was the marke at which he aimed; a Country so abounding in all riches and pleasures, that it might wel haue tempted any Prince, finding him∣selfe strong enough, to seeke occasion of quarrell against it; and so farre an enemie to the Crowne of Babylon, that had it beene poorer, yet either it must haue beene sub∣dued, or the conquest of Syria could ill haue beene established. Neuerthelesse it was needfull, that before hee entred into this businesse, the Countries adiacent should be reduced into such termes, that either they should wholly stand at his de∣uotion, or at least bee vnable to worke him any displeasure. And herein the of God concurred, as in all prosperous enterprises, with reason of state. For the people of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Damascus, Kedar, Hazor, and other adioyning Re∣gions, whom God for their sins had condemned to fall vnder the Babylonian swords, were such, as regarding onely their owne gaine, had some of them, like Rauens, fol∣lowed the Chaldaean Armie, to feede vpon the carcasses that fell by the crueltic thereof; others taking aduantage of their neighbours miseries, occupied the Coun∣tries which were by his victories belonging to Nabuchodonosor; al of them thinking, that when the Assyrian had satisfied his furie, he should be faine to forsake those de∣solate parts, and leaue the possession to those that could lay hand vpon it. Particu∣larly the Edomites and Philistims had shewed much malice to the Iewes when their . 25. 12. & 15. Citie was taken. What good seruice they had done to the Chaldaeans, I finde not; if they did any, it is likely to haue been with reference to their own purposes, where∣in . 25. 3. they were disappointed. The Ammonites were not contented to reioyce at the . 49. 1. fall of Ierusalem, but presently they entered vpon the Country of Gad, and took pos∣session, as if not the Assyrians, but they, had subdued Israel. Neither can I perceiue what other ground that practice had of Baalis King of the Ammonites, when he sent Ismael, a Prince of the bloud of Iuda, to Gedalia, whom the King of Babel had left Gouernour ouer those that remained in Israel, and to carry captiue into the Ammonites Countrie the people that abode in Mizpah, than a desire of embroiling Nabuchodonosor with so many labours at once, as should make him retire into his owne Country, and abandon those wasted Lands to himselfe and others, for whom . 40. 14. & 41. 2. & 10. they lay . Such or the like policie the Moabites did exercise; whose . 28. 27. &c. pride and wrath were made frustrate by God, and their dissimulation condemned, as not doing right. All these Nations had the art of rauening, which is familiar to such as liue or bor∣der vpon desarts; and now the time afforded them occasion to shew the vttermost cunning of their theeuish wits. But Nebuchadnezzar did cut asunder all their de∣uices by sharpe and suddaine war, ouer-whelming them with vnexpected ruine, as it were in one night; according to the prophecies of Esay, , and Ezekiel, who 16. 14. fore-told, with little difference of words, the greatnesse and swiftnesse of the mi∣serie that should come vpon them. With which of them he first began, I find not; it seemes that Moab was the last which felt his hand: for so doe many good Au∣thors interpret the prophecie of Esay, threatning Moab with destruction after three yeeres, as hauing reference to the third yeere following the ruine of Ierusalem; the next yeere after it being spent in the Aegyptian expedition. This is manifest, that all the principall Townes in these Regions were burnt, and the people slaine, or made slaues, few excepted, who being preserued by flight, had not the courage to returne to their habitations ouer-hastily, much lesse to attempt any thing against Nabucho∣donosor, but liued as miserable out-lawes, or at least, oppressed wretches, vntill the end of the seuentie yeeres, which God had prescribed vnto the desolation of their Countries, as well as of the Land of Iuda. §. VIII. That Aegypt was conquered, and the King therein raigning slaine by NABVCHODO∣NOSOR, contrarie to the opinion of most Authors: who following HERO∣DOTVS and DIODORVS, relate it otherwise. WHen by a long course of victorie Nabuchodonosor had brought into subiection all the Nations of Syria, & the bordering Arabians, in such wise, that no enemie to himselfe, nor friend of the Aegyptian, was left at his back, that might giue impediment vnto his proceeding, or take aduantage of any misfortune; then did hee forth-with take in the conquest of Aegypt himselfe, vpon which those other Nations had formerly beene depending. Of this expedition, and the victorious issue thereof, the three great Prophets, Esay, Ieremie, and Ezechiel, haue written so plainely, that I hold it al∣together needlesse to looke after more authoritie, or to cite for proofe halfe of that which may be alleadged out of these. Neuerthelesse, we finde many and good Au∣thors, who following Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus, are well contented to straine these prophecies with vnreasonable diligence vnto such a sense, as giues to Nabucho∣donosor little more than the honour of hauing done some spoile in Aegypt, omitting the conquest of that Land by the Babylonian, and referring the death of Apries or Hophra to a chance long after following, which had no coherence with these times or affaires. So preposterous is the delight which many men take in the meanes and second helps conducing to their purpose, that often-times they preferre the Com∣mentator before the Author; and to vp-hold a sentence, giuing testimonie to one clause, doe carelesly ouerthrow the historie it selfe, which thereby they sought to haue maintained. The reports of Herodotus and Diodorus, concerning the Kings of Aegypt, which raigned about these times, are already rehearsed in the former book: but that which they haue spoken of Apries, was purposely reserued vnto this place. Herodotus affirmes, that he was a very fortunate King, but wherein he telleth not; Herod. l. 2. &. l. (vnlesse we should vnderstand that he was victorious in the Warre, which he is said to haue made vpon Tyrus and Sidon ) that hee raigned fiue and twentie yeeres, and was finally taken and put to death by his owne subiects; who did set vp Amasis, as King, which preuailed against him. The rebellion of the Aegyptians he imputeth to a great losse which they receiued in an expedition against the Cyrenians, by whom almost their whole Armie was destroied. This calamitie the people of Aegypt thought to be well pleasing to their King, who had sent them on this dangerous expedition, with a purpose to haue them consumed, that so he might with greater securitie raigne ouer such as staied at home. So they who escaped, and the friends of such as were , rebelled against Apries, who sent Amasis to appease the tu∣mult; but Amasis became Captaine of the rebells, and was by them chosen King. Finally, the whole Land consented vnto this new Election; whereby Apries was driuen to trust vnto his forraine Mercenaries, the Ionians and Carians, of whom hee kept in readinesse thousand good Souldiers that fought va∣liantly for him, but were vanquished by the great numbers of the Aegyptian forces, amounting vnto two hundred and fiftie thousand, which were all by birth and education, men of warre. Apries himselfe being taken prisoner, was gently intreated by Amasis for a while, vntill the Aegyptians, exclaiming vpon him, as an extreme enemie to the Land, got him deliuered into their hands, and strangled him, yet gaue him honourable buriall. Such is the report of Hero∣dotus, with whome Diodorus Siculus neerely agrees, telling vs that Apries did Diodor. Sic. lib. 1. ca. 2. vanquish the Cyprians and in battell at Sea, tooke by force and demo∣lished Sidon, wan the other townes of Phoenicia, and the Isle of Cyprus, and finally, as is before rehcarsed, when he had raigned two and twentie yeeres. This authoritie were enough (yet not more than enough) to informe vs of Apries his hi∣storie, if greater authoritie did not contradict it. But the destruction of Aegypt by the Babylonian, fore-told by the Prophets, which hath no coherence with these re∣lations, hath greater force to our beliefe, than haue the traditions of Ae∣gyptian Priests (which the Greeke Historians followed) and greater probabilities to perswade those that looke onely into humane reasons. For Esay prophecied long Esa. 20. ver. 4, 5. &. 6. before of the shameful captiuitie of the Aegyptians, whom the king of Asshur should carry away naked, young and old, in such wise, that the Iewes, who vnto them fo: deliuerance from the Assyrian, should bee ashamed of their owne vaine confi∣dence in men so vnable to defend themselues. But Ezekiel and Ieremie, as their prophecies were neerer to the time of execution, so they handled this Argument more precisely. For Ezekiel telleth plainely, that Aegypt should be giuen to Nebuchadnezzar, as wages for the seruice which hee had done at Tyre: Also hee recounteth particularly all the chiefe Cities in Aegypt, say∣ing, Ezech. 29. 20. &c. 30. That these by name should bee destroyed, and goe into captiuitie; yea, that Ezech. 32. v. 31. PHARAOH and all his armie should be slaine by the sword. Wherefore it must needes be a violent exposition of these Prophecies, which by applying the issue of such threatnings to an insurrection and rebellion, concludes all, without any other alte∣ration in Aegypt, than change of the Kings person, wherein Amasis did succeed vn∣to Apries, by force indeede, but by the vniforme consent of all the people. Cer∣tainely, if that notable place of Ieremie, wherein hee how the Iewes in Ierem. 44. 30. Ierem. 43. 10. Aegypt should see Pharaoh Hophra deliuered into the hand of his enemies, as Zedekia had beene, were to be referred vnto the time of that rebellion, whereof Herodotus hath spoken, as the generall opinion hath ouer-ruled it, then was it vainely done of the same Prophet (which God forbid that any Christian should thinke, seeing hee did it by the appointment of God himselfe) to hide in the clay of a Brick-hill, those very stones, vpon which the throne of Nabuchodonosor should be ser, and his paui∣lion spred. Yea then was that prophecie no other than false, which expressed the of Pharaoh thus: Behold, I will visite the common people of No, & PHARAOH, and Ierem. 46. verse 25, &. 26. Aegypt, with their gods and their kings, euen PHARAOH, and all that trust in him: and I will dcliuer them into the hands of those that seeke their liues, and into the hand of , King of Babel, and into the hands of his seruants. The clearenes of this prophecy being such as could not but refute that interpretation of many other places, which referred all to the rebellion of Amasis, it caused me to wonder what those Commentators would say to it, who are elsewhere so diligent in fitting all to the Greeke Historians. Wherefore looking vpon Iunius, who had in another place taken the enemies of Pharaoh Hophra to be Amasis, and his followers, I found him Iun. in Ierem. c. 44. verse 30. heere acknowledging that the Aegyptian Priests had notably deluded Herodotus with lies, coined vpon a -glorious purpose of hiding their owne disgrace and bondage. And surely it may well be thought, that the historic of Nebuchadnezzar, was better knowne to the Iewes, whom it concerned, than to the Greekes, that scarce∣ly at any time heard of his name. Therefore I see no cause why we should not ra∣ther beleeue Iosephus, reporting that Nabuchodonosor in the three & twentieth yeere of his raigne, and the fift yeere of the destruction of Ierusalem, did conquer Egypt, kill the King thereof, and appoint another in his stead, than Herodotus or ; de An∣tiq. . . 10. c. 11. who being meere strangers to this businesse, had no great reason to labor in search∣ing out the truth, but might rest contented with any thing that the Priests would tell them. Now if setting aside all aduantage of authoritie, we should only consider the relations of Iosephus, and of the Greeke , as either of them might bee verified of it selfe by apparant circumstances, without reflecting vpon the Hebrew Prophets, or Aegyptian Priests; me thinks the death of Apries can no way be appro∣ued as hauing beene wrought by consent of the people, but affords great matter of suspition; yea, though no man had opposed the reports of Herodotus and Diodore. For the great loue and houour which the Aegyptians did beare vnto their Kings, is notorious by the vniforme testimony of al others that haue handled the matters of that Countrey, as well as by the report of Diodore himselfe. How then can wee thinke it probable, that Apries hauing wonne great victories, did for one only losse fall into the hatred of all his people, or which may serue to perswade vs, that a King of Aegypt would seeke, or so demeane himselfe, that he might be thought to seeke the destruction of his naturall subiects? As for that armie of thirtie thousand soul∣diers, Carians and Ionians, which the King of Aegypt, whom Amasis tooke prisoner, is said to haue kept for his defence: doth it not argue that hee was a forrainer, and one that armed himselfe against the Aegyptians, wishing them few and weake; ra∣ther than any of the Pharaohs, who accounted the force of the Country, as assured∣ly their owne, as the strength of their owne bodies? It were more tedious than a∣ny way needfull, to vse all Arguments that might bee alleadged in this case. The very death of this supposed Apries, which the clamours of the people obtained of Amasis, who sought to haue kept him aliue, doth intimate that he was some forren Gouernour, not a naturall Prince; otherwise the people would haue desired to saue his life, and Amasis to take it quickly from him. I will not labour any further to disproue that opinion, whereunto I should not haue yeelded, though it had stood vpon great apparance of truth, considering that the voice of Truth it selfe cries out against it; but leaue the circumstances, prouing the Conquest of Aegypt by Nabuchodonosor to bee obserued, where due occasion in course of the storie fol∣lowing shall present them. §. IX. How Aegypt was subdued and held by NABVCHADNEZZAR. IT is a great losse, that the generall Historie of the World hath suffe∣red, by the spoile and waste which Time hath made of those Monu∣ments, that should haue preserued the memorie of such famous acti∣ons as were accomplished by this mightie Prince Nabuchodonosor; wherein, whether his Vertue, or Fortune were greater, it is now vn∣certaine. That his victories following the Conquest of Syria, and the Neighbour∣Prouinces, were such as did more enlarge his dominion, than all his former warres had done, it may easily be gathered out of , who vp in his thirtieth chapter (besides the whole Countrey of Aegypt) Phut and Lud, with other Nati∣ons that may seeme to haue reached out into Mauritania, as people subdued by this great Babylonian. The circumstances of these warres are in a maner vtterly lost; but that the victorie was easie and swift, any man shall find, who will take the pains to conferre the places, wherein the three great Prophets touch this Argument. Thus much I thinke worthy of more particular obseruation; that Pharaoh, who (as is already noted in the former Booke) thought himselfe safe in Aegypt by the well defenced situation of his Countrey, did very vnwisely in suffering his enemies to sweepe the way cleane vnto his owne doores, by consuming all his friends and adhaerents in Syria. For as the labour of this businesse did more harden then the Chaldaean army, so the confidence and vaine securitie of the Aegyptians, vpon the difficult passages which the enemie was to make thorow the Arabian desarts, and the much aduantage which the great riuer of Nilus would afford vnto themselues, did little auaile them in prouision for the war, and much astonish them (as may iustly bee thought) in the time of execution: it being vsually seene, that the hearts of men faile, when those helps faile, in which they had reposed more confidence than in their owne vertue. Hitherto the Kingdome of Aegypt had flou∣rished vnder the rule of the Pharaohs, about a thousand fiue hundred & foure score yeeres; but from this time forward it remained forty yeeres without a King, vnder the subiection of the Babylonians; and then at length it began to by little & litle the former greatnes, yet so, that it was neuer dreadful vnto others, God hauing said of that people, I wil diminish them, that they shal no more rule the Nations. For wher∣as . 29. 13. 14. & 15. it hath beene said of Pharaoh: I am the sonne of the wise, I am the sonne of the anci∣ent Esay 19. . Kings: and whereas he had vaunted, The Riuer is mine, and I haue made it; the Ezek. 29. 9. Princes of Aegypt now became fooles, the riuer failed them, the King himselfe was taken and , and that ancient linage quite extinguished. This came to passe in the first yeere after the destruction of Ierusalem, and the three and twentieth of Nebuchadnezzar, at which time (saith Iosephus ) He slew the King then raigning, pla∣ced Ioseph. . Iud. libr. 10. c. 11. another in his roome, and carried captiues thence to Babylon, the Iewes whome he found in that Countrie. Now concerning the time which Iosephus giues vnto this bu∣sinesse, and the businesse it selfe, I haue already shewed, that it is warranted by all the prophecies which insinuate the same. As likewise the last destruction of Ierusa∣lem, and carrying a way those vnto Babel, who inhabited the miserable ruines of that great city, which was in the same three & twentieth yeere of NEBVCHADNEZZAR, is not vnprobably thought by good authors to haue beene at the returne from this . 52. 30. Aegyptian expedition. But whereas Iosephus tels vs, that there was another King put in the roome of Apries by Nebuchadnezzar, wee must vnderstand, that hee was one∣ly a Viceroy, and not (as some haue mistaken it) thinke that this was Amasis. For to place the beginning of Amasis his raigne in the three and twentieth of Nebuchadnez∣zar, were as well repugnant vnto the prophecies before , as to all Chrono∣logie and historic. Some there are, which to helpe this inconuenience, imagine that there were two successiuely bearing the name of Amasis; others, that there were two Apries, the one slaine by Nebuchadnezzar, the other by Amasis: a question of small importance, because the difference is onely about a name, it being once granted that the person mentioned in Scriptures, was depriued of life and kingdome by the As∣syrians. Yet for any thing that I can perceiue, that Apries, of whom the Greeke Histo∣rians wrote, could not be the Deputie of Nebuchadnezzar, seeing that hee was the Grand-childe of Pharao Necho, and made warre (as they report) vpon the Phoenici∣ans, who were, before the Aegyptians, become subiect vnto the Crowne of Babylon. I might adde, perhappes, that he whom Nebuchadnezzar left as Gouernour of Ae∣gypt, was more likely to haue had some Chaldaean or , than Aegyptian name; vnlesse we should thinke that hee had beene a traytor to his naturall Prince, and so rewarded by the Conquerour with of the Country: about which it were but friuolous to dispute. Thus much in briefe we ought to beleeue, that Na∣buchodonosor made an absolute Conquest of Aegypt; that he was not so foolish as to giue it away, any man may guesse; that he appointed one to rule the Countrey, it is conscquent vnto the former, and hath authoritie of Iosephus; that this Gouernour (or some successour of his) was afterwards taken and slaine by Amasis, I see pro∣babilitie enough to perswade my selfe, and yet can well bee content, that others vse their libertie, and beleeue what they list. As for the armie which this Aegyptian King Apries is supposed to haue kept of Ionians and Carians; I hold them to be none other than the garisons of souldiers which were left by the Assyrian for the guard of his Viceroy, and of the new Prouince: as likewise the company returning from Cyrene and , who together with the of such as were slaine in that expedition, remembred before out of the Greeke Histori∣ans, deposed and slew Apries, I take them to beene the Aegyptian fugitiues, which then recouered their owne Countrey. Sure it is that this Prophecie of Eze∣kiel was verified, At the end of fortie yeeres will I gather the Aegyptians from the people . 30. v. 13. & 14. where they were scattered, and I will bring againe the of Aegypt, and will cause them to returne into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation, and they shall be there a small kingdome. If the Aegyptian Priests alluded heereunto in the tale which they made of Amasis his obtaining the Kingdome, then are they to be helped with this or the like interpretation; if they deuised matter that had no shadow of truth, onely to keepe the Greekes from knowledge of their Countries disgrace; then are they little to be regarded, since we know the truth with them. §. X. Of the sundry accompts drawne from sundry acts of NEBVCHADNEZZAR, and of the destruction of Niniuie, by him; the time of which action is vncertaine. THese victories brought the greatnes of the Assyrian Empire to the full, and from them was reckoned the time of Nebuchadnezzar's raigne in sundry places of Scripture. To speake any more of the questions arising about the supputation of Nebuchadnezzar his times, might seeme to be the ouer-handling of one Argument: Yet thus much I will note; that whereas Daniel was carried captiue in the third yeere of Iehoiakims Dan. c. 1. & 2. raigne (which ranne along with some part of Nebuchadnezzar's first yeere) and was kept in diet three yeeres more, before he was brought into the Kings presence; it could not be the second of Nebuchadnezzar's kingdome, wherin he interpreted the forgotten dreame of the great Image, foreshewing the succession of Monarchies, but the second of his Empire. The same or the like may be said of diuers places which referre sundry matters vnto their set yeeres; as that of Ezekiel before-cited, where he fore-tells, that Aegypt should be giuen in reward for the seruice done before Ty∣rus, dating his prophecie in the seuen and twentieth yeere; and that of Daniel, pla∣cing the erection of the golden Image in the eighteenth yeere: for these yeeres held no dependance vpon either the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar's kingdome, or of his Empire, nor yet vpon any of the captiuities, but had reference to some memorable action, omitted in Scripture, and therefore not easie to be found, nor worth the la∣bour of vncertaine search. Ofany warre made by Nebuchadnezzar, after such time as he returned from the Conquest of Aegypt, I not read: excepting that against Niniuie, the destruction whereof was fore-tolde by the Prophet Naum. had long before ta∣ken by Merodach (as in due place hath beene shewed) and together with the rest of Assyria made subiect to Babylon. Yet was it left vnder a peculiar King, who against the Chaldaean, as Iehoiakim & Zedekias, tributary Kings of Iuda, had done, tasted likewise of the same fortune. That the destruction of Niniuie followed the Conquest of Aegypt, it appeareth by the comparison which Nahum the Prophet . 3. . made betweene this Citie, that was to fall, and the Citie of No in Aegypt, that was fallen already. But how long after this came to passe, it is (me thinks) vnpossible to finde out. For whereas it is found in an Hebrew Chronologie, that it was in the first of Nebuchadnezzar's raigne; the place of Nahum last cited is enough to disprooue it. Whereas it is by some vnto the first of his Monarchie, which began at the end of the Aegyptian warres; the whole Prophecie of which went the one and the other, argueth , that there was a longer space of time inter∣current. So that to enquire into the very yeere of this destruction, or other cir∣cumstances of the Warre, whether managed by Nabuchodonosor in person, or by his Lieutenants, were somewhat like vnto the vaine curiositie of Tyberius Caesar, enqui∣ring who was the Mother of Hecuba; or to the like idle paines which he should take, who would seeke to learne what woman that Huzzab Queen of Niniuie was, whose wofull captiuitie the same Prophet Naum likewise did fore-tell. §. XI. Of the later time of NEBVCHADNEZZAR; his buildings, madnesse, and death. OF the time which this great Monarch spent in quiet, I thinke there are no Monuments extant; saue those which wee finde among the of Daniel. Among these wee may reckon his great works at Babylon, wherewith he pleased himselfe so well, that he brake out in∣to these glorious words: Is not this great Babel that I haue built for the Dan. 4. 27. house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my Maiestie? Surely if those things bee true that are by Iosephus rehearsed of him out of Berosus and Megasthenes, he might well delight himselfe with the contemplation of such goodly and magnificent buildings. For it is said, That he fortified Babylon with a triple wall; that besides other slaterly works, he raised those huge arches wherewith were borne vp the high Orchards, hanging as it were in the ayre, and equalling the tops of Mountaines; which most sumptuousframe, that out lasted all the remain∣der of the Assyrian, and all the Persian Empire, is said to haue beene reared, and fi∣nished in fifteene daies. But of all this, and other his magnificence, we finde little else recorded, than that (which indeede is most profitable for vs to consider) his ouer-valuing of his owne greatnesse abased him vnto a condition, inferiour to the poorest of men. And not vndeseruedly fell these iudgements of God vpon him. For whereas God had ho∣noured him, not onely with many victories, and much happinesse in his owne life, but with a discouerie of things to come after him, yea and had approoued the cer∣taintie of his dreame, by the miraculous reducing of it into his memorie, and inter∣pretation thereof by Daniel the Prophet: he neuerthelesse became so forgetfull of God, whose wonderfull power he had seene and acknowledged, that hee caused a golden Image to be set vp and worshipped: ordaining a cruell death as reward vnto them that should to disobey his Kingly will and pleasure, which was vtterly repugnant to the law of him that is the King of Kings. Hereof S. Hierome hath well noted; Velox obliuio veritatis, vt qui dudum seruum Dei quasi Deum , statuam sibi fieri iubeat, vt ipse quasi Deus in statuâ adoraretur: A hastie forget∣fulnesse of the truth, that hee who so lately had worshipped (DANIEL) the seruant of God, as if he had beene God himselfe, should now command a Statua to be erected vnto himselfe, wherein himselfe might bee worshipped as God. From this impietie it pleased God to reclaime him, by the strange and wonderfull deliuerie of those bles∣sed Saints out of the fierie fornace; who being throwne into it bound, forrefusing to commit Idolatrie, were assisted by an Angell; preserued from all harme of the fire; loosened from their bands; and finally called out with gracious words, and restored to their former honour, by the King: who amazed at the miracle, made a decree tending to the honour of God, which by erection of his Image he had viola∣ted. Yet this deuotion of Nabuchadnezzar was not so rooted in him, that it could bring foorth fruit answerable to his hastie zeale. Therefore was he forewarned by God in a dreame of the terrible iudgement hanging ouer his head, which Daniel expounding, aduised him to breake off his sinne by righteousnesse, and his iniquitie by mercy towards the poore, that there might be an healing of his error. Hereby it seemes that iniustice and were the faults, for which he was threatned, but this threating sufficed not vnto his reformation. For that so great a Monarch should be driuen from among men, (according to the tenor of the dreame and interpretation) yea, compelled to dwell with the beasts of the field, and made to eate grasse as the Oxen, was a thing so incredible in mans iudgement, that easily it might be thought an idle dreame, and much more easily be forgotten at the yeeres end. One whole yeeres leasure to repent was giuen to this haughtie Prince: which respite of the exe∣cution may seeme to haue bred in him a forgetfulnesse of Gods sentence. For at the end of twelue moneths, walking in the royall Palace of Babel, he was so ouer-ioyed and transported with a vaine contemplation of his owne seeming happinesse, that without all feare of Gods heauie iudgement pronounced against him, hee vttered those loftie words before rehearsed, in vaunting of the Maiesticall works which he had reared, as well beseeming his person. But his high speeches were not fully ended, when a voice from heauen, telling him that his Kingdome was de∣parted from him, rehearsed ouer vnto him the sentence againe, which was fulfilled vpon him the very same houre. That Salomon, and many other Princes, and great ones, haue taken delight in their owne buildings, it cannot any way be doubted; yet I doe not remember that euer I haue read of any, that were punished for reioycing in works of this kinde (though it is hard in ioy, or any passion of the minde, to keepe a iust measure) excepting one∣ly this Nabuchadnezzar. The like may be said of Dauid: for other (and some very godly) Kings haue mu∣stred all their to the very last man; but few or none haue been known to haue beene punished as Dauid was. Surely I not onely hold it lawfull to reioyce in those good things, wherwith God hath blessed vs; but a note of much vnthankfulnesse to entertaine them with a sullen and vnfeeling disposition. Yet as all humane affecti∣ons, wherein due reference to God is wanting, are no better than obscure cloudes, hindring the influence of that blessed light, which clarifies the soule of man, and predisposeth it vnto the brightnesse of eternall felicitie; so that in solent ioy, which man in the pride of his vaine imagination conceiueth of his owne worth, doth a∣boue all other passions blast our mindes, as it were with lightning, and make vs to reflect our thoughts vpon our seeming inherent greatnesse, forgetting the whilest him, to whom wee are indebted for our very being. Wherefore these malamentis gaudia; The euill ioyes of the minde, were not vnaptly, by the Prince of Latine Poets, bestowed in the entrance of Hell, and placed further inward than sorrowes, cares, and feares; not farre from the yron Cabbins of the Furies. And certainely it is no vnlikely token of vengeance neere at hand, when these vnreasonable flushes of proud and vaine ioy, rage in a minde, that should haue beene humbled with a iust repentance and acknowledgement of ill deseruing. This was verified vpon Nebuchadnezzar, whose punishment was singular and vnexampled. For he ranne among beasts in the fields and woods, where for seuen yeeres hee liued, not onely as a saluage man, but as a saluage beast, for a beast hee thought himselfe secundum suam imaginationem, as Thomas noteth, and therefore L. 2. de Reg. pri. fed himselfe in the same manner, and with the same food that beasts doe; Not that he was changed in figure externall, according to Mediana, in so much as he appeared Med. l. 2. de re∣cta in Deum cap. 7. a beast to other mens eies, as S. Hierome in the life of Hilarius (how true God knows) speakes of a woman that appeared to all other mens sight a Cow, but to Hilarius onely a woman; neither was he changed as Iphigenia the Daughter of Agamemnon was said to be, into a Hinde, nor made a Monster, as Dorotheus and Epiphanius drea∣med: Dor. in Synopsi. vit. . but according to S. Ieromes exposition of these words: At the same time was my vnderstanding restored vnto me &c. Quando dicit (saith S. Ierome) sensum sibi redditum, ostendit non se amisisse, sed mentem; When he saith that his sense was restored vnto him, he sheweth that he had not lost his humane shape, but his vnderstanding. Seuen yeeres expired, it pleased God to restore Nabuchodonosor, both to his vnderstan∣ding, and his estate, for which he acknowledged and praised God all the rest of his life, confessing his power, and euerlasting being; that he was the Lord of heauen and earth, and wrought without resistance what he pleased in both; that his works Dan. 4. 1. 32. c. 34. were all truth, and his waies righteous. Which gaue argument to many of the Fa∣thers, and others, not to doubt of his saluation; namely, S. Augustine, Theodoret, Lyra, Carthusianus, and others. And for that place of Esay, the fourteenth, out of which his perdition may be gathered, the aforenamed Authors apply the same to Balthasar, because Isay, both in the thirteenth and fourteenth Chapter, speaketh of the King, and the destruction of Babylon ioyntly. §. XII. Of EVILMERODACH. HAuing already spoken what I could of the succession and yeeres of Nebuchadnezzars posteritie; the most that may be said of him, is said of Euilmerodach, which I will not here againe rehearse. He lost some part of that which his Father had gotten; and left his Kingdome burning in a warre that consumed it to ashes. He lost Ae∣gypt by rebellion of the people, in the nineteenth yere of his raigne, which was yeeres after his Father had conquered it. But this agrees neither with the ac∣compt of Herodotus, who allowes to Amasis foure and fortie yeeres of raigne; nor with that of Diodorus, who giues him fiue and fiftie, saying that he died in the third yeere of the threescore and third Olympiad, when Cambyses did conquer Aegypt. There were indeed but seuen and thirtie yeeres, which passed betweene the second yeere of the foure and fiftieth Olympiad, (which was the nineteenth of Euilmero∣dach, and the first of Amasis ) and the fift of Cambyses his raigne, wherein hee wanne Aegypt; of which seuen and thirtie yeeres it is credibly held, that Psamennitus, the sonne of Amasis, raigned three: so that Amasis could be no longer King than foure and thirtie yeeres. But seeing that these two Greeke Historians haue beene abused by Aegyptian Priests, in the substance of that which was spoken of Amasis, it is no maruell though they were also deceiued in the length of his raigne. This is the plaine answere to this obiection. For to say either that the numbers were miswrit∣ten, and foure and fortie set downe in stead of foure and thirtie, or that Amasis did temporise awhile with the Assyrians, and not himselfe as absolute King of Ae∣gypt, vntill the nineteenth of Euilmerodach (at which time, and not before, it hath beene proued out of , that Aegypt became againe a Kingdome) I hold it a superfluous excuse. Whether these Aegyptian troubles did animate the King of the Medes to deale with Euilmerodach, as with a Prince greater in fame, and reputation, gotten by the decaied valour of his people, than in present forces; or whether (as I rather thinke) some foile receiued by the Assyrian inuading Media, emboldned the Aegyptians to rebell against him: I will neither vndertake, nor seeke to define. Xenophon tels, that Xenoph. Cyro∣paed. l. 1. the first of young Cyrus in warre, was vnder Astyages King of the Medes, his Grand-father, in a prosperous fight against the Assyrian Prince, who did set vpon him; at which time Cyrus was fifteen or yeeres old. If therefore Cyrus liued threescore & three yeeres (as he is said to haue died well stricken in yeeres) which is held to be the ordinarie terme of no short life, then was this encounter in the third yeere of Euilmerodach his raigne. Yet by the same reckoning it should follow, that Xenoph. . l. 8. the warre began more early betweene these Nations, for as much as the manner of their fight in former times, with other circumstances insinuating as much, are found in the same place of Xenophon. And it may well be, that the death or destru∣ction of Nabuchodonosor gaue courage vnto those that had felt him a troublesome neighbour, to stand vpon prouder termes with the Assyrians, than in his flourishing they durst haue vsed. Howsoeuer the quarrell beganne, wee finde that it en∣ded not before the last ruine of the Assyrian Monarchie. For the Babylonian, being too proud to digest the losses which hee receiued by the Medes and their Allies the Persians, drew vnto his the Lydians, and all the people of the lesser Asia, with gifts and strong perswasions, hoping so to ouer-whelme his enemies with a strong inuasion, whome in vaine hee had sought to wearie out with a lingring Warre. This happened after the death of Astyages, who left the World in the nineteenth yeere of Euilmerodach, at which time Amasis tooke possession of Aegypt. So that the Assyrian hauing his hands alreadie full of businesse, which more did affect him, seemes thereby to haue giuen the better meanes vnto the ; of new erecting their Kingdome, which by long distance of place did sundry finde occasion to rebell in after-ages, and set vp a King within it selfe, against the far more Persian. The issue of these great preparations made by Euilmerodach against the Medes, was such as opened the way vnto the fulfilling of those prophecies, which were ma∣ny yeeres before vttered against Babel, by Esay and . For the Assyrians, and their Confederates, who, trusting in their numbers, thought to haue buried the Medes and Persians vnder their thicke shewres of arrowes and darts, were encountred with an armie of stout and well-trained men, weightily ar∣med for close fight, by whom they were beaten in open battell, wherein was slaine. So that great frame of Empire which Nabuchodonosor had raysed and vp-held, being shaken and grieuously crackt vnder his vnfortunate Sonne, was left to bee sustained by his vnworthy Nephew: a man more likely to haue ouer∣throwne it, when it was greatest and strongest, than to repaire it, when it was in way of falling. §. XIII. Apriuate coniecture of the Author; seruing to make good those things, which are cited out of BEROSVS, concerning the Successors of EVILMERO∣DACH, without wrong to the truth, the qualitie, and death of BALTHASAR. THough I haue alreadie (as it seemes to mee) sufficiently prooued that Balthasar was the Sonne, and immediate Successour to Euilmerodach, yet considering earnestly the coniectures of those Writers, which fol∣lowing Berosus, , or Niriglissoroor, and his sonne Labas∣sardach betweene them: as also that which I finde in Herodotus of , a famous Queene of Babylon, who greatly adorned and fortified that ; I haue thought it not superfluous here in this place to shew, by what meanes it was possible that some errour might haue crept into the Historie of those times, and thereby haue brought vs to a needlesse trouble of searching out the truth as it were by candle-light, in the vncertaine fragments of lost Authors, which we might haue found by day-light, had we adhered onely to the Scriptures. First, therefore I ob∣serue, that the time which Berosus dinides betwixt Euilmerodach, and the two next Kings, agrees with the yeeres in which Nebuchadnezzar liued wilde among brute beasts in the open field: Secondly, that the suddainenesse of this accident, which came in one houre, could not but worke much perturbation in that state, wherein doubtlesse the honour of so noble a Prince was highly regarded, his calamitie pit∣tied, and his restitution hoped; the prediction of Daniel finding reputation in that clause which promised his recouerie, as being verified in that which had bin more incredible. Now if we doe in common reason iudge, what course was like to be ta∣ken by the great ones of the Kingdome, for settling the gouernment, whilest the King was thus distracted, we shall finde it most likely, that his Sonne and Heire did occupie the royall , with condition to restore it vnto his Father, when God should enable him to repossesse it. In this his rule Euilmerodach being to supplie the vtter want of vnderstanding in his Father, as Protectors doe the vnripenesse of it in Herod. l. 1. young, but reasonable Kings, might easily either commit the insolencies, or fall into the troubles, incident to such an office. That hee had in him very small abilitie of gouernment, it appeares by his ill maintaining the Empire, when hee held it in his owne right. That his Sister Nitocris (if Nitocris were his sister) was a woman of an high spirit, it appeares by that which Herodotus reports of her, saying that shee was more cunning than Semiramis, as appeared in her magnificent and vsefull works a∣bout the Riuer of Euphrates, and her fortification of Babylon against the Medes, who had gotten many Townes from the Assyrians, & amongst them Niniuic. Wherfore it were not vnreasonable to think, that such a woman, seeing how the Empire went to decay through her brothers misgouernment, vsed practices to get the rule into her owne hands, and afterwards, as a mother, to leaue it vnto her vngracious sonne. Other time than this, wherein Nitocris could haue raigned, we doe not finde; but we finde in Berosus (as Iosephus hath cited him) that Niglissar, who got the Kingdom from Euilmerodach, was his sisters husband; which argues this to haue beene the same woman. As for Labassardach the of Niglissar, if at the end of nine Mo∣neths raigne hee were for his lewd slaine by the Nobilitie, as the same Berosus reporteth, it seems that God hereby the way for Nebuchadnezzars restitution (whose terme of punishment was expired) by raising such troubles as should make him the more desired, both of the Princes and the people. I will not here vse many words to confute that which Berosus hath further set downe of Euilmerodach, telling vs that hee was slaine by his sisters husband: for the plaine words of Scripture, naming the yeere wherein he gaue libertie to Iechonia, do plain∣ly testifie that he out-liued the three or foure and fortieth yeere of his Fathers raigne, which was the last of his life. This may suffice to shew, that they who are said to haue succeeded Euilmerodach in the Kingdome, might indeede haue so done, though not when hee held it in his owne right. Of Balthasar, who was his Sonne and Heire, we finde, that he had such conditions, as God permitteth to be in a King for the ruine of the people. He was from his young yeeres of a mischieuous nature; hauing in his Fathers time slaine a Noble yong man that should haue married his sister, onely for spight and enuie to see him kill two wild beasts in hunting, at which himselfe hauing throwne his Iaue∣line had missed them. Another great Lord he had gelded, because a Gentlewoman commending his beautie, said it were a happie woman that should be his wife. Such barbarous vilanies caused many which had loued his Father (as a good and gra∣cious, though vnfortunate Prince) to reuolt from him vnto the enemie as soone as he was King. Neither doe I finde that hee performed any thing worthy of record, but as a Coward and a Foole hee lost all; sitting still, and not once daring to giue battell to them that daily tooke somewhat from him: Yet carelesly feasting when danger had hemmed him in on euery side, and when death arrested him by the hands of those whom hee had wronged in his Fathers life. So the end of him was base and miserable; for he died as a foole taken in vnexcusable securitie, yet had not that happinesse, such as it is, of a death free from apprehension of feare, but was ter∣rified with a dreadful vision; which had shewed his ruine not many houres before, euen whilest hee was drinking in that wine, which the swords of his insulting ene∣mies drew out of him, together with his latest bloud. It is therefore in this place e∣nough to say of him, That after a dishonourable raigne of seuenteene yeres, he pe∣rished like a beast, and was slaine as he deserued. The rest that concerneth him in question of time, hath beene spoken heretofore; in matter of his affaires, shall be handled among the acts of Cyrus, to whose storie that of Balthazar is but an ap∣pendix. CHAP. II. Of the originall and first greatnesse of the Persians. §. I. That the Medes were chiefe actors in the subuersion of the Babylonian Empire. THE Line of Belochus being now extinguished in Bal∣thasar, the Empire of Babylon, and of Assyria, was ioy∣ned first to that of Media, which then was gouerned by Cyaxares or Darius Medus, after whom Cyrus became Lord and Monarch, both of Assyria and of Media it selfe. Of the race of Phul Belochus there were ten Kings besides himselfe, and of Arbaces as many are found by Metasthenes. These two Prouinciall Gouernours hauing cut downe the last branch of Ninus in Sarda∣napalus, diuided betweene them the Easterne Empire. Cyaxares (whom the Scriptures call Darius Medus ) the last of the race of Arbaces, dying about two yeeres after that the line of Belochus was ended in Balthasar; the Dominions aswell of the Conquerour, as of the conquered, fell to a third Familie, namely, to Cyrus of the house of Achaemenes, the Princes of which bloud raigning in Persia, had formerly beene dependants on the Medes, and were of as little power at home, as of fame abroad in the World. Of the Family of the Achaemenes, and Line of the Persian Kings, we shal hereafter finde occasion in due place to intreat. The Nation of the Medes descended from Madai the third sonne of Iaphet; that they had Kings soone after the floud, Lactantius and Diodorus haue found re∣cord; For Lactantius remembreth an ancient King of the Medes called Hydaspes, and Diodor speaketh of Pharnus with his seuen Sonnes, slaine by the Assyrian in the beginning of their Empire. But of these who succeeded Arbaces the first, that freed his Nation from the Assyrians. I take the list and number from Eusebius, adding Darius Medus: of whom I haue spoken in their proper places heretofore; and they are these. Arbaces. Who raigned 28. yeeres. Sosarmus. Who raigned 30. yeeres. Medidus. Who raigned 40. yeeres. Cardiceas. Who raigned 13. yeeres. Diocles. Who raigned 53. yeeres. Phraortes. Who raigned 24. yeeres. Cyaxares. Who raigned 32. yeeres. Aslyages. Who raigned 38. yeeres. Darius Medus. Who raigned And though the Greekes ascribe the conquest of Babylon to Cyrus alone, yet the Scriptures teach vs that Darius was not onely King of Media, and had the Persians his followers, but that the Armie victorious ouer Balthazar was his; as the Assy∣rian and Babylonian Empire also was during his owne life. For wee finde in Daniel, that Darius of the Medes tooke the Kingdome being threescore and two yeres old: And further, what Officers it pleased him to set ouer the Kingdome. And so was it prophecied by Isay long before: Behold, I will stirre vp the Medes against them, &c. Cap. 13. v. 17. 51 v. 11. & 28. And by IEREMIE; The Lord hath raised vp the Spirit of the King of the Medes: for his purpose is against Babel to de destroy it; and in the eigth and twentieth Verse, Pre∣pare against her the Nations, with the King of the Medes, the Dukes thereof, the Princes thereof, and all the Land of his Dominion. These Scriptures Iulius Affricanus doth well open, who taking authoritie from Diodor, Castor, Thallus, and others, deliuereth that Babylon was taken before Cyrus beganne to raigne, which also agreeth with Strabo, where he saith, That as the Medes were subiugated by the Persians, so be∣fore Lib. 16. that, both the Babylonians and Assyrians were mastered by the Medes. And ther∣fore the reports of Iustine, and Herodotus, are not to be receiued, who attribute the taking of Babylon to Cyrus alone. §. II. By what meanes the Empire was translated from the Medes to the Persians. HOW the Kingdome of the Medes fell into the hands of Cyrus, it is a doubt not sufficiently cleared by Historians, but rather their diffe∣rent relations of his beginnings haue bred the former opinion of those who giue the conquest of Babel to the Persian only. For some there are who denie that Astyages had any other Successour than Cyrus his Grand-child by Mandane. Whereas Ctesias on the contrarie side affir∣meth, that Cyrus was no way descended from Astyages (whom hee calleth Astigas or Apinia ) but onely that hauing vanquished him in battaile, and confined him to Bactria, hee married his Daughter Amytis. But I finde the relations of Ctesias often cited and seldome followed, and himselfe sometimes very iustly reproued of will∣full vntruth. Viginier a diligent and learned Historian of this age, produceth many probable reasons that Astyages had no such sonne as Cyaxares, or Darius Medus; and to con∣firme his opinion, the more he citeth Diodore, Iustine, Strabo, Plato, Aristotle, Iso∣crates, and before them Castor, Thallus, and Phlegon, who doe not finde any such Successour. Neither doe Tatianus, Theophilus, Antiochenus, Iulius Affricanus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustine Martyr, Lactantius, Eusebius, S. Hierome, or S. Augustine, make report out of any faithfull Author by them read, that hath giuen other Son or Successour to Astyages than Cyrus. Yet seeing that this manner of argument ab authoritate negatiuè, doth neuer in∣force consent; we may bee the bolder (all this great list of noble Writers by him alleaged notwithstanding) to affirme that either Astyages himselfe must haue been Darius of the Medes, which cannot agree with his place in the course of time; Or . l. 1. c. 19. else to giue him some other Successour, according to Iosephus, and Xenophon, the Ios. an. l. 10. c. 13 same whom Daniel calleth Darius. For it is manifest, and without dispute, that the Xeu. l. 8. . King of the Medes commanded in chiefe, and was absolute Lord of that Con∣quest, Cyrus during his life, being no other then the Lieutenant of his Armie, and subiect to his authoritie; The strength of both Nations, to wit, the Medes and Persians, with other the Vassalls of Darius, being ioyned together to com∣pound it. But it is very certaine that the honour of that great victorie ouer Babylon was wholly giuen to Cyrus, who was the instrument preordained and forenamed by God himselfe, not onely for his action, but for the deliuerie of his Church; a grea∣ter worke in the eies of God, than the subuersion of any State or Monarchie, how powerfull soeuer. And it may well be thought, that the Souldiers imployed in that seruice did rather ascribe the glorie to him that was the best man of Warre, than to the Median, who was greatest in riches and power. All which also falling vpon Cyrus by succession, and continuing in his posteritie, did much augment the same of his ver∣tue, which among prophane Historians ouergrew altogether the honour due to Cyaxares, both because he was old, and did nothing in person; as also because hee soone after quitted the world, and left all to Cyrus, who was possest of whatsoe∣uer belonged to Darius, before the fame of any such King or Conquerour was car∣ried farre off. And for the Greeke Historians, they tooke all things from the relations of the Persians, who gaue to Cyrus all the praise of a most excellent Prince, making none his equall. Only Daniel in the first, fift, and sixt Chapters of his prophecies, makes it plaine, that himselfe not onely liued a great Officer vnder King Darius, but that hee continued in that estate to the first of Cyrus; which being the yeere of Daniels death, could not haue bene distinguished from the raigne of Darius, if they had begunne together and raigned ioyntly; Neither can it bee imagined that Darius held the Kingdome by Cyrus permission, considering that Cyrus beganne after him. §. III. XENOPHONS relation of the Warre with the and Per∣sians, made with ioynt forces vpon the Assyrians, and others. THese Testimonies of the Scriptures, which neede no other confirma∣tion, yet made more open to our vnderstanding, by that which Xeno∣phon hath written of these warres: The cause whereof, according to his report, was this. When the Assyrian had enlarged his Empire with victories, and was become Lord of all Syria, and many other Countries, hee beganne to hope that if the Medes could be brought vnder his subiection, there should not then be left any Nation adioyning able to make head against him. For the King of the Medes was able to bring into the field threescore thousand foote, and aboue tenne thousand horse, to which the forces of Persia being ioyned, made an exceeding strong Armie. The Assyrian considering the strength of such a Neighbour, Croesus King of Lydia, a Prince very mightie both in men and treasure, and with him other Lords of Asia the lesse to his assistance, alleaging that those Easterne Nations were very powerfull, and so firmely conioyned by league and many alliances, that it would not bee easie, no not possible, for any one Nation to resist them. With these incitements strengthned with great presents, he drew to himself so many adherents as he compounded an Armie of two hundred thousand foot, and threescore thou∣sand horse, of which, ten thousand horse, and fortie thousand foote were led by Croesus, who had great cause of enmitie with the Medes, in regard of the Warre made by them against his Father Alyattes; But this great Armie was by Cyaxares King of the Medes, and by Cyrus generall of the Persian forces, vtterly broken; Vp∣on which defeat the Assyrian King being also slaine, so many of the Assyrians re∣uolted, as Babylon it self could not longer be assured without the succours of Merci∣naries, waged with great summes of money out of Asia the lesse, Aegypt, and else∣where. Which new gathered forces were also scattered by Cyrus, who following his aduantage, possest himselfe of a great part of the lesser Asia, at which time it was, as I take it, that Croesus himselfe was also made . The attempt of Babylon following soone after, the Armie lying before it being paid by Darius, whom Xenophon calleth Cyaxares, and led by Cyrus his sisters sonne, preuailed against Balthasar, as in due time shall be set downe. Those Persians which followed Cyrus, and by him leuied, are numbred thirtie thousand foot-men, of which a thousand were armed Gentlemen, the rest of the common sort were Archers, or such as vsed the Dart and the Sling. So farre Xeno∣phon. Of whom in this argument, as it is true, that he described in Cyrus the paterne of a most Heroicall Prince, with much addition: So it cannot be denyed, but that the bulke and grosse of his Narration was founded vpon Historicall truth. Neither can it indeed bee affirmed of any the like Writer, that in euery speech and circumstance he hath precisely tyed himself to the phrase of the speaker, or na∣ture of the occasion, but borrowed in each out of his owne inuention, appropria∣ting the same to the times and persons of whom he treated. Putting therefore a∣part the Morall and Politique discourse, and examining but the Historie of things done, it will easily appeare, that Xenophon hath handled his vnder-taken subiect in such sort, that by beautifying the face thereof, hee hath not in any sort corrupted the bodie. §. IIII. The estate of the Medes and Persians in times fore-going this great Warre. FOr it is commonly agreed vpon, that Achaemenes the sonne of Perses being Gouernour of Persia, did associate himselfe with Arbaces, who commanded in Media in that rebellion against Sardanapalus, and that each of them after the victorie obtained, held for himselfe the Domi∣nion of those Countries, which he had formerly ruled for the Assyri∣ans; as also that they ouer the same honor and power to their posteritie; which in Media was not absolutely Regall, but with some restraint limited, vntill such time as Deioces tooke vpon him the full authoritie and of a King. From the death of Sardanapalus to the raigne of Deioces, are vsually accounted about an hundred and forty yeeres, in the last sixtie whereof there raigned in Assyria mightie Princes, namely Salmanasser and his Successours, whose great atchiuements in Syria and elsewhere witnesse, that the Medes and Persians found it not for their aduantage to vnder-take any offensiue warre against those victorious Kings, it being also pro∣bable that the league continued as yet betweene these the successours of Belochus, and Arbaces, who had formerly shared the Empire. Now from the beginning of Deioces to the first of Astyages, therepast aboue ninetie yeeres, in which if haue written truely, that conquered Persia, and how he and other the Kings of Media by many victories greatly en∣larged their dominions, and commaunded many parts of Asia, it had beene but an vnaduised enterprise of the Assyrians and Babylonians, to haue wasted themselues a∣gainst the Syrians and Aegyptians, leauing so able and victorious a Nation on their backes. But that the Medes had done nothing vpon the South parts of Persia, and that the Persians themselues were not masters of Susiana in Nabuchodonosors time, it is manifest in Daniel, who was then Gouernour for the Babylonian in Susa or Susan, the chiefe Citie thereof. It is true indeed, that the Medians, either vnder Cyaxares or Astiages, or both, had quarrell with Halyattes the father of Croesus, which after some sixe yeeres dispute was compounded. How the affaires of Persia stood in so many ages, I doe not find any memorie. It seemeth that the roughnesse of the mountainous Countrey which they then pos∣sest, with the confederacie which they continued with the Medes, gaue them more securitie than : For if their Kings, being the posteritie of Achaemenes; had done any memorable acts, the greatnesse which they afterward obtained would not haue suffered any forgetfulnesse thereof. But as we find all Xenophons reports, both of these Warres and the state of those Countries to be very conso∣nant and agreeable to the relation of many other good Authors, so it appeares, that the race of Achaemenes held the Principalitie of Persia from father to sonne for many descents. And therefore we may better giue credit to Xenophon, who affir∣meth, That Cambyses the father of Cyrus was King of Persia: than to those that make him a meane man, and say, that Astiages gaue him his daughter Mandane in marriage, to the end that her sonne (whose he feared) might be disabled from any great vndertaking by his fathers ignobilitie. For what cause of griefe could it be to Astiages, that the sonne of his daughter should become Lord of the best part of Asia? No; it was more likely, that vpon such a Prophecie his loue to his grand-child should haue encreased, and his care beene the greater to haue married her to some Prince of strength and eminent vertue. Yea, the same Herodotus, who is the first Author, and as I thinke the deuiser of the mischiefe intended against Cyrus by his grandfather, doth confesse, That the line of the Achaemenidae was so renowned, that the great King Xerxes in the height of his prosperitie did thence himselfe, and vaunt of it: which he would ne∣uer haue done, had they beene ignoble, nor had they been the vassals of any other King or Monarch. For in this sort Xerxes in the seuenth of Herodotus deriueth himselfe. Achaemenes. Cambyses. Cyrus. Teispeus. Ariaramnes. Arsamnes. Hystaspes. Darius. Xerxes. Of the Achaemenidae there were two races: of the first was Cyrus the great, whose issue male fayled in his two sonnes, Cambyses and Smerdis. This royall familie is thus set downe by the learned Reineccius. Achaemenes, the sonne of , first King of Persia. Darius. Cyrus, the first of that name, had Cambyses and Atossa, who, mar∣ried to Pharnaces, King of Cappadocia, had Artystona and other daughters. Cambyses had Cyrus the Great, Cyrus had Cambyses, who succeeded him, and Smerdis by his brother Cambyses. Of the second were those seuen great Princes of Persia, who hauing ouerthrowne the vsurped of the Magi, chose from among themselues Darius the of Hystaspes King. This Kingdome of Persia was first knowne by the name of Elam, so called after Elam the sonne of Sem, and the people therein , Elamitae; by Elianus, Ely∣mae; by Iosephus, Elymi. Suidas deriues this Nation sometimes from Assur, sometime from Magog, of whom they were called Magusaei; which Magusaei, according to Eusebius, are not to Euseb l. 6. c. 8. d. . Euan . be taken for the Nation in generall, but for those who were afterward called the Magi or Wise men. So doe the Greekes, among many other their sayings of them, affirme, That the Persians were anciently written Artaei, and that they called them∣selues Cephenes. But that they were Elamitae, Moses and the Prophets, Esay, Ieremie, Gen. 10. Ezechiel, Daniel, and Esdras in many places confirme: Which also S. Hierome vpon 11. 21, 22. Iere. 25. & 29. Ieremie the fiue and twentieth, vpon Daniel the eight and twentieth, and in his He∣brew Ezecb. 32. questions approueth, saying: Elam à quo Elamitae Principes Persidis; ELAM, of Dan. 8. whom were the Elamites Princes of Persia. Esd. 4. And that Citie which the Author of the second booke of the Maccabees cal∣leth 2. Mac. 9. Persepolis, is by the Author of the first called Elimais, but is now called Siras, 1. Mac. 6. being the same which Antiochus, for the great riches thereof, twice attempted in vaine, and to his great dishonour. And yet this Citie, now called Siras, was not the old Persepolis; for Alexander, at the request of Thais the Harlot, burnt it. The first King of Persia to vs knowne, if wee follow the current of Au∣thors interpreting the foureteenth chapter of Genesis, was Che∣dorlaomer, who liued with Amraphel or Ninias, and ioyned with him in the warre against those Arabians, who was afterward ex∣tinguished by the forces of Abraham. Gen. 10. CHAP. III. Of CYRVS. §. I. Of CYRVS his name and first actions. AS touching the name of Cyrus, Strabo sayth, That the same was taken from a Riuer which watereth Persia; this great Prince hauing Agradatus for his proper name. But the great Cyrus was not the first of that name. Herodotus otherwise; and that Cyrus signifieth Strab. l. 15. a father in the Persian Tongue, and therefore so in∣tituled by the people. It is true that for his Iustice and other excellent vertues he was indeed called a Father; but that the name of Cyrus had any such signification, I thinke it be mistaken. Plutarch hath a third opinion, affirming, That Cyrus is as much to say as the Plut. in . . Sunne, in the same Language. Howsoeuer it be, yet the Prophet Esay, almost two hundred yeeres before Cyrus was borne, giues him that name, Thus saith the Lord vnto CYRVS his , &c. Before the Conquest of Babylon, the victories which Cyrus obtained were many and great: among which, the Conquest of Lydia, and other Prouinces thereto sub∣iect, together with the taking of Croesus himselfe, are not recounted by Eusebius, Orosius, and others, but placed among his latter atchiuements, whose opinion for this difference of time is founded vpon two reasons; namely, That of the Median there is no mention in that last warre against Croesus: and that the obtaining of Sardis is referred to the eight and fiftieth Olympiad, and the glorious victory which Cyrus had ouer Babylon, to the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad. The former of which might haue beene vsed (and was by the Greekes ) to ex∣clude the Medes from the honour of hauing wonne Babylon it selfe, which in due place I haue answered. The latter seemes to haue reference to the second Warre which Cyrus made vpon Lydia, when it rebelled; at which time hee so established his former Conquest, as after that time these Nations neuer offered to reuolt. Wherefore I like better in this particular to with , whome the most of Chronologers follow, and finde the enterprise of Sardis to praecede that of Babylon. § II. Of CROESVS the King of Lydia, who made warre vpon CYRVS. I Haue in the last Booke spoken somewhat of Croesus, of his race and predecessors, as also of those Kings which gouerned Lydia in more ancient times: of which the first (to prophane Authors knowne) was Lydus the sonne of Atys: Which familie extinguished, the King∣dome was by an Oracle conferred vpon Argon, descended from Her∣cules, whereof there were two and twentie generations, Candaules being the last, who by shewing his faire wife naked to Gyges his fauorite, he was by the same Gyges (thereto vrged vpon perill of his owne life by the Queene) the next day slaine. Which done, Gyges enioyed both the Queene and the Kingdome of Lydia, and left the same to Atys his sonne, who was father to Sadyattes, the father of Halyattes (who thrust the Cimerians out of ) and Halyattes begat Croesus: Which fiue Herod. l. 1. p. 3. 4 & 5. Kings, of a third race, enioyed that Kingdome an hundred and seuentie yeeres. Halyattes the father of Croesus was an vndertaking Prince, and after hee had continu∣ed a warre against Cyaxares the Median, a Prince very powerfull, and maintained it six yeeres: a peace was concluded vpon equall conditions betweene them. Astyages, the sonne of Cyaxares, and grandfather to Cyrus, thought himselfe greatly honoured by obtayning Aryenis, Croesus sister, whom he married. But Croesus so farre enlarged his dominions after fathers death, as he was no∣thing inferior in territorie to any King or Monarch of that age: Of which, about that time there were foure in effect of equall strength; to wit, the Median, the Ba∣bylonian, the Aegyptian and the Lydian: onely Nabuchodonosor, after he had ioyned Phoenicia, Palestina, and Aegypt to his Empire, had thence-forward no competitor during his owne life. But Croesus, notwithstanding the men and treasure spent in the quarrel of the Ba∣bylonians, he yet mastred Aeolis, Doris, and Ionia, Prouinces possest by the in Asia the lesse, adioyning to ; gaue law to the Phrygians, Bithinians, Carians, Mysians, Paphlagonians, and other Nations. And that he also inforst the Ephesians to acknowledge him, notwithstanding they compassed their Citie with gir∣dle, Her. l. 5. Herodotus witnesseth. Moreouer, Athaeneus out of Berosus (which also . l. 14. c. 17. confirmeth) makes report of a Signall victorie which Croesus obtained against the Sacaeans, a Nation of the Scythians, in memorie whereof the Babylonians his allies did yeerely celebrate a Feast, which they called Sacaea: All which hee performed in foureteene yeere. And being now confident in the continuance of his good fortune, and enuious of Cyrus fame, doubting also, that his prosperous vndertakings might in the ende grow perillous to himselfe, he consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, whom he pre∣sented with maruellous rich gifts, what successe he might hope for against Cyrus, if he vndertooke him: from whom he receiued this riddle; CROESVS passing ouer the Riuer Halys, shall dissolue a great dominion. For the diuell being doubtfull of the successe, payed him with marchandize of both sides like, and might be inuerted ei∣ther way to the ruine of Persia, or of his owne Lydia. § III. CROESVS his Expedition against CYRVS. HEreupon Croesus being resolued to stop the course of Cyrus fortunes, if he could, despised all the arguments vsed by Sandanes to the con∣trarie, who desired him to fore-thinke, That he vrged a Nation inha∣biting a barren and mountainous Region, a people not couered with the soft silke of wormes, but with the hard skinnes of beasts; not fed with such meat as they fancied, but content with what they found; drin∣kers of water, not of wine: and in a word, a Nation warlike, enduring, valiant and prosperous; ouer whom if he became victorious, he could thereby enrich himselfe in but fame, in which he alreadie excelled: and if by them beaten, and subiected, so great would his losse appeare of all things which the world hath in account, as the same could neither hastily be told, nor readily conceiued. Notwithstanding this solide Counsaile, Croesus hauing prepared a powerfull ar∣mie, he led the same towards Media, but in his passage, he was arrested at Pterium, a Citie of great strength in Cappadocia; which while he sought by all meanes to sur∣prise or to force, Cyrus came on, and found the encamped before it. That each was inferior to other in strength or opinion, I doe not finde: for out of doubt, Croesus as he excelled any Prince of that age in riches and abilitie; so was hee not vnder any in territorie and fame that then liued. But as Cratippus of Mitylene answered Pompey when he complained against the gods, because they fauoured a disturber and vsurper of the Commonweale against him who fought for the Romane , That Kingdomes and Commonweales had their encrease and period from diuine Ordinance: so at this time was the Win∣ter of Croesus at hand, the leaues of his flourishing fortune ready to fall, and that of Cyrus but in the flower and first spring. The God of all power, and not Admetis Herdman, Apollo, had giuen date to the one, and a beginning of glory to the other. When these two Armies were in view of each other, after the entertainement of diuers skirmishes, the Persians and Lydians beganne to ioyne in grosse troupes: sup∣plies from both Kings thrust on vpon the falling off, and aduauncement of either Nation: and as the Persians had somewhat the better of the day, so when the darke vaile of night had hidden each armie from the others view, Croesus doubting what successe the rising Sunne would bring with it, quitted the field to Cyrus, and with all speede possible retyred, and taking the next way into Lydia, recouered Sar∣dis his first Citie and Regall Seat, without any pursuite made by Cyrus to retard him. Where being arriued, and nothing suspecting Cyrus approach, or any other warre for that Winter, he dismissed the souldiors, and sent the troupes of his sun∣dry Nations to their owne Prouinces, appointing them to reassemble at the end of fiue moneths, acquainting his Commaunders with his intents for the renewing of the warre at the time appointed. §. IIII. The Conquest of Lydia by CYRVS. CYRVS in the following morning finding the Lydians departed, put his armie in order to pursue them, yet not so hastily, and at their heeles, as to be discouered. But hauing good intelligence of Croesus his proceeding, hee so measured his Marches, as he presented not himselfe before Sardis, till such time as Croesus had disposed his ar∣mie to their Wintring garrisons: when being altogether vnlooked for, and vnfea∣red, he surrounded Sardis with his Armie: Wherein Croesus hauing no other Com∣panies than his Citizens and ordinary Gards, after fourteene dayes siege the same was entred by assault, and all executed that resisted. Croesus hauing now neither armes to fight, nor wings to flye, Sardis being on all parts strongly encompassed, In calamitate suam quisque habet , . thrust himselfe into the heape and miserable multitude of his vassals, and had vn∣dergone the common fortune of common persons vanquished, had not a sonne of his, who had beene dumbe all his life (by extremitie of passion and feare enabled) Memoriam me∣tus perimit: vocis est in∣citamentum, &c. cried out to the souldiors to spare Croesus. Who thereupon being taken and impri∣soned, despoyled of all things but the expectation of death, he was forth with tied in fetters, and set on the top of a great and high heape of wood, to be consumed to ashes thereon. To which when the fire was set and kindled, remembring the dis∣course Solin. c. 7. which he had with the Athenian Law-giuer, he thrice cryed out on his name, Solon, Solon, Solon: and being demaunded what he meant by that inuocati∣on he first vsed silence: but vrged againe, he told them, That he now found it true which Solon had long since told him, That many men in the race and courses of their liues might well be accounted fortunate, but no man could discerne himselfe Homo qui in homine calami∣toso est, , Cass. for happy indeede, till his end. Of which answere Cyrus being speedily informed, remembring the changes of fortune and his owne mortalitie, he commaunded his ministers of Iustice to with∣draw the fire with all diligence to saue Croesus, and to conduct him to his presence: Which done, Cyrus demaunded of him, Who it was that had perswaded him? Or what selfe reason had conducted him to inuade his territorie, and to make him of a friend an enemie? To whom he thus answered, It was thy prosperous and my vn∣prosperous destinie (the Graecian God flattering therewithall my ambition) that were the inuerters and conductors of Croesus warre against Cyrus. Cyrus being pierst with Croesus answere, and bewayling his estate, though victori∣ous ouer , did not onely spare his life, but entertained him euer after as a King and his companion, shewing therein a true effect of mercy indeed, Quaenon causam sed fortunam spectat. And herein is the reall difference discerned betweene that behauior which wee call Beneficium latronis, & gratiam Principis: A theefe sometime sparing the life of him which is in his power, but vniustly: A King that giueth breath, and a continu∣ance of being, to him that was the cause and author of his owne euill. The report made by Xenophon is, That Cyrus did friendly entertaine Croesus at the first sight, not mentioning that which Herodotus deliuers, and is here already set downe, that hee should haue beene burnt aliue. It may well , that Xenophon pourtraying (in Cyrus ) an heroicall Prince, thought an intent so cruell fitter to be forgotten than rehearsed, as too much misbeseeming a generous nature. And it is very likely, that neerenesse of alliance might with-hold Cyrus (had he beene other∣wise vitious) from so cruell a purpose against his grandmothers brother. How so∣euer it was, the Morall part of the Storie hath giuen credit and reputation to the re∣port of Herodotus (as to many the like it often doth) and made it passe for currant, though the trust reposed in Croesus afterwards may seeme to argue, that Cyrus did not vse him inhumanely at the first. For as Herodotus himselfe telleth vs, when Cyrus past with his armie ouer Araxes into Scythia, he Croesus to accompanie and aduise his sonne Cambyses, Gouernour of the Empire in his absence, with whom he liued all the time of Cyrus, and did af∣terward follow Cambyses into Aegypt, where he hardly escaped his hand. What his end was I doe not finde. But in this time the races of three of the greatest Kings in that part of the world tooke end; to wit, of the Babylonians, Medians, and Lydians; in Balthasar, Cyaxares, and Croesus. §. V. How CYRVS wonne Babylon. AFter this Lydian warre ensued the great Conquest of Babylon, which gaue vnto Cyrus an Empire so large and mighty, that he was iustly reputed the greatest Monarch then liuing vpon earth. How long time the preparations for this great action tooke vp, it is vncertaine; onely it seemes, that tenne whole yeeres did passe betweene his taking those two Cities of Sardes & Babylon, which neuerthelesse I doe not thinke to haue beene wholly occupied in prouision for the Assyrian warre, but rather to haue beene spent in settling the Estate which hee had already purchased. And hereunto per∣haps may be referred that which Ctesias hath in his fragments of a warre made by Cyrus vpon the Scythians, though related as foregoing the victory obtained against Croesus. He telleth vs, That Cyrus inuaded Scythia, and being victorious ouer that Nation, tooke Amorges their King prisoner: but being in a second battaile ouer∣throwne by the wife of Amorges, Sparetha, and therein taken, the one King was de∣liuered for the other. Likewise it may be thought, that no small part of those troubles which arose in the lower Asia, grew soone after the departure of the victorious , before the Conquest was fully established. For after Cyrus was returned out of Asia the lesse, many Nations, conquered for∣merly by Croesus, and now by Cyrus, reuolted from him; against whom imploy∣ed Pactias, and then Harpagus, who first reduced the Phocians vnder their former o∣bedience: and then the rest of the Greekes inhabiting Asia the lesse, as the Ionians, Carians, Aeolians, and Lycians, who resoluedly (according to the strength they had) defended themselues. But in the attempt vpon Babylon it selfe it is not to be doub∣ted, that Cyrus employed all his forces, hauing taken order before-hand, that no∣thing should be able to diuert him, or to raise that siege, and make frustrate the worke vpon which he did set all his rest. And great reason there was, that he should bend all his care and strength vnto the taking of that , which the same and reputation that it held, as being head of an Empire thereon depending, was so strongly fenced with a treble wall of great height, and surrounded with waters vn∣foordable, so plentifully victualled for many yeeres, that the inhabitants were not onely free from all doubt and feare of their estate, but despised and derided all pur∣poses and power of their besiegers. The onely hope of the Medes and Persians, who despaired of carrying by assault a so well fortified and manned, was in cutting off all supplies of victuals and o∣ther necessaries; whereof though the Towne was said to be stored more than twentie yeeres, yet might it well be deemed, that in such a world of peo∣ple as dwelt within those gates, one great want or other would sooner appeare, and vanquish the resolution of that vnwarlike multitude. In expecting the successe of this course, the besiegers were likely to endure much trauaile, and all in vaine, if they did not keepe straight watch and strong gards vpon all quarters. This was hard to doe, in regard of the vast circuit of those wals which they were to gird in, with numbers neither great enough, nor of men sufficiently assured vnto their Commaunder: The consideration whereof ministred vnto the Babylonians matter of good pastime, when they saw the Lydians, Phrygians, Cappadocians, and o∣thers, . . lib. 7. quartered about their Towne to keepe them in, who hauing beene their auncient friends and allies, were more likely to ioyne with them, if occasion were offered, than to vse much diligence on the behalfe of Cyrus, who had, as it were, yesterday laid vpon their neckes the galling yoake of seruitude. Whilest the besieged were pleasing themselues in this deceitfull gladnesse, that is the ordi∣narie fore-runner of suddaine calamitie; Cyrus, whom the Ordinance of God made strong, constant, and inuentiue, deuised by so many channels and tren∣ches as were sufficient and capable of Euphrates, to draw the same from the wals of Babylon, thereby to make his approach the more facile and assured: which when by the labour of many hands hee had performed, hee stayed the time of his aduantage for the execution: for hee had left certaine bankes or heads vncut, betweene the maine riuer which surrounded the Citie, and his owne Trenches. Now Balthasar, finding neither any want or weakenesse within, nor any of approach for his enemies without, prepared an exceeding sumptuous feast, publike Playes, and other Pastimes, and thereto inuited a thousand of his Princes or Nobilitie, besides his wiues, curtizans, and others of that trade. This he did ei∣ther to the know, that his prouisions were , not onely for all needfull vses, but euen for and excesse: Or because hee hoped that his ene∣mies, vnder the burthen of many distresses were well neere broken, or in honour of Bel his most Idoll: Or that it was his birth or coronation day: Or for many or all these respects. And he was not contented with such as no Prince else could equall, but (vsing Daniels words) he himselfe vp against the Lord of Heauen: For hee and his Princes, wiues and concubines, made carowsing cuppes of the Vessels of God, in contempt of whom he praised his owne puppets, made of siluer and Gold, of Brasse, of Iron, Wood, and Stone, Quanta fuit stultitia in vasibus aureis bibentes ligneos & lapideos Deos laudare; How great a foolishnesse was it (sayth S. HIEROME) drinking in golden Cuppes, to praise Gods of Wood and Stone. While Balthasar was in this sort triumphing, and his braines well filled with vapors, he beheld a hand, which by diuine power wrote on the wall opposite vnto him cer∣taine words which he vnderstood not: wherewith so great a feare and amazement seized him, as the ioynts of his loynes were loosed, and his knees smote one against Dan. 5. v. 6. the other. Which passion when he had in some part recouered, hee cryed out for his Caldeans, Astrologians, and Southsayers, promising them great rewards, and the third place of honour in the Kingdome to him that could reade and expound the writing; but it exceeded their art. In this disturbance and astonishment the Queene hearing what had past, and of the Kings amazement, after reuerence done vsed this speech: There is a man in thy Kingdome, in whom is the spirit of the holy Gods, and in the dayes of thy father, light, and vnderstanding and wisdome, like the wisdome of the Gods, was found in him, whom the King NABVCHODONOSOR thy father, the King (I say) thy father made chiefe of the Inchanters, Astrologians, Chaldeans, and Southsayers, because a more excellent spirit, and knowledge, and vnderstanding, &c. were found in him, euen in DANIEL, &c. Now let DANIEL be called, and he will declare the interpretation. This Queene, Iosephus takes for the grandmother; Origen and Theodoret for the Orig. & Theod. in Dan. Ioseph. Ant. 10. mother of Balthasar; either of which may be true: for it appeareth, that shee was not any of the Kings wiues, because absent from the feast; and being past the age of dauncing and banquetting, she came in vpon the bruit of the miracle, and to com∣fort the King in his distraction: and whereas Daniel was forgotten and neglected by others of younger yeeres and times, this old Queene remembred well what he had done in the dayes of Nabuchodonosor, grandfather to this Balthasar, and kept in mind both his religion and diuine gifts. When Daniel was brought to the Kings presence, who acknowledged those ex∣cellent graces wherwith God had enriched him, he prayed him, together with pro∣mises of reward and honour, to reade and interprete those words miraculously written; to whom Daniel made answere in a farre different style from that he vsed towards his grandfather: for the euill which he foretold Nabuchodonosor, he wished that the same might befall his enemies, but to this King (whose neglect of God and vice he hated) he answered in these words, Keepe thy rewards to thy selfe, and giue thy gifts to another, yet will I reade the writing vnto the King, and shew him the interpretati∣on: Which before he had performed, he gaue him first the cause of Gods just judge∣ment against him, and the reason of this terrible sentence; whereof the King and all his Wisemen were vtterly ignorant: Which being written at large in Daniel, hath this effect, That forgetting Gods goodnesse to his father, whom all Nations feared Dan. 5. v. 18, 19, 20. and obeyed, and that for his pride and neglect of those benefits, as he depriued him of his estate and vnderstanding; so vpon the acknowledgement of Gods infinite power he restored him to both. This King notwithstanding lifted himselfe vp a∣gainst same God, and presumed both to abuse those vessels, dedicated to holy vses, and neglecting the Lord of all power, praysed and worshipped the dead Idols of Gold, Siluer, Brasse, Iron, Stone, and Wood: and therefore those wordes, from the Oracle of a true God deliuered, (to wit) Mene Tekel, Vphraisin, gaue the King knowledge, that God had numbred the time of his Kingdome, and finished it: That he was weighed in the ballance of Gods justice, and found too light; and that his Empire was diuided and giuen to the Medes and Persians. The very euening or night of this day, wherein Balthasar feasted and perished, Cyrus either by his espiall, according to Xenophon, or inspired by God himselfe, wose ensigne he followed in this warre, found the time and opportunitie to inuite him: and therefore while the Kings head, and the heads of his Nobilitie were no lesse filled with the vapours of wine, than their hearts were with the feare of Gods judgement, he caused all the bankes and heads of his trenches to be opened and cut down with that diligence, as by them he drew the great Riuer of Euphrates drie for the present, by whose channell running, his armie made their entrance, finding none to disturbe them. All the Towne lay buried (as the Poet saith) in sleepe and wine: such as came in the Persians way, were put to the sword, vnlesse they saued themselues by flight, as some did, who ranne away crying, and filling the streets with an vncertaine tumult. Such Assyrian Lords as had reuolted from Balthazar, and betaken themselues to the partie of Cyrus, did now conduct a selected companie to the Kings Palace; which hauing easily forced, they rushed into the chamber where the King with his Princes were banqueting, slew both him and them without any mercie, who strug∣led in vaine to keepe those liues which God had newly threatned to take away. And now was the prophecie of Ieremie fulfilled, & that of Esay, two hundred yeeres Ier. c. 27. before this subuersion, who in his three & fortieth Chapter, and else where, writeth Esa. c. 47. this destruction so feelingly and liuely, as if he had beene present both at the terri∣ble slaughter committed, and had seene the great and vnfeared change and calami∣tie of this great Empire; yea, and had also heard the sorrowes and bewailings of euery suruiuing soule thereunto subiect. His prophesie of this place he beginneth in these words: Come downe, and sit in the dust, O virgine daughter of Babel: sit on the ground, there is no throne, &c. And againe, Sit still and get thee into darknesse, O daugh∣ter of the Chaldaeans, for thou shalt no more be called the Ladie of Kingdomes. For though it cannot be doubted, that God vsed Nabuchodonosor & the Chaldaeans, to punish the idolatrie of the Iudaeans, yet Esay teacheth vs in this place, That he did not yet for∣get, that the execution of his iudgements was mixt with a rigorous extremitie. For (saith Esay ) in the person of God, I was wroth with my people, I haue polluted mine in∣heritance, Cap. 47. and giuen them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercie, but thou didst Isai. 14. lay thy very heauie yoke vpon the ancient. I will rise vp against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and will cut off from Babel the name and the remnant, and the sonne and the nephew. And To wit, Euil∣merodach and Balthasar. in the thirteenth, Euery one that is found, shall be stricken thorow: and whosoeuer ioy∣neth himselfe, shall fall by the sword, their children also shall be broken in pieces before their eyes, their houses spoyled, and their wiues rauished. So as there is no Historian who was either present at this victorie of Cyrus, or that receiued the report from others true∣ly as it was, that could better leaue the same to posteritie after it happened, than E∣say hath done in many places of his prophecies, which were written two hundred yeeres before any thing attempted. The greatnesse and magnificence of Babylon, were it not by diuers graue Au∣thors set downe, might seeme altogether fabulous: for besides the reports of Saint Heirome, Solinus, and Orosius, Aristotle in the third of his Politikes, the second Chap∣ter, receiued the report for true, That one part of the Citie knew not that the rest was taken three daies after. Which is not impossible, if the testimonie of Diodorus Siculus may be taken; who findes the compasse thereof at three hundred Diod. l. 3. and threescore Stadia or Furlongs, which makes fiue and fortie miles: the walls whereof had so great a breadth, as sixe chariots might passe in front thereon. And of height, according to Ctesias and Clitracus, three hundred threescore and fiue foot, garnished with an hundred and fiftie Towers. Strabo in the beginning of his sixteenth Booke of Geographie giues it a greater circuit, adding fiue and twen∣tie furlongs more to the former compasse, reckoning the same at three hundred fourescore and fiue furlongs, which makes eight and fortie myle and one furlong: but findes the wall farre vnder that which Diodor reports: and so doth Curtius measure their thicknesse but at two and thirtie foot, and their height at an hun∣dred cubits; which is also very much: euery cubite containing a foot and halfe of the large measure, though to the whole circuit of the Citie hee giues the same with Siculus, and eight furlongs more. Herodotus findes a greater content than Strabo doth, namely, foure hundred and fourescore furlongs in circle; the thick∣nesse of the wall he measures at fiftie cubits, and the height at two hundred of the same regall cubit. For entrance it had an hundred gates of Brasse, with posts and Her. l. 1. hookes to hang them on of the same metall: and therefore did the Prophet Esay Esa. 4. 7. &. c. 13. rightly intitle Babylon, The Princesse and glorie of Kingdomes. But when Cyrus had wonne her, he stript her out of her princely Robes, and made her a slaue, diuiding not onely all her goodly houses, and her whole Terri∣torie, with all the riches therein contained, among his souldiers: but bestowing the inhabitants themselues as bondslaues vpon those that had taken possession of their goods. Touching the raigne of Cyrus, and the time which he enioyed in rest and plea∣sure, I can say no more of it, than that it is generally agreed by all Chronologers to haue lasted onely seuen yeeres: in which time he made such Constitutions, as differ little from the Ordinances of all wise Kings that are desirous to establish a Royal power in themselues and their posteritie. §. VI. The end of CYRVS. THe last warre, and the end of this great King Cyrus, is diuersly written. Herodotus and Iustine deliuer, That after the Conquest of Asia the lesse Cyrus inuaded the Massagetes, a very warlike Nation of the Scythians, gouerned by Tomyris their Queene: and that in an incounter be∣tweene the Persians and these Northerne Nomades, Tomyris lost Armie, and her Sonne Spargapises, that commanded it: In reuenge whereof, this Queene making new leuies of men of warre, and following the warre against Cy∣rus, in a second battaile beat the Persian armie, and taking Cyrus prisoner, cut off his head from his body, and cast the same into a boule of bloud, vsing these wordes; Thou that hast all thy life time thirsted for bloud, now drinke thy fill, and sati∣ate thy selfe. It should hereby seeme, that Cyrus knowing the strength and multitude of those frozen Nations, was perswaded to abate their furie by some forcible inuasion and depopulation, because in the time of Syaxares, father to Astyages, those Scythians inuaded Media and Asia the lesse, and held the same in a seruile subiection eight and twentie yeeres. This warre which Metasthenes calleth Tomyrique, lasted (saith he) sixe yeeres, and tooke end at the death of Cyrus. But in this particular I with Viginer, that this Scythian warre was rather the same which Cyrus made against the Sacians, before the Conquest of Lydia, ac∣cording to Ctesias before cited, who calleth Tomyris, Sparetha, though he deliuer the Vig. prim. part. Bib. successe of that warre otherwise then Herodotus doth: The rather (saith Viginer ) because Strabo in his eleuenth booke reciteth, That Cyrus surprised the Sacians by the same stratageme by which Iustine saith, defeated the sonne of Tomyris. And the same Ctesias also reporteth, That the last warre which Cyrus made was a∣gainst . l. 15. hist. part. , King of the Derbicians a Nation (as the rest) of ; whom though he ouercame, yet he then receiued the wound of his death, which he suffe∣red three dayes after. Strabo also affirmeth, That he was buried in his owne Citie of Pasagardes, which Strab. l. 15. himselfe had built, and where his Epitaph was to be read in his time; which is said to haue beene this: O vir quicunque es, & advenis, neque enim te ad∣venturum ignor aui: Ego sum CYRVS qui imperium constitui, pusillum quo meum mihine inuideas; O thou man, whosoeuer thou art, or whencesoeuer thou commest; for I was not ignorant that thou shouldest come: I am CYRVS that foun∣ded the Persian Empire, doe not enuie vnto me this little earth, with which my bodie is co∣uered. This Tombe was opened by Alexander, as Qu. reporteth, either vpon Q. Curt. l. hope of treasure, supposed to haue beene buried with him, or vpon desire to ho∣nour his dead body with certaine ceremonies; in which there was found an olde rotten Target, two Scythian Bowes, and a Sword. The Coffin wherein his bodie lay, Alexander caused to be couered with his owne garment, and a Crowne of gold to be set vpon it. These things well considered, as they giue credit to the reports of Xenophon and Zonaras, so they derogate much from Herodotus, who leaues his bodie Xen. . 8. in the hands of Tomyris. Zon. l. 1. c. 20. And surely, had Cyrus lost the Armie of Persia in Scythia, it is not likely, that his sonne would so soone haue transported all his remaining forces into Aegypt, so far off from that quarter: the Scythian Nation then victorious, and bordering Media; neither had Cambyses beene able in such haste to haue vndertaken and performed so great a Conquest. Wherefore I rather beleeue Xenophon, saying, That Cyrus died aged and in peace: and that finding in himselfe, that hee could not long en∣ioy the world, hee called vnto him his Nobilitie, with his two sonnes, Cambyses and Smerdis; or after Xenophon, Tanaoxares: and after a long Oration, wherein he assured himselfe, and taught others, of the immortalitie of the Soule, and of the punishments and rewards following the good and ill deseruing of euery man in this life; he exhorted his sonnes by the strongest arguments hee had, to a per∣petuall concord and agreement. Many other things hee vttered, which make it probable, that hee receiued the knowledge of the true God from Daniel, when hee gouerned Susa in Persia; and that Cyrus himselfe had read the prophecie of E∣say, wherein hee was expressely named, and by God (for the of his peo∣ple) praeordained. Which act of deliuering the Iewes from their , and of restoring the holy Temple and Citie of Hierusalem, was in true consideration the noblest worke that euer Cyrus performed. For in other actions he was an instrument of Gods power, vsed for the chastising of many Nations, and the establishing of a Gouernement in those parts of the world, which was not long to continue. But herein he had the grace to be an instrument of Gods goodnesse, and a willing ad∣uancer of his Kingdome vpon earth; which must last for euer, though heauen and earth shall perish. §. VII. Of CYRVS his decree for building the Temple of God in Ierusalem. HAuing therefore spoken of his great victories, mentioned by sundry , the glory of all which was as a reward of this his seruice done vnto him that was Author of them and of all goodnesse: I hold it meete at length to speake of the Decree made in the first of his Raigne, being perhaps the first that euer he made, after his pos∣session of the Babylonian Empire: That the captiue Iewes should returne againe into their owne , and re-build the House of GOD in Ierusalem, hauing now endured and finished the threescore and tenne yeeres , by the Pro∣phets foretold. For the accomplishing whereof, hee gaue order to his Treasurers to furnish them with all things necessarie and wanting. Hee also restored vnto them thousand foure hundred threescore and nine Vessels of Gold and Siluer, whereof Nabuchodonosor, the grandfather of Balthasar, had formerly robbed the Temple. The number of the Iewes which returned out of Chaldaea vnder their leader Zoro∣babel, 1. . 2. the sonne of Salathiel, and nephew to King Iecontas, and Iesus or Iosua the 2. . 7. . sonne of Iosadak, were about fiftie thousand; where, as soone as they arriued, they built an Altar to the liuing God, and sacrificed thereon, according to their owne 1. Esd. 2. 3. Esd. Law, and afterward bethought themselues how to prepare materials for the re∣building 5. Esd. . 4. & 5. of the Temple. Jos. l. 11. But no sooner did the Iewes begin to lay any one stone, than the Samaritanes and other idolatrous Nations adioyning gaue all the impediment they could. So did the Gouernours of those Prouinces vnder Cyrus altogether countenance the , and in no sort fauoured the Iewes, nor the labours and purposes they had in hand. And not onely those which were but Prouinciall Lieutenants and other of∣ficers Esd. 1. c. 2. v. 16. of lesse place, but Cambyses himselfe; who hauing the charge of the whole Empire, while Cyrus was busied otherwise, countermanded the building begun. Esd. 2. v. 16. And whereas some Authors make doubt, that whatsoeuer Cambyses did when him∣selfe had obtained the Empire, yet during the life of Cyrus there was no such impe∣diment or prohibition: They may herein resolue themselues out of Esdras, That by the conspiracies of the neighbouring Nations the building was hindered all the Esd. 1. c. 5. v. 33. Esd. 1. c. 4. v. 5. time of King Cyrus life, &c. And therefore it is true, that the Iewes themselues af∣firme as it written in the second of Iohn, That the Temple was sixe and fortie yeeres in setting vp, hauing receiued so many hinderances from the first foundation to the second of Darius. And if wee seeke the naturall and politique causes which moued Cambyses to withstand his fathers decree, as well while he gouerned vnder him, as when him∣selfe became sole and soueraigne Monarch, we shall finde them in that Epistle re∣membred by Esdras, written by Belemus, Mithridates, and the rest, Presidents and Counsellors in Phoenicia, wherein they complaine, that the Iewes were euermore rebellious & troublers of Kings; that their Citie being once built, they would then refuse to pay Tribute, and fall from the obedience of the Empire, as they had for∣merly done in the times of other Kings. Esd. 1. c. 2. But that which for that present seemed the most forcible impediment was, that Cambyses, hauing it in his resolution to inuade Aegypt, and that it was a common o∣pinion, That the Iewes were descended of those Nations, because they issued thence vnder Moses, when they conquered Iudaea; their Citie being once repaired and for∣tified, they might returne to their old vomit, and giue the same disturbance to Cam∣byses Conquest, which they did to Senacherib, Nabuchodonosor, and other Kings of Babylon. For as it is written in EZEKIEL, Aegypt was the confidence of the house of Ezck. c. 29. ISRAEL. But it is to be vnderstood, as Codoman and others haue obserued, that Artaxerxes, to whom the Counsellors & Gouernors of Phoenicia complained against the Iewes, did not praecede, but succeed Darius Hystaspes, as in the sixt and seuenth chapters of Esdras it is made plaine: and also that those Gouernors (whose Epistle sheweth as much) did not withstand the building of the Temple, but the fortifying and inclo∣sing of the Citie, as by the reasons giuen in the said Epistle, and by the Kings answer, it is euident. Also in the sixt of Ezra, the foureteenth verse, the Kings are named in order as they gouerned, and Artaxerxes written after Darius; as: And they built and finished it (to wit, the Temple) by the appointment of the God of Israel, and by the commandement of CYRVS and DARIVS, and ARTAHSHASTE King of Persia. Lastly, in the se∣uenteenth of Ezra it is written; Now after these things, in the raigne of ARTAH∣SHASTE King of Persia: which was as much to say as after the finishing of the Temple in Darius time. And therefore Artaxerxes in the second of Esdras is there named by anticipation, not in his owne time and place. And thus much concerning the rebuilding of the Citie and Temple of Hierusa∣lem. Which action though prospered by the hand of God, was very slowly pursued by the men whom it most concerned, but first set on foot by Cyrus. The other or∣dinances of Cyrus, with his forme and manner of gouernment, are to be found in Xenophon. At his death he bequeathed the Empire vnto his eldest sonne Cambyses, appointing Smerdis or Tanaoxares his younger sonne to be or Lieutenant of Media, Armenia, and Cadusia, and then died, after he had raigned (saith Herodotus ) one and thirtie yeeres, or (according to Iustine ) but thirtie. §. VIII. Of CYRVS his issue: and whether ATOSSA were his daughter, or (as some thinke) were the same with Queene HESTER. CYRVS had issue two sonnes, Cambyses and Smerdis, with three daugh∣ters, Atossa, Meroe, and Artystona: Ctesias addeth to these, Amytis. Atossa and Meroe their brother Cambyses married; Artystona, Darius Hystaspes obtained; so did he Atossa, Cambyses being dead: who (as some Writers haue supposed) inflamed both her husbands Darius, & Xerxes after him, to inuade Greece, to be auenged of the whole Nation for the cruell intent that Aman (whom the old translation calleth a Macaedonian ) had against the Iewes though the opinion of Iosephus be more probable, who findes Aman to be an Amalekite. But it is hard to bee vnderstood, how Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, should haue beene Esther; whose Historie seemes rather to appertaine to the time of Artaxerxes Longimanus, than of Darius the sonne of Hystaspes, or of Xerxes. The desire of Atossa to haue Greece brought vnder theyoke of Persia, was partly groun∣ded vpon the honour which thereby shee thought her husband might obtaine, partly vpon a feminine humor of getting many braue Dames, Corinthians, Atheni∣ans, and others of that Nation to be her bond-women. Wherefore I cannot giue assent to the opinion of Codoman, who vpon the neere sound of the two names, Atossa and Hadassa (by the latter of which Esther was also called) makes them to haue beene one person. For though it be true, that Esther concerning her paren∣tage a while, might be taken for a great Ladie; yet Codomans inference is nothing probable, that she should therefore, and for the great affection which the King bare vnto her, be thought the daughter of Cyrus. Certaine it is, that Esther did at length discouer her Kindred and Nation; whereby if Hystories could not be kept free from this error, yet the people, and especially the Nobilitie, must needs haue vnderstood the truth: who neuerthelesse did so well know the parentage of Atossa, that for her sake, as being daughter of Cyrus, her sonne Xerxes was preferred to the Kingdome be∣fore his elder brother, against whom also he could haue pretended a very weake clayme. But of these things more here∣after in fitter place. CHAP. I III. The estate of things from the death of CYRVS to the Raigne of DARIVS. §. I. Of the number and names of the Persian Kings. OF the successors of Cyrus, and the continuance of the Persian Empire, there are many opinions; As that of Metasthenes, who hath numbred the Persian Kings and their times, as followeth. Darius Medus, and Cyrus iointly 2 yeares. Cyrus alone. 22 yeares. Priscus Artaxerxes. 20 yeares. Darius Longimanus. 37 yeares. Darius Nothus. 19 yeares. Artaxerxes Mnemon. 55 yeares. Ataxerxes Ochus. 26 yeares. Arses, or Arsames. 4 yeares. Darius the last, conquered by Alexander. 6 yeares. To which Philo agreeth; which number of yeeres added, make in all an hundred ninetie and one. But in this Catalogue Metasthenes hath left out Cambyses and Xerxes, and names Artaxerxes Assuerus for the immediate successor of Cyrus; in place (saith Melancthon ) of Darius the sonne of Hystaspes: for Metasthenes, as Me∣lancthon coniectureth, doth not account Cambyses in the Catalogue, because his raigne was confounded with that of Cyrus. There is a second opinion, though ridiculous, of Seder Olam, who finds but foure Persian Kings from the beginning to the end of that Empire. Genebrard, Schubert, and Beroaldus haue also a differing account from the Greekes; whom neuerthelesse Eusebius and most of the Latines follow, and so doth Krentz∣heim, who hath fully answered, and as I take it, refuted all the former Authors va∣rying Chron. Krentz. fol. . from that account: For in this sort doe the Greekes marshall the Persian Kings with the times of their raignes. Cyrus in all. giues Cyrus but 29. 30 yeeres. Cambyses, with the Magi. 8 yeeres. Darius Hystaspes. Melanct. but 20 36 yeeres. Xerxes 21 yeeres. Artaxerxes Longimanus. 40 yeeres. Darius Nothus. 19 yeeres. Artaxerxes Mnemon. Melanct. but 40 Melanct. 26. 43 yeeres. Artaxerxes Ochus. 23 yeeres. Arsames. 3 yeeres. Darius the last. Melanct. 4. 6 yeeres. Which numbers, put together, make in all two hundred and thirtie. This account (as I haue said) the most Chronologers and the best learned ap∣proue. These Persian Princes being all warranted by the authoritie of the Scrip∣tures, as Peucer in his historicall Animaduersions hath gathered the places; finding first Cyrus in the second of Chronicles, chap. 36. vers. 22, 23. Ezra 1. chap. 1. vers. 1. and often elsewhere. Secondly Cambyses in the 11 th of Daniel, who may indeede be well esteemed for one of those three Kings in the second verse named, and so the marginall Commen∣tor vpon the Geneua vnderstands that place; but, vnder correction, mistakes the mat∣ter greatly, when he saith in the same note, that Darius was an enemie to the people of God, and stood against them: his great fauour and liberalitie to the Iewes being elsewhere proued. Thirdly, is Darius Hystaspes found in Ezra the first, c. 4. v. 5 who in the sixt verse is also named Ahassuerus. Fourthly, in the eleuenth of Daniel verse the second, Xerxes is plainely foretold and described, and the great warre which hee should make against the Greekes by Daniel remembred. , Artaxerxes Longimanus in Ezra the fourth, verse seuen, who is also called Arthasasta, c. 4. 1. lib. Ezra v. 7. and cap. 7. v. 7. Sixtly, Darius Nothus, Ezra cap. 4. vers. 24. and cap. 5. vers. 6. . cap. 12. vers. 22. Seuenthly, Artaxerxes Mnemon in Nehe. c. 2. v. 1. who was father to Artaxerxes Ochus, and Arsames: for Darius the last he was of another Familie, the Line of Cyrus the Great ending in Ochus, who descended from Xerxes the sonne of Atossa, Cyrus his Daughter; and the issue male of Cyrus failing with his owne Sonnes. But to proceede. Eusebius with the Latines, following the Greekes, apply the be∣ginnings and ends of euery Persian King with their Acts, to some certaine Olym∣piad; As the war of Astyages ( Cyrus his maternall Grand-father) and Alyattes ( Croesus his father) to the nine and fortieth Olympiad; The beginning of Cyrus raigne to the beginning of the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad; The taking of Sardis by Cyrus to the eight and fiftieth Olympiad; The inuasion of Aegypt by Cambyses to the third yeere of the threescore and third Olympiad, and so of the rest. Which reference with good agreement betweene seuerall formes of computation adde the more credit vnto both. Againe, this historicall demonstration is confirmed by the Astronomicall com∣putation Ptol. in lib. 3. cap. 8. of Ptolomie, who refers the death of Alexander the Great, who died the 12. of Nouember, in the beginning of the hundred and fortieth Olympiad, to the foure hundred and foure & twentieth yeere after Nabonassar. And the Aera of Nabonassar beganne on the sixe and twentieth of Februarie: which conferred with the Olym∣piad, was in the ninth Moneth of the first yeere of the eighth Olympiad; So that whether we follow the accompt of the Olympiads, as doe the Greeke Historians, or that of Nabonassar with Ptolomie, we shall finde euery memorable accident to fall out right with each computation. Ptolomie reckons the time answerable to two hundred and foure and Iulian yeeres, and an hundred and fortie daies from Nabonassar, to the sixteenth of Iulie in the seuenth yeere of Cambyses. The Greekes, and namely Diodorus Siculus, place the taking of Aegypt by Cambyses in the second or third yeere of the threescore and third Olympiad, and the begin∣ning of Cambyses seuenth yeere in the first of the threescore and fourth Olym∣piad: which first of the threescore and fourth Olympiad runnes along with part of the two and twentieth of Nabonassar. The like agreement is consequently found about the beginning and end of Cyrus. Likewise the twentieth of Darius, who succeeded Cambyses, is according to Ptolo∣mie the two hundred and sixe and fortieth of Nabonassar, which (obseruing the of Nabonassars Aera and the Olympiad, viz. eight and twentie yeeres) it a∣grees with the third of the threescore and ninth Olympiad, where in it is placed by the Greekes. In this Iosephus agrees with the Greekes throughout, sauing that he ioy∣neth Darius Medus, whom Xenophon calleth Cyaxares, with Cyrus, in the destruction of Babylon, which is true, and not contrarie to the Greeke computation, but may very well stand with it. Lastly, the disagreements and confused accompts of those that follow the other Catalogue of the Persian Kings formerly rehearsed, doth giue the greater credit to this of the Greekes, which being constant in it selfe, accordeth also with the com∣putation of other Historians, and Astronomers, and likewise with the holy Scriptures. §. II. Of CAMBYSES, and the conquering of Aegypt by him. WE will therefore according to the truth giue the Empire of Persia to Cambyses, the sonne of Cyrus, though degenerate in all things, sauing the desire to increase the greatnesse of his Empire: whereof hee was possest in his Fathers time while Cyrus made warre in the North. Cte∣sias with others giue him a longer raigne than agreeth with the Groe∣cian accompt before receiued. In the fifth yeere of his sole raigne, and in the third yeere of the threescore and third Olympiad, according to Diodor and Eusebius, he inuaded Aegypt, and hauing ouerthrowne the King thereof, Psammenitus, he not only caused him to bee saline, . 2. c. 2. but also did put to death all his kindred and dependants, with the most of his . l. 3. . 83. 84. 85. children. Herodotus and Ctesias giue for cause of this Warre (being no other indeede than the Ambition of Cambyses ) that when he sent to Amasis King of Aegypt, to haue his daughter in marriage, Amasis presented him with Nitetis the daughter of Apries his predecessour, which Cambyses disdained. Howsoeuer it were; true it is, that Cambyses gathered an Armie fit for such an enterprise, and caused the same to march. But before they entred Aegypt, Amasis died and left Psammenitus, whom Ctesias called Amyrtoeus, his successour; who in∣ioyed Aegypt after his father (according to the best copies of Herodotus ) but sixe Moneths, though other Chronologers giue him sixe yeeres. But how long soeuer he held the Crowne, in one battaile heelost it, and was himselfe taken prisoner. It is said that Cambyses following therein the example of Cyrus, did not only spare life to the conquered King, but that hee also trusted him with the gouernement of Aegypt, and that vpon some reuolt, or the suspition thereof, hee caused him to bee slaughtered. But the race of this King was not so extirpated, if wee may beleeue Herodotus and Thucydides, but that he left a Sonne called Inarus, who caused the Ae∣gyptian to reuolt both from Xerxes and Artaxerxes. That Psammenitus was at the first entreated gently by Cambyses, I hold it very improbable, if it be true which is also written of him, That he so much hated Ama∣sis the King of Aegypt, who died before his arriuall, that hee caused his body to be drawne out of the graue, and after diuers indignities vsed, commanded the same to bee burnt, contrarie to the custome both of the Aegyptians and Persians. For the Aegyptians vsed to their dead bodies with salt, and other drugges, to the end the wormes might not deuoure them. The Neither did the Romanes euer consume their dead to , till the time of Sylla Dictator, who caused his owne to be deuoured by that element, fearing the Law called Talionis, or like for like, because himselfe had vntombed the carkasse of Caius Marius after his death, Her. l. 3. Plin. l. 7. c. 54. Persians durst not consume them with fire, which they esteemed as a God, and therefore feared to feede it with Carrion. §. III. The rest of CAMBYSE s his acts. AFter this victorie obtained in Aegypt, Cambyses sent an Armie into Cy∣prus, and constrained Euelthon King to acknowledge him, who before held that Iland of the Aegyptians. While Cambyses yet busied himselfe in Aegypt, he so much detested the Idolatry of that Nation, as he caused the Images them selues, with the Temples wherein they were worshipped, to beetorne downe and defaced. That done, he directed a part of his Armie into Lybia, to ouer-turne the Temple of Iupiter Ammon; but the Deuill in defence of his Oratorie raised such a tempest of Strab. & . L. 1. Sand, wherewith the greatest part of that Countrey is couered, as the Persians were there-with choked and ouer-whelmed. Pag. 87. 88. Notwithstanding which misaduenture, and report, that disday∣ning Her. l. 3. . l. 7. to be resisted, he prepared the rest of his Armie, which himselfe meant to con∣duct into those parts, but that finding a beginning of those incommodities, which his first-sent troupe had tried, hee changed his purpose. For though conquering Kings haue power ouer men, yet the Elements doe not obey them, according to that old English prouerbe, Goe, saith the King. Stay, saith the Tide. After his returne from the attempt of Aethiopia, hee caused Apis the Aegyptian Bull, worshipped by that Nation as God, to be slaine: a deed very commendable, had it proceeded from true zeale, and beene executed as in seruice of him that only is, and liueth. But soone afterwards, when in a dreame it seemed vnto him that Smerdis did sit in the royall Throne of Persia (which apparition was verified in Smerdis the Magus ) hee gaue it in charge to his fauourite Praxaspes, to murther Smerdis his brother. And hauing married his owne sisters, contrarie to the Persian Lawes, hee committed a most causelesse and most detestable murder vpon the one of them, called Meroe, then by himselfe with child, because shee bewailed the death of her brother Smerdis. I find it written of this Cambyses, That because his Predeces∣sors Her. pag. 89. 90. obserued religiously the ordinances of their Empire, assembled his Iudges and enquired of them, whether there were any law among the Persians that did permit the brother to marry his owne sister: it being his owne intent so to doe. The Iudges (who had alwaies either lawes or distinctions in store to Kings and times) made answere, that there was not any thing written allowing any such coniunction, but they notwithstanding found it in their , that it was al∣waies left to the will of the Persian Kings to doe what best pleased themselues; and so, as Nauclerus termes it, inuenerunt occasionem: That is as much to say, as the Iudges found a shift to please the King, and to secure themselues. And yet, where it con∣cerned not the Kings priuate satisfaction, he caused Sisamnus one of his Iudges, and perchance one of those which fauoured his incestuous match, to be flayed for an iudgement giuen, and the same his hide to bee hung vp the iudge∣ment seate. After which bestowing the fathers Office on his sonne, hee willed him to remember, that the same partialitie deserued the same punishment. Among other his cruelties, that which he exercised against the of his belo∣ued Praxaspes was very strange and vngratefull. For when he desired to bee truely informed by him what the Persians thought of his conditions, Praxaspes answered, That his vertues were followed with abundant praise from all men; only it was by many obserued, that he tooke more than vsuall delight in the taste of Wine. With which taxation inflamed, hee vsed this replication: And are the Persians double∣tongued, who also tell me that I haue in all things excelled my Father ? thou Praxaspes shalt then witnesse, whether in this report they haue done mee right: for if at the first shot I piercethy sonnes heart with an arrow, then is it false that hath beene spoken; but if I misse the marke, I am then pleased that the same be accounted true, and my subiects beleeued. This being spoken, hee directed an arrow towards the innocent child, who falling dead with the stroke, Cambyses commanded his bo∣dy to be opened, and his heart being broched on the arrow, this monstrous Tyrant greatly reioycing, shewed it to the Father with this saying, in stead of an Epitaph: Now PRAXASPES, thou maiest resolue thy selfe that I haue not lost my wits with Wine, but the Persians theirs, who make such report. Many other barbarous cruelties hee exercised, till at the last, according to the phrase of our Law, he became felon de soy. For when he was informed that Patizites, and Smerdis the Magi, ( writeth them Sphendanes and Cimerdius ) Ministers of his domesticall affaires, taking aduantage of the great resemblance betweene Smerdis the Kings brother, and Smerdis the Magus, possest themselues of the Em∣pire, he made all haste towards Persia, and in mounting hastily on horsebacke, his sword dis-sheathing pierced his owne thigh, where-with deadly wounded, falling into an ouer-late and remedilesse repentance of the slaughter which hee had execu∣ted vpon his owne brother, he soone after gaue vp his wicked ghost, when hee had raigned eight yeeres, accounting therein those seuen Moneths in which the Magi gouerned, while he was absent. In Cambyses the Male line of Cyrus failed. For he had no issue either by Atossa or Meroe: yet Zonaras out of Hierome giues him a Daughter called Pantaptes, and a Zonaras Com. 3. pag. 117. sonne called Orontes, who being drowned in the Riuer Ophites by , the same was afterward in memorie of the Princes death called Orontes. He built the Citie of Babylon in Aegypt, in the place where Latopolis was formerly seated, and that of Meroe in the Iland of Nilus, calling it by the name of his sister Meroe. §. IIII. Of the inter-regnum betweene CAMBYSES and DARIVS. CYRVS and his two sonnes beeing now dead, and the Kingdome in the possession of one of the Magi, the counterfait of Smerdis, the Princes, or Satrapes, or Prouinciall Gouernours of the Empire (to wit, Otanes, Intaphernes, Gobrias, Megabysus, Asphatines, Hidarnes, and Darius, who were all descended from the first Persian King, hauing discouered the fraud of this imposture, ioyned their forces together, surprised and rooted out the Conspirator with his Companions, and assistants. In which action (saith Iustine ) Intaphernes and Asphalines were slaine; but Herodotus o∣therwise, that they were only wounded, for he auoweth, that all the seuen Princes were present at the election following. For the Empire being now without a Gouernour, these Princes grew into con∣sultation how the same might be ordered from thence-forth. Otanes one of the se∣uen did not fancie any election of Kings, but that the Nobilitie and Cities should confederate, and by iust lawes defend their liberty in equality, giuing diuers reasons for his opinion, being as it seemed greatly terrified by the cruelties of Cambyses; As first, that it was not safe to giue all power to any one, seeing greatnesse it selfe, e∣uen in good men, doth often infect the minde with many vices, and the libertie and freedome in all things is most apt to insult, & to commit all manner of wicked out∣rage. Againe, that tyrants do commonly vse the seruices of wicked men, and fauour them most; they vsurpe vpon the lawes of their Countrey; take other mens wiues by force, and destroy whom they please without iudgement. Megabysus was of another opinion, affirming that the tyrannie of a multitude was thrice more intolerable, than that of one. For the multitude doe all things without iudgement runne into businesse and affaires with precipitation, like raging and ouer-bearing flouds. He therefore thought it safest to make election of a few, and those of the best, , and most vertuous; because it is euer found, that excellent Counsailes are euer had from excellent men. Darius gaue the third iudgement, who perswaded the of a King, because among few diuturnitie of concord is seldome found, and in great Empires it doth euer happen that the discord of many Rulers hath inforst the of one Supreme. It were therefore, saith Darius, farre safer to obserue the Lawes of our Countrie, by which Kingly gouernement hath beene ordained. The other foure Princes adhered to Darius, and agreed to continue the same Im∣periall gouernement by God established, and made prosperous. And to auoide par∣tialitie, it was accorded, that the morning following these seuen Princes should mount on Horse-back, and on him the Kingdome should be conferred, whose horse Her. l. 3. p. 100. 101. after the Sunne-rising should first ney or bray. In the euening after this appoint∣ment was made, it is said that Darius consulted with the Master of his horse Oebarus, who in the Suburbs of the Citie when the election was resolued of, caused the same Horse, whereon in the morning Darius was mounted, to couer a Mare, who as soone as he came into the same place was the first horse that brayed. Whereupon the o∣ther sixe Princes descended from their horses, and acknowledged Darius for their Lord and King. Plato in the third of his Lawes affirmeth, that in memorie of the seuen Princes, whereof Darius himselfe was one, that deliuered the Empire from the vsurpation of the Magi, hee diuided the whole into ; Herodotus saith into Satrapies. CHAP. V. Of DARIVS the sonne of HYSTASPES. §. I. Of DARIVS his Linage. DARIVS was descended of the ancient Persian Kings, to wit, of the Achaemenidae, of which, Cyrus the Great was the lineall Successour. For in this sort Herodotus deriues him as before. Cyrus the first, who had Teispius, who begat Ariaramnes, who was father of Arsamnes, the father of Hystaspes, the father of Darius, surnamed Celes, the father of Xerxes. . l. 4. Hystaspes accompanied Cyrus the Great in the warres against the Scythians, at which time Cyrus being made jelous of Darius by a dreame of his owne, caused him to be sent into Persia, others say to be imprisoned, from whence by the death of Cyrus he was deliuered, and made Gouernor of the Persian Magi. He afterward fol∣lowed . l. 1. & 3. Cambyses into Aegypt; he then ioyned with the rest of the Princes against the Magi, and either by the neying of his horse, or, as others affirme, by strong hand he obtained the Empire, which he the more assured to himselfe by taking two of Cyrus Daughters, and as many of his Neeces for his wiues. Pag. 130. Hystaspes, according to pag. 237. Pag. 154. Herodotus, had besides Darius these three sonnes, who Pag. 101. & 202 Pag. 180. 190. were great Commanders in the warre which Darius made in Asia the lesse, Thrace, . l. 6. pag. 180 Macedon, and Greece; Atarnes, Artophernes; and Artabanus, who disswaded Xerxes Pag 180. 190. from the second Graecian warre. Hystaspes had also a Daughter married to Gobryas Pag 199. the Father of Mardonius, who commanded the Armie of Darius in Macedon, and Pag. 200. 204. & pag.: 13. 285. 286. married the Daughter of Darius, Artozostre his Cosen germaine. Reineccius giues to Hystaspes fiue sonnes, Darius who sueceeded Cambyses, Artaba∣nus, Pag. 214. 254. Artaphernes, Otanes, and Atarnes, with two daughters. De Reg. Persar. Fol. 32. §. II. Of DARIVS his Gouernment, and suppressing the rebellion of Babylon. DARIVS deuised equall lawes whereby all his subiects might be go∣uerned, the same being formerly promised by Cyrus. He gaue accesse to all his subiects, and behaued himselfe so mildly to al men, that ma∣ny Nations desired and offered themselues to become his Vassalls: Only hee laied diuers payments and taxes on the people, which had not beene accustomed in Cyrus time, to the value of foureteene thousand fiue hun∣dred and threescore talents, saith Herodotus. The warre which Cambyses made a farre off in Aegypt, and the contention be∣tweene the Magi, and the Princes of Persia, for the Empire, gaue heart to the Baby∣lonians to recouer their libertie, and to shake off the Persian yoke, wherof Darius be∣ing aduertised, he prepared an Armie to recouer that Citie and State reuolted. But finding the same a difficult worke, he vsed the seruice of Zopirus, who for the loue he bare Darius, did cut off his owne Eares and Nose, and with other wounds yet fresh bleeding, he seemed to flie to the Babylonians for succour, to whom he accused the cruelty of Darius: who, for hauing giuen him aduice to giue ouer the siege of their Citie, had in this sort dismembred and deformed him; whereupon the Baby∣lonians gaue him that credit, as they trusted him with the disposition & comman∣dement of their greatest forces: which when Zopirus had obtained, after some small colourable ouer throwes giuen to the Persians vpon sallies, hee deliuered the Citie Her. lib. 3. into Darius his hands, who had lyen before it twentie Moneths. §. III. Of DARIVS his fauour to the Iewes in building the Temple. IN the second yeere of Darius, he gaue order that the building of the Temple at Hierusalem should goe on, and commanded that the same should be finished at his own charge, and out of the reuennues of the Crowne. And whereas the Gouernors of those Prouinces which are situate betweene Euphrates, and the Phoenician, and mid-land Sea, (whom Ezra calleth the Captaines beyond the Riuer) had hindred the worke in Ezra. c. 6. Cambyses his time, Darius gaue commandement that they should not thence-forth come neere vnto Ierusalem, to giue any impediment to the building, but that they should with-draw themselues, and get them farre off till all were finished and at an end. In the old Latine it is written, Procul recedite ab illis; With-draw your selues farre from them; In our English, Be yee farre from thence, to wit, from the Citie, and Tem∣ple, now in building. Hee also made a decree, which concerned his owne Subiects, That whosoeuer Ezr. 6. 11. should thenceforth hinder the setting vp of the Temple of God, that his house should be torne downe, and the disturber hanged on a Gallowes made of the Tim∣ber thereof. He also in the same decree maketh inuocation to God, That hath caused his name to dwell there, (to) destroy all Kings and People that put their hands to alter, and to destroy this house of God which is in Ierusalem, &c. In foure yeeres afrer which decree (the Iewes being really furnished with money and all things necessarie from Darius ) the Temple was in all finished, to wit, in the beginning of the Spring, in the sixth yeere of Darius Hystaspes, and in the two and forttieth after their first returne. Ezr. 6. §. IIII. Of DARIVS his Scythian Warre. AFter the recouerie of Babylon he inuaded the Soythians, whose King Her. l. 4. . l. 2. Iustine calleth Lauthinus; and saith, that Darius vnder-tooke this warre against him, because he refused him his Daughter in marriage. The better to conuoy his Armie into Scythiae, hee built a Bridge of small Vessels ouer the Riuer Ister or Danubius, and gaue the custodie of the same in charge (among others of Asia the lesse) to the Ionians, and Aeolians, among whom was Miltiades, who perswaded the Asian Graecians to breake downe the bridge, to the end might not returne thereby, and if by any other way, then not without great difficultie; but the same was resisted by Histiaeus Prince of Milet, a Citie of Ionia, which Nation being a Colonie of the Greekes, Diodorus calleth Trai∣tors to their Countrie, because they ioyned themselues to Darius. But the Scythians Diod. l. 11. more elegantly termed them good slaues, for as much as they would not runne a∣way from their Master, but were more mindfull of doing their duties, than of sha∣king off their bondage, when they were presented with as faire an occasion of liber∣tie as could haue beene desired. For the great Armie of Darius entring the de∣sart Countrie called Bessarabia, found in it neither people to resist them, nor any su∣stenance to relieue them. For the Scythians were then, as are the Chrim Tartars, their posteritie, at this day, all horse-men, vsing the Bow and Sword. They were not Plough-men, but Grasiers, driuing their Heards from one place to another as op∣portunitie of pasture led them. Standing Townes they had none, but vsed for Houses the Waggons wherein they carried their wiues and children. These Wag∣gons they place at euery Station in very good order, making Streets and Lanes in the manner of a great Towne, remoueable at their pleasure. Neither hath the Em∣perour himselfe, called now the great Chrim, any other Citie than such an Agora, (as they name it) or Towne of Carts. When as therefore Darius had wearied him∣selfe, and wasted his prouision in those desolate Regions, wherein he found neither waies to direct him, victualls to refresh him, nor any houses, fruitfull trees, or liuing creatures, nor any thing at all, which either hee himselfe might make vse of, or by destroying it might grieue his enemies; he beganne to perceiue his owne folly, and the danger into which he had brought him. Yet setting a good face vpon a badde game, he sent braue messages to the Scythian, bidding him to cease his flight, and ei∣ther to make triall of his valour and fortune in plaine battaile, Or if he acknowled∣ged himselfe the weaker, then to yeeld by faire meanes, and become his Subiect, gi∣uing him Earth and Water, which the Persians vsed to demand as a signe, that all was yeelded vnto them. To this challenge the Scythian returned an Hieroglyphicall answere; sending a Bird, a Frog, a Mouse, and fiue Arrowes: which dumbe shew Darius interpreting by his owne wish, thought that heedid yeeld all the Elements wherein those creatures liue, and his weapons withall into his hands. But Gobryas, one of the seuen Princes, who had slaine the Magi, construed their meaning a-right, which was thus; O yee Persians, get yee wings like Birds, or diue vnder the water, or creepe into holes in the earth, for else yee shall not escape our arrowes. And this interpreta∣tion was soone verified by the Scythians themselues, who assailed the Persian camp, draue the horse-men into the trenches, and vexing the Armie with continuall Alarums day and night, were so fearelesse of this great Monarch, and so little regar∣ded him, that within his hearing, and euen in his sight, they did not forbeare the pastime of coursing a Hare, which they had started by chance. By this boldnesse of theirs, Darius was so discouraged, that he forsook his Camp by night, making many fires, and leauing all that were sicke and weake behinde him, and so with all speede marched away to the Riuer Ister. He was pursued hardly by the Scythians who mist him, yet at the Bridge before him, perswaded the Ionians to de∣part, assuring them that the Persian King should neuer more be able to doe them either good or harme. Which words had certainely beene proued true, had not Hystiaeus the Milesian preuailed with his people, to attend the comming of Darius, whom the Scythians did like faile to meete, when they returned from Ister to seeke him out. §. V. Some actions of the Persians in Europe, after the Scythian Warre. DARIVS hauing thus escaped out of Scythia, determined the inuasion of Thrace and Macedon, in which Warre hee imployed Megabasus, who mastered the Poeonians, and transplanted them, & possest Perin∣thus, Chalcedon, Bizantium, and other places, being also soone after subiected, and added to the Persian Empire by Otanes, the sonne of Sysamnes, whom Cambyses had excoriated for false iudgement. So were the Cities of Her. l. 5. A maritimate Citie of Thrace to the South of Constantinople. Selybria and Cardia, a City vpon the Cher∣sonesus of Ihrace, after∣ward . Pto. Paus. Cardia likewise taken in for the Persian, who hauing now reduced vnder his obey sance the best part of Thrace, did send his Embassadours to Amintas King of Macedon adioyning, demanding of him by the Earth & Water, the Soue∣raignetie ouer that Kingdome. Amintas doubting his owne strength, entertained the Embassadours with gentle wordes, and afterward inuiting them to a solemne and magnificent feast, the Persians greatly desired that the Macedonian Ladies might bee present: which being granted, the Embassadours who were well filled with wine, and presumed vpon their greatnesse, and many victories, beganne to vse such imbracings, and other lasciuious behauiour towards those Noble Ladies, as Alexan∣der the Kings Sonne, great Grand-father to Alexander the Great, disdaining the Persians barbarous presumption, besought his father to with-draw himselfe from the assembly, continuing notwith standing all honourable respect towards the Em∣bassadours, whom withall hee entreated that the Ladies might refresh themselues for a while; promising their speedy returne. This being obtained, Alexander cau∣sed the like number of well-fauoured yong-men to clothe themselues in the same garments, & to vse the same attires which the Ladies had worne at the feast, giuing them in charge, That when the Persians offered to abuse them, they should forth∣with transpierce them with their long kniues, of which they were prouided for that purpose, which was accordingly performed. Charge was soone after giuen by Da∣rius for a seuere reuenge of this murder. But Alexander, somewhat before the death of Amintas, gaue his sister Gygea in marriage to Bubaris, a principall Commander of Darius forces on that side, who perswading her husband how helpfull the Alliance of Macedon would proue for the inuasion of Attica intended, so preuailed, as Alexan∣der escaped that tempest, which threatned to fall vpon him very suddenly; the warre of Asia the lesse, called Ionick, falling out at the same time. §. VI. The first occasion of the Warre which DARIVS made vpon Greece, with arehear sall of the gouernment in Athens, whence the the quarrell grew. NOw the better to vnderstand the reason and motiues of that great Warre, which followed soone after, betweene the Persians and Grae∣cians, it is necessarie to make a short repetition of the state of Athens, which Citie indured the hardest and worst of Darius inuasion on that side the Sea with admirable successe. Neither doe I hold it any impertinencie, to be large in vnfolding euery circumstance of so great a busi∣nesse as gaue fire to those warres, which neuer could be throughly quenched; vntill in the ruine of this great Persian Monarchie, Persepolis the capitall Citie of the Em∣pire, was at the request of an Athenian Harlot consumed with a flame, as dreadfull as in the pride of their greatnesse, the Persians had raised in Athens. Now therefore as out of the former bookes it may be gathered, how Athens, and other parts of Greece, were anciently gouerned, the same being alreadie set downe, though scatteringly, and in seuerall times, among other the Contemporarie occur∣rents of the Easterne Emperors, and the Kings of Iudaea; so I thought it very perti∣nent in this place to remember againe the two last changes in the State of Athens. As for the Lacedaemonians, they maintained still their ancient policie vnder Kings, though these also after some fifteene descents bridled by the Ephori. Codrus King of the Athenians in the former bookes remembred, who willingly died for the safetie of his people, was therefore so honored by them, as (thinking none worthy to succeed him) they changed their former gouernment from Mo∣narchicall to Princes for terme of life, of which Medon the sonne of Codrus was the first, after whom they were called Medontidae; and of these there were twelue Ge∣nerations besides Medon, to wit. Agastus. Archippus, in whose times the Greekes transported themselues into Ionia, after Troy an hundred and fourescore yeeres, according to Eusebius: which migration al other Chronologers (such as follow Eusebius here∣in excepted) find in the yeere after Troy fallen one hundred and fortie. Thersippus. Phorbas. Mezades. Diogenetus, in whose time Lycurgus gaue Lawes to the Spartans. Pheredus. Ariphron. Theispius, in whose time the Assyrian Empire was ouer-throwne by Be∣lochus, and Arbaces. Agamnestor. Aeschylus, in whose time the Ephori (according to Eusebius ) were erected in Lacedaemon. Alcamenon, the last Prince for life, after whose death the Athenians ele∣cted Decennall Gouernours: the former Princes for life hauing conti∣nued in all three hundred and sixteene yeeres. The first of those that gouerned for ten yeeres, or the first Archon, was Charops, then Aesymedes. Elydicus. Hyppomenes. Leocrates. Absander. Erixias was the last Archon of the decennal Gouernors, which forme con∣tinuing threescore and ten yeerres, was then changed into into annuall Magistrates, Maiors, or Burg-masters, of which was the first, according to Pausanias: others finde Leostratus; and then Anthosthenes. Paus. pag. 159. . . l. 3. Miltiades. Paus. p. 169. Damasias. Pausan. 170. Draco. Pag. 331. Megacles. Solon, and others, who are the lesse to bee regarded, by reason of the yeerely change. This Solon being a man of excellent wisdome, gaue lawes to the Athenians, which were published according to Gellius, in the three and thirtieth yeere of Tar∣quinius Priscus, and were in after-ages deriued vnto the Romanes, and by the Decem∣viri (Magistrates in Rome created for that purpose) reduced into twelue Tables, which were the ground of the Romane lawes. But these goodly ordinances of So∣lon, were in his owne daies violated, and for a while almost quite extinguished. For whereas they were framed vnto the practice and maintenance of a popular go∣uernement; the estate of Athens was very soone changed into a Monarchie by Pisi∣stratus the son of Hippocrates: who finding the Citizens distracted into two factions, whereof Megacles and Lycurgus two Citizens of noble Families were become the heads, tooke occasion by their contention and insolencie to raise a third faction more powerfull than the other two, and more plausible, for that he seemed a Pro∣tector of the Citizens in generall. Hauing by this meanes obtained loue and credit, he wounded himselfe, and faining that by malice of his enemies he had like to haue beene slaine for his loue to the good Citizens, he procured a guard for his defence, and with that band of men surprising the State-house, or Cittadell of Athens, hee made himselfe Lord of the Towne; Hegesistratus being then Gouernour. But the Citizens, who in euery change of gouernement had sought to remoue themselues further and further from the forme of a Monarchie, could so ill brooke this vsurpa∣tion of Pisistratus, that he was for lack of helpe to flie the Towne, as soone as Megacles and Lycurgus ioyning their forces his expulsion. Yet as the builiding of his tyranny founded vpon the dissension of the Citizens, was ruined by their good agreement; so was it soone after well by the new breaking out of the old factions. For when Megacles found the power of Lycurgus to grow greater than his owne, he did (as is the vsuall practice of the weaker side) call in the common Pisistratus, to whom he gaue his Daughter in marriage; by which alliance the Familie of the , whereof Megacles was chiefe, became very powerfull, yet so that Pisistratus by their power was made Master both of them and all the rest. But this agreement held not long; the , and especially Me∣gacles being incensed against Pisistratus for his misdemeanour towards his Wife. Wherefore they practised with the Souldiers of the Towne, proceeding in their Her. l . a Citie of , by called , by . treason so secretly, and so farre, that Pisistratus vpon the first of their in∣tent, perceiued no other remedie for his affaires, than to with-draw him selfe to Ere∣tria, where he remained eleuen yeeres. Which time being expired, hauing hired Souldiers out of many parts of Greece, hee againe recouered the principalitie of Athens: after which third obtaining his estate, hee gouerned Athens Pol. 5. Heraclid. . pag. 262. , according to Aristotle, and raigned in all thirtie and three yeeres, saith Elianus, but as Iustine hath it, foure and thirtie, accounting the time belike as well . pag 28. before as after his seuerall expulsions. Herodotus giues the father and the Sonne . . 6. . . 6. c. 10. sixe and thirtie yeeres; Aristotle fiue and thirtie. But Thucidides affirmeth, that hee died very old, leauing for his Successours his two Sonnes Hippias and Hippar∣chus, who gouerned the Athenians with such moderation, as they rather seemed the successors of a naturall Prince than of a Tyrant. But in the end, and some three yeeres before was expelled out of Athens, his brother Hippar∣chus was murdered by Harmodius and Aristogiton. The cause why, and the manner how performed, Thucidides hath written at large. And though were charged with vnnaturall lust after Harmodius, yet Plato in his Dialogue, intituled Hipparchus, doth greatly magnifie him, affirming that hee was a Prince of as many eminent vertues as that Age had any, altogether condemning the murde∣rers and authors of that scandall. Hippias fearing that this enterprise vpon his brother had more and deeper rootes than were apparent, first sought to discouer the further intents of Harmodius and Aristogiton, by a of theirs called Lemnia: who because shee would not her Companions, did cut out her owne tongue. Then did Hippias, the better to strengthen himselfe, enter into a a ci∣tie of vp∣on the Helle∣spont. strait amitie with , Tyrant of the Citie Lampsacus, whom he knew to bee greatly fauoured by Darius, to whose sonne Hypoclus hee gaue one of his Daugh∣ters in marriage. But some three yeeres after the death of his brother, doubting Her. . 5. I know not what strong practice against himselfe, hee beganne to vse the Citizens . . 6. c. 1. with great seueritie, which neither the Father, nor Hippias himselfe had euer exercised during their vsurpations till this time. And therefore the Athenians fearing lest that this disease might rather increase, than diminish in Hippias, they stirred vp Clistines one of the noblest and best able of their Citie, to practise their deliuerie: who calling to his assistance the banished , together with an Armie of the , ledde by their King, so affrighted Hippias, as by composition he gaue ouer his estate, and the possession of Athens, and from thence imbarking himselfe tooke land at a op∣posite to the Ile of , which Arist. in 5. Animal. . Sigeum, whence went to in gouerned by , who presented him to Darius. Hee was depri∣ued of his estate, as and Thucidides , twentie yeeres before the battel of Marathon: all which time he continued, partly with , at other times with Artaphernes Lieutenant for Darius in Sardis, the Metropolis of Lydia; perswading and practising the enterprise vpon Athens, which Darius in the ende to his great dishonour vnder tooke, twentie yeeres after Hippias had refigned his estate. Thus farre I haue digressed from Darius, to the ende the Reader may con∣ceiue the better the causes and motiues of this warre: whereof the hope that Hip∣pias had to be restored to Athens by the helpe of Darius, which made him so∣licite and perswade the Persians to conquer Greece, was one; but not the most vrgent. §. VII. Of the Ionian Rebellion, which was the principall cause of the warres betweene Greece and Persia. ANother, and a strong motiue to this expedition, was the Ionick warre, breaking out in Asia about the same time. The Colonies transported out of Greece into Asia, which occupied the greatest part of the , hauing their libertie about 500. yeeres, euen from the Ionick, migration, to the time of Croesus, were by this Lydian King made , and afterwards as parcell of his Dominions, were taken in by Cyrus, and left as hereditarie Seruants to the Crowne of Persia. But as it is the custome of Nations halfe conquered (witnesse Ireland ) to rebell againe vpon euery aduantage and opportunitie: so did the Ionians, and other , both in Cyrus his life, and after him, seeke by all meanes possible to free themselues. At this time they found such men readie to spurre them into Rebellion, as had by the Persian been giuen vnto them for bridles to hold them in subiection. Euery one of those Townes had a Lord to rule it, whom they (abhorring the gouernment of one man) called their Tyrants. These Lords were very true to the Persian, by whose onely might they held the people in subiection. And this their dutifull af∣fection they had well declared, when, Darius being in great extremitie, they vsed all meanes to deliuer him and his Armie (that otherwise had beene lost) out of the Scythians hand. Of this great piece of seruice the tyrant of Miletus expe∣cted the chiefe thankes, as hauing beene chiefe Author of their expecting , when the rest, either perswaded by the Scythians, carried away with owne desires, were readie to haue abandoned him. But it came so to passe, that Darius be∣ing more fearefull of the harme that (being powerfull and craftie) might doe to him in the future, than mindfull of the good which he had alreadie receiued at his hand, found meanes to carry him a-long to Susa, where hee detained him with all kind vsage of a friend, yet kept such good espiall vpon him, as an enemie, he could not start away. had subtiltie enough to discouer the Kings pur∣pose; which ill agreed with his owned desires. For he thought it more pleasant, and more honourable rule as Prince in one faire Citie, hauing a smal Territorie, than to sit and at the great Kings table, and heare the counsailes by which a large Empire was menaged; being himselfe an idle beholder, and enioying with much restraint of libertie, none other pleasures than a priuate man might bestow vpon himselfe. Wherefore he bethought himselfe of of some tumults in the lower , to which if he might be sent, as one that had great experience and authoritie in those quarters it would afterwards be in his power to stay at home, and either satisfie the King with excuses, or deale as occasion shall require. Resoluing vpon this course, he sent very secret instructions to his kinsman, whom he had left his Deputic at , aduising him to stirre vp some Rebellion. These dire∣ctions came seasonably to , who hauing failed in an enterprise vpon the Isle of Naxos, through the false dealing of a Persian his Associate, stood in feare of , if not of some further ill that might befall him, as one that that had the Kings treasures to no good purpose. Therefore he readily embraced the counsaile: and the better to draw the whole Countrie of Ionia into the same course which he determined to , hee abando∣ned his tyrannie, and did set Miletus at libertie. This plausible beginning wanne vnto him the hearts of the Milesians: and his proceeding with other Ionian Tyrants (of whom some he tooke and sold as slaues to their citizens, he chased away) caused the whole Nation to bee at his command. The Persian fleet, of hee lately had beene Admirall in the enterprise of Naxos, hee had surprised in his first breaking out, together with the principall Officers, and Captaines, so that now hee thought himselfe able to deale with the great Kings forces, lying thereabout, either by Land or Sea. But likely it was that the power of all Asia would shortly be vpon his neck, and crush both him and his assistants to pieces, vnlesse that he were able to raise an Armie that might hold the field, which the alone were insufficient to performe. Therefore he tooke a iourney to Sparta, where assayed in vaine with many arguments, and the offer of talents, to win to his Cleomenes King of the : hee went from thence to Athens, and with better suc∣cesse besought the people to led him their assistance. The Athenian Embassadors which had been sent to the Persian Kings Lieutenants in the lower Asia, desiring them not to giue countenance to , now a banished man, and lately their Ty∣rant, were a while before this returned with ill answeres, hauing found very chur∣lish entertainement. So that the euill which they were to expect in all likelyhood from the Persian, made them willing to begin with him. To which purpose, their consanguinitie with the Ionians, and the perswasions of Aristagoras, drew them on apace, if perhaps his treasure were not helping. Twentie shippes the Athenians fur∣nished for this voyage; to which the added more, in regard of anci∣ent kindnesse that had passed betweene the Ionians and them. With these and their owne forces , the Ionians entred the Riuer Caistrus, which falleth into the Sea by Ephesus: by which aduantage they surprised Sardis when no enemie was heard of or suspected; insomuch, as , who ruled as Vice-roy in those parts, had no other hope of safetie, than by retreating himself into the Castle; which the could not force: from whence he beheld the slaughter of the Citizens, and the Citie flaming. The Persians at length, mixt with the Burgers, began to encourage them to de∣fence, and recouered the Market place, by the Riuer , which ran through it, and borrowing courage from desperation, they both defended themselues, and charged their enemies; who well aduising , made all the haste they could toward the Sea side. But Artaphernes gathered the strength he could, the , and found them neere Ephesus; set∣ting resoluedly vpon them, he slaughtered a great part of their Armie; the sa∣uing themselues in Ephesus. In this fight Eualcides, Captaine of the , pe∣rished: but his fame and memorie was by that excellent Poet Simonides . After this ouerthrow, the Athenians, which were sent to Aristagoras and to the , could by no arguments of theirs, no not by their teares, be perswaded to make any second triall of their fortunes, on that side the Sea. Yet the burning of Sardis made a greater noyse in the world, than the good suc∣cesse which the Persians had in one or two skirmishes, could rayse. Wherefore the Ionians brauely proceeding, woon a great part of Caria; and sending their Fleet into the Hellespont, got Bizantium and other Townes into their hands. Yea, the Cypri∣ans, lately subdued by Cambyses, beganne hereupon to take heart; and entring into confederacie with the Ionians, who were able to giue them aide by sea, rebelled a∣gainst the Persians. These newes comming to the care of , filled him with great indignation, and with an extreme hatred of the Athenians, vpon whome hee vowed to take sharpe . As for the Ionians, his contempt of them, and their knowledge of his power, made him to thinke, that they would not haue dared to attempt such things, but by the instigatin of those, to whom their ignorance of his great might had affoorded the courage to prouoke him. This was the maine ground of the Warre commenced by Darius, and pursued by Xerxes against Athens: To which, the solicitation of Hippias, before remembred, gaue onely some forme and assistance: the businesse, when once it was thus farre on foot, being like ynough to haue pro∣ceeded, though he had perished it were aduanced any further. Some other occurrents in this Ionian commotion extended the quarrell of Da∣rius against many of the Ilanders, if not against the whole Nation of the Greekes; for all of them gaue to his Rebels free harbour: the Ilanders moreouer did helpe to furnish out a Nauie of three hundred and saile against him. These did rather breede in him a desire to abate their pride, than any feare of harme that they were like to doe him. For what they had done at Sardis, was but by surprise. In euery fight they were beaten by the Persians, who had not yet lost the fruits of their discipline, wherein Cyrus had trained them, nor all their ancient Captaines. In one sea-fight by the Isle of Cyprus, the Ionians indeed had the vpper hand; but they were . ns, , and Cilicians, whom they vanquished: neither was that victorie of any vse to them; the Cyprians, in whose aid they came, being vtterly beaten by the Persian Armie at Land, and reduced into their old sub∣jection. So had the Persians likewise by open warre and faire force ouerthrowne the Carians in two battailes, and reclaimed that Nation; as also they had recouered the Townes vpon Hellespont, with some Aeolian & Ionian Cities: when Aristagoras with his friends quitting Miletus, fled into Thrace, desirous to seat himselfe in Am∣phipolis, a Colonie of the Athenians. But the Edonians, on whose Territorie belike he landed, ouerthrew him, and cut his troupes in pieces. About the same time, the first mouer of this insurrection came downe in∣to those quarters; who hauing vndertaken the performance of great matters to Darius, was glad to flye from his Lieutenants, by whome his double dealing was detected. But this euasion preserued him not long. For after many vaine attempts that he made, hee was taken in fight by the Persians, and hastily beheaded, lest the King should pardon him vpon remembrance of old good turnes; as it seemes that hee would haue done, by the buriall which he commanded to be giuen to his dead bo∣dy that was crucified, and by his heauie taking of his death. had sought to put himselfe into Miletus; but the Citizens doubting his condition, chose rather to keepe him out, and make shift for themselues, without his helpe. The strength of their Citie by land, which had in old time withstood the Lydian Kings, and their good Fleet which promised vnto them the libertie of an open sea, emboldened them to trie the vttermost, when very few friends were left vpon that Continent to take their part. But their Nauie was broken as much by threatnings as by force; many of their companions and fellow-rebels for saking them vpon hope of pardon; and many being daunted with the causelesse flight of those that should haue assisted them. Neither was it long before the Towne it selfe being assaulted both by Land and Sea, was taken by force, the Citizens slaine, their wiues and children made slaues, and their goods a bootie to the Persians, whome for sixe yeeres space they had put to so much trouble. §. VIII. The Warre which DARIVS made vpon Greece, with the battaile of MARATHON, and DARIVS his death. THis warre with good successe finished by the Persians, and some at∣tempts made on Europe side with variable successe: Darius obstinate in the enterprise and conquest of Greece (though at first he pretended to Herod. lib. 6. make the warre but against the Athenians and Eritraeans, who jointly Whether this Citie or People were of Peloponnesus in Sicyonia, or of , be∣tween Thessalia and Macedon, I do not know: but those bor∣derers, & next the enemie, were more likely to com∣pound than the rest farre off. There is a Citie called , not farre from Aegea. 32. 33. &c assisted the Ionians against him, and burnt Sardis in Lydia ) did now by his embassadours demaund an acknowledgement from them all: among whome, some of them not so well resolued as the rest, submitted themselues; as the Aeginets and others. Against these, the Athenians being inflamed (by the assistance of the Lacedaemonians ) after diuers encounters forst them to giue pledges, and to relinquish the partie of the Persians. Cleomenes led the Lacedaemonians in this warre, and caused his companion King Demantus to be deposed: who thereupon fled to Darius, farre the more confident of victorie, by reason of these discords, alienations, and ciuill warres among the Greekes. He therefore gaue order to Hippagoras, to prepare a Fleet of shippes fit to transport his Armie ouer the Hellespont: the same consisting of an hundred thousand foot, and tenne thousand . The charge in chiefe of his Ar∣mie he committed to , accompanied and assisted by Hippias, the sonne of Pisi∣stratus, expelled out of Athens twentie yeres before, and by Artaphernes his brother, Gouernour of Sardis, and the Sea-coast of Asia the lesse. These Commaunders ha∣uing their Companies brought downe to the Sea-side, imbarked themselues in sixe hundred Gallies and other Vessels; and first of all attempted the Islands called Cy∣clades, which lay in the mid-way betweene Asia the lesse, and Greece. For (obtaining those places) the Persians had then nothing to hinder the transportation of their forces ouer the Aegean Sea; but on the contrarie they might alwayes both relieue themselues in their passage, and shrowd themselues from all suddaine tempests and outrage. To this end they first possest themselues of Samos, secondly, they attempted Na∣xos: Which Island, the inhabitants despairing of their owne forces, abandoned. So did the people of Delos, of which Apollo was natiue: Which Island did not onely forbeare to sacke, but recalling the inhabitants, he gaue order to beautifie the places and Altars of Sacrifice, to Apollo erected. And hauing recouered these and other Islands, the Persians directed their course for Eretria in Euboea: for that Citie In Herod. (as already hath beene shewed) had assisted the Ionians at the taking and firing of Sardis. In this Island the Persians tooke ground, and besieged Eretria very straitly, and after sixe dayes assault, partly by force, and in part by the treason of Euphabus and Philagius; they tooke it, sack it, and burnt it to the ground. Thus farre the winds of prosperous fortune filled their sayles. From Euboea the Persians past their Armie into , conducted and guided by Hippias, late Prince of Athens, and marching towards it, they encamped at Marathon, in the way from the Sea, where they landed, towards Athens. The Athenians finding the time arriued, wherein they were to dispute with their owne vertue against Fortune, and to cast lots for their libertie, for their wiues, their children, and their liues, put themselues in the best order they could to make resi∣stance, and withall sent away with speed to the Lacedaemonians for succour, imploy∣ing in that Negotiation one Phidippides; who passing through Arcadia, encountred in the way a familiar Diuell, which he supposed to be Pan, who willed him to assure the Athenians of victorie, promising that some one of the Gods should be present at the battaile to assist them and defend them against the multitude of their enemies. Phidippides at his returne seeing he could not bring with him any present succours from Sparta, yet he thought it greatly auailing to bring newes from the Gods, and promise of assistance from Heauen, which no doubt (though the deuice was likely to be his owne) yet it greatly encouraged the multitude and common people, who in all ages haue beene more stirred vp with fond Prophecies and other like supersti∣tious fooleries, than by any just cause or solid reason. The Athenians being now left to themselues, with one thousand onely of the Plataeans (who hauing beene for∣merly defended by the Athenians against the Thebans, did in this extremitie witnesse their thankefulnesse and gratefull disposition) began to dispute, Whether it were most for their aduantage to defend the wals of Athens, or to put themselues into the field with such forces as they had, the same consisting of tenne thousand Athenians, and one thousand of the Plataeans. In the end, and after great diuersitie of opinions, Miltiades, who perswaded the triall by battaile, preuailed. The Armies being now in view, and within a myle of each other, the Athenians disposed themselues into three troupes: two wings or hornes, as they tearme them, and the body of a battaile. The Persians, when they perceiued so small a Troope aduauncing towards them, thought the Athenians rather dispossest of their vnderstanding, than possest with the resolution whereof they made . So inuincible and resistlesse the Persians esteemed their owne numbers to be, and that small troupe of their enemies then in view, rather to be despised than to be fought withall: But in conclusion, the victory being doubtfully ballanced for a while, sometime the vertue of the Graecians, and sometimes the number of the Persians preuailing, the Graecians fighting for all that they had, the Persians for that they needed not, these great forces of Darius were disordered and put in rout; the Athenians following their victorie euen to the Sea∣shore; where the Persians, so many of them as lost not their wits with their courage, saued themselues in their shippes. The Persian Armie consisted of an hundred thousand foot and tenne thousand horse; of which there were slaine in the place sixe thousand three hundred, and of the Graecians an hundred fourescore and twelue. For howsoeuer it came to passe, either by strange visions, which were afterward called Panici terrores, or by some o∣ther affright, it seemeth, that the inuading Armie, after the first encounter, fought with their backes towards their enemie, and lost that number, by Herodotus set downe, in their disorderly retreat, or rather in their flat running away. As for Iu∣stines report, That two hundred thousand of the Persian Armie were slaine, the same hath no apparance nor possibilitie of truth. In this fight Hippias the perswader of the enterprise was slaine, sayth Iustine and Cicero; but Suidas tels vs, That he esca∣ped Ad Att. and died most miserably in Lemnos. The greatest honour of this victory was cast vpon Miltiades, who both perswaded the triall by battaile, and behaued himselfe therein answerably to the counsell which he gaue. Themistocles had his first reputation in this fight, being but young and of the first beard. Those of the Graecians, of marke and commandement, that fell in the first encounter, were Callimachus and Stesileus. It is also said, That Cyne∣gyrus following the Persians to their embarking, layd hands on one of their Gallies, to haue held it from putting off the shore, and hauing his right hand cut off, he yet offered to arrest it with his left; of which being also depriued, he tooke hold of it with his teeth. This encounter happened in the first yeere of the threescore and twelfth Olympiad, about the time of the Warre made by Coriolanus against his fellow- Romanes: Alexander the sonne of Amintas being then King of Macedon, and then Gouernour of Athens, according to Plutarch; or Hybilides, af∣ter In vita Arist. Halycarnasseus. This great fray thus parted, and the Persians returned backe into the lesser Asia, Miltiades sought and obtained an imployment against the Ilanders of Paros, one of the Cyclades, and passing ouer his Companies in threescore and tenne Gal∣lies, after sixe and twentie dayes assault he brake his thigh, in seeking to enter it by the Temple of Ceres, wherewith himselfe being made vnable, and his compa∣nies discouraged, he returned to Athens; where those vngratefull Citizens forget∣ting all his seruices past, and that of all other the most renowned at the battaile of Marathon, did by the perswasion of Xantippus, the father of Pericles (who enuied his fame) cast him into prison, and set on him a fine of fiftie Talents; where his weake and wounded body being not able to endure the one, nor his estate to pay the o∣ther, he after a few dayes ended his life. Which enuie of the better sort to each other, with their priuate Factions, assisted by the vnthankfull and witlesse people, brought them, not many yeeres after, from a victorious and famous Nation, to base subjection and slauerie. Miltiades left be∣hind him one sonne called Cymon, begotten on Hegisipila, daughter of Olorus King of Thrace, who (saith Plutarch ) was neither inferior to his father in valour, nor to Themistocles in vnderstanding, but exceeded them both in justice and good go∣uernment. Now Darius taking greater care how to recouer his honour, than sorrow for the losse receiued in Greece, gaue order for new leuies of men, and all other warlike pro∣uisions. But the Aegyptians reuolting from his obedience (a Kingdome of great strength and reuenue) greatly distracted his resolution for the reinuasion of Greece. The dissension also among his sonnes; of whom, the yonger being borne after he was King, and by so great a mother as Atossa, disdained to giue place to his elder brother, borne before Darius obtained the Empire, greatly vexed him. And lastly, death, who hath no respect of any mans affaires, gaue end to all his consultations and enterprises, and joyned him to the earth of his auncestors, about a yeere after the battaile of Marathon, and after that he had raigned sixe and thirty yeres. He left behind him fiue sonnes, namely Artabasanes, born before he obtained the kingdome, Xerxes who succeeded him, Achemenes gouernor of Aegypt, Masistes and Anabignes. CHAP. VI. Of XERXES. §. I. The preparation of XERXES against Greece. XERXES receiued from his father, as hereditarie, a double Warre; one to be made against the Aegypti∣ans, which he finished so speedily, that there is no∣thing remaining in writing how the same was per∣formed: the other against the Graecians; of which it is hard to judge, whether the preparations were more terrible, or the successe ridiculous. In the con∣sultation for the prosecution of this Warre, which was chiefely bent against the Athenians, the Princes of Persia were diuided in opinion. Mardonius, who had formerly commaunded in Thrace and Macedon, vnder Darius, and had also Hystaspes for his grandfather, as Xerxes had, and Xerxes his sister Artozostres, perswaded by many arguments the Europaean warre. But Artabanus, brother to the late Darius, and vncle to Xerxes, maintained the contrarie counsell, laying before Xerxes the lamentable and ridiculous successe of the two late inuasions, which Darius had made contrarie to his counsell: The in person vpon the Scythians, the other by his Lieutenants vpon the Greekes; in each of which Darius left to his enemies both his Armie and his honour. He therefore besought Xerxes to be right well aduised before he did too farre imbarke himselfe in this businesse. For whatsoeuer vndertaking hath deliberate and sound counsell for conductor, though the successe doe not alwayes answere the pro∣babilitie, yet hath Fortune nothing else thereof to vaunt, than the variablenesse of her owne nature, which only the diuine Prouidence, and not any humane power, can constraine. But so obstinate was the resolution of Xerxes in prosecution of his former intent, that Artabanus, whether terrified by Visions (as it is written of him) or fearing the Kings hatred, which hee made knowne to all those that opposed his desire to this Warre. (changing opinion & counsell) assisted the graecian Expedition with all the power he had. After the Warre of Aegypt was ended, foure yeeres were consumed in describing and gathering an Armie for this inuasion: which being compounded of all Nati∣ons subject to the Persian Empire, consisted of seuenteene hundred thousand foot, Her. l. 7. and eightie thousand horsemen, besides Chariots, Camels, and other Beasts for Carriage, if we may beleeue Herodotus: for of this multitude, Trogus findes the numberlesse by seuen hundred thousand footmen. The Commaunders of the seuerall Nations were the Princes of the bloud of Persia, either by marriage in the Kings house, or otherwise: for to these were all commaundements of this nature giuen, some few people excepted, who had of their owne leaders. The charge of the whole Armie was bestowed on Mardonius, the sonne of Go∣bryas by a sister of Darius, to whom were joyned some others of Xerxes his neerest kindred, as Generals ouer all; sauing that the charge of tenne thousand select Per∣sians, called the immortall Regiment (because if any one of the whole number died or were slaine, there was another presently chosen in his ) was giuen to Hy∣darnes; the eighty thousand horsemen were led by the sonnes of Datis, who com∣maunded the late Armie of Darius in Greece. The Fleet of Gallies were two thousand two hundred and eight, furnished by the Phoenicians, who had Commaunders of their owne Nation, and by the Cypriotes, Cilicians, , Lycians, Dorians, Carians, Ionians, Aeolians, and Hellespontines; who were trusted with the furnishing of their owne Vessels, though commaunded by the Princes of Persia, as by Ariabignes the sonne of Darius, and others. The rest of the Vessels for transportation were three thousand. There were also certaine Gallies furnished by Artemisia, the daughter of Lygdames, of Halycarnassus, and the Islands adioyning, which her selfe commaunded. Those Gallies by her pre∣pared and furnished, exceeded all the rest of the Fleet, excepting those of Zidon, in which Xerxes himselfe was imbarked. §. II. XERXES Armie entertained by PYTHIVS: His cutting off Mount Athos from the Continent: his bridge of Boates ouer the Hellespont: and the discourse betweene him and ARTABANVS vp. on the view of his Armie. WHen this world of an Armie was throughly furnished, he caused all the Nations of which it was compounded, to make their Rendez-vous and repaire at Sardis in Lydia. And when hee had assembled to the number of seuenteene hundred thousand foot, as he entred the body of Celaenas, he was by one Pythius the Lydian entertained, who out of his Flocks and Heards of Cattell gaue food to Xerxes and his whole Armie. The Feast ended, hee also presented him with two thousand Talents of siluer, and in Gold foure Millions, wanting seuen thousand of the Persian Darici, which make so many of our markes. The King ouercome with the exceeding liberalitie of Pythius, did not only refuse his treasure offered, but commaunded that seuen thousand Darici should be giuen him to make vp his foure Millions; of which, so many thousands were wanting when he made the present. But soone after, when Pythius besought him to spare one of his fiue sonnes from his attendance into (because himselfe was old, and had none whom he could so well trust as his owne sonne) Xerxes most barba∣rously caused the young man, for whom his father sought exemption, to be sunde∣red into two parts, commaunding, that the one halfe of his should be layed on the right, and the other halfe on the left hand of the common way by which the Armie marched. Two things he commanded to be done before he came to the Sea side. The one was a passage for Gallies to be cut behind Mount Athos, making the same (which the halfe Island or Headland, whereon it stood) to be an entire Island, sundring thereby from the Continent of Thrace fiue Cities, besides the Mountaine and the Chersone∣sus or Necke of Land it selfe a worke of more than of vse, and yet an en∣terprise of no great wonder, the Valley which held it to the Continent hauing but twelue furlongs (which make about a mile and ) to cut through, and the ditch being broad enough onely for two Gallies to passe in front. The Cities so seuered from the maine, were Dion, Olophyxus, Acrothoon, Thysus, and Cleonae. He also gaue order, that a Bridge vpon Boats should be made ouer the Hellespont betweene Abidus and , the Sea there hauing am yle of breadth, wanting an eight part; which after the finishing, was by a Tempest torne asunder and disseue∣red: wherewith Xerxes being more enraged than discouraged, commaunded those to be that were masters of the worke, and caused sixe hundred threescore and fourteene Gallies to be coupled together, thereon to frame a new Bridge; which by the art and industry of the Phoenicians was so well anchored to resist both windes blowing into and from the Euxine Sea, as the same being well boorded and rayled, the whole Armie of seuenteene hundred thousand foot, and fourescore thousand Horse, with all the Moyles and Carriages, past ouer it into Europe in seuen daies and seuen nights, without intermission. This transportation of Armies did Caesar after∣ward vse. And Caligula that mad Emperour, in imitation of Xerxes his Bridge, did build the like. The Bridge finished, and the Armie brought neere to the Sea side, Xerxes tooke a view of all his Troupes, assembled in the Plaines of Abidus, being carried vp, and seated on a place ouer-topping the Land round about it, and the Sea adioyning: and after he had gloried in his owne happinesse, to behold and commaund ma∣ny Nations, and so powerfull an Armie and Fleet, he suddenly (notwithstanding) burst out into teares, moued with this contemplation, That in one hundred yeeres there should not any one suruiue of that maruellous multitude: the cause of which sudden change of passion when he vttered to Artabanus his vncle, Artabanus spake to the King to this effect: That which is more lamentable than the dissolution of this great Troupe within that number of yeeres by the King remembred, is, That the life it selfe which we enioy is yet more miserable than the end thereof: for in those few daies giuen vs in the world, there is no man among all these, else∣where, that euer found himselfe so accompanied with happinesse, but that he of∣tentimes pleased himselfe better with the desire and hope of death, than of liuing; the incident calamities, diseases, and sorrowes whereto mankind is subiect, being so many and ineuitable, that the shortest life doth oftentimes appeare vnto vs ouer∣long; to auoide all which, there is neither refuge nor rest but in desired death alone. With this melancholy discourse, Xerxes being not much pleased, prayed Arta∣banus not to ouer-cast those ioyes which they had now in pursuit with sad remem∣brances. And holding stil a doubtful conceit, that Artabanus vtterly condemned the inuasion of Greece, against which he had formerly giuen many strong reasons, desi∣red him to deale freely with him, Whether he were returned to his first resolution, that the enterprise of Greece could not be prosperous? Or whether, according to the change of mind put into him by his late Vision, he was confident of good suc∣cesse? Artabanus, notwithstanding that he assured himselfe of the Kings resolution to go on, and dared not by any new Arguments to batter the great purpose it selfe, yet he told the King, That there were two things which maruellously affrighted him, and which the King should finde, as he feared, to be most aduerse; to wit, the Sea and the Land: The Sea, because it had no where in that part of the world any Port capable of so great a Fleete: insomuch, as if any tempest should arise, all the Continent of Greece could hardly receiue them, nor all the Hauens thereof af∣foord them any safetie: and therefore when such shelter shall bee wanting vnto them, he prayed him to vnderstand, that in such a case of extremitie, men are left to the will and disposition of Fortune, and not Fortune to the will and disposition of men. The Land, besides other incommodities, will be found by so much the more an enemie, by how much the vnsatiate desire of man to obtaine more and more thereof, doth leade him forward: for were there no man found to giue resistance, yet the want of meanes to feede such an Army, and the Famine, which cannot bee preuented, will without any other violence offered disinable and consume it. By these Arguments Artabanus hoped to haue diuerted Xerxes, not daring perchance to vtter what indeed he most feared; to wit, the ouerthrow of the Armie it selfe both by Sea and Land, which soone after followed. These Cautions were excee∣ding weightie, if Xerxes his obstinacie had not misprised them. For to inuade by Sea vpon a perillous Coast, being neither in possession of any Port, nor succored by any party, may better fit a Prince presuming on his fortune, than enriched with vn∣derstanding. Such was the enterprise of Philip the second vpon England in the yeere 1588. who had belike neuer heard of this Counsell of Artabanus to Xerxes, or forgotten it. Now concerning the second point, it was verie likely, that Xerxes his Armie, which could not haue lesse in it than two millions of Soules, besides his beastes for Seruice and Carriage, should after a few dayes suffer famine, and vsing Machiauels words, Mourire sans cousteo; die without a knife. For it was impossible for Greece, be∣ing a ragged, strait and mountainous Countrey, to yeeld food (besides what ser∣ued themselues) for twenty hundred thousand strangers, whom they meant to entertaine but with the sharpened points of their weapons, destroying withall whatsoeuer they could not well inclose and defend. Nay, if we may beleeue Hero∣dotus, Lib. 3. the Armie of Xerxes, being reuiewed at Thermopylae, consisted of fiue millions, two hundred eightie three thousand, two hundred twentie men, besides Laundres∣ses, Harlots and Horses, and was therefore likely to endure a speedy famine. The effect of Xerxes his answere was, That it was impossible to prouide for all things; and that whosoeuer should enterprise any great matter, if he gaue the hea∣ring to all that could be objected of accidentall inconueniences, hee should neuer pursue the same farther, than the dispute and consultation: which if his Predeces∣sors, the Persian Kings, had done, they had neuer growne to that greatnesse, or pos∣sest so many Kingdomes and Nations as now they did, and therefore concluded, That great enterprises were neuer vndertaken without great perils. Which resolu∣tion of Xerxes was not to be condemned, if any necessity had enforst him to that warre. But seeing the many Nations newly conquered, which hee already com∣maunded, were more than could be constrained to obedience any longer than the powerfull prosperity of the Persians endured, and that Greece was separated by the Sea from the rest of Xerxes Dominions (of whose resolution his father Darius had made a deare experience) the of this warre was answerable to the plantation, and the successe and end to the weake counsell whereon it was grounded. Furthermore, those millions of men which he transported, and yet in his owne iudgement not sufficient (for he gathered in marching on, all the strength of Thrace and Macedon ) were an argument, that he rather hoped to feare the Greekes by the fame of his numbers, than that he had any confidence in their valour and resoluti∣on, whom he conducted. For it is wisely said of those vncountable multitudes: Non vires habent sed pondus, & impediment a potiùs sunt quàm auxilium; They are great in bulke, but weake in force, and rather a luggage than an aide. Besides, as it was impossible to marshal such a world of men in one Armie, so the diuers Nations, speaking diuers languages, bred the same confusion among the Per∣sian commaunders when they came to fight, as it did to the builders of Babel, when they came to worke. Whereas if Xerxes had of his fiue millions compounded tenne Armies of fiftie thousand chosen souldiors in each, and sent them yeerely into Greece well victualed and furnished, he had eyther preuayled by the sword, or forst them to forsake their territorie, or brought them in obedience by necessity and fa∣mine, which cannot be resisted. But while Xerxes, resolued to cut down the bankes of Greece, and to let in a sea of men vpon them, he was deceiued both in his owne hopes, and in their hearts whom he imployed, and beaten by the Greekes, both by Land and Sea; yea, he himselfe, conducted by his feare, fled shamefully into Asia. A great part of his Armie was buried in Greece: the remainder wherof, which win∣tred in Thessalie, and led by Mardonius, who perswaded the Enterprise, was in the Summer following vtterly defeated, and himselfe slaine. §. III. Of the fights at Thermopylae and Artemisium. AFter such time as Xerxes had transported his Armie ouer the Helle∣spont, and landed in Thrace, (leauing the description of his passage a∣longst that Coast, and how the Riuer of Lissus was drunke by his multitudes, and the Lake neere to Pissyrus by his cattell, with other accidents in his marches towards Greece ) I will speake of the encoun∣ters he had, and the shamefull and incredible ouerthrowes which he receiued: As first at Thermopylae, a narrow passage of halfe an acre of ground, lying betweene the Mountaines which diuide Thessalie from Greece, where sometime the Phocians had raysed a wall with gates, which was then forthe most part ruined. At this entrance Leonidas, one of the Kings of Sparta, with three hundred Lacedaemonians, assisted with one thousand Tegeatae and Mantineans, one thousand Arcadians, and other Pe∣loponnesians, to the number of three thousand one hundred in the whole, besides one thousand Phocians, foure hundred Thebans, seuen hundred Thespians, and all the forces (such as they were) of the bordering Locrians, defended the two whole daies together against that huge Armie of the Persians. The valour of the Greekes appeared so excellent in this defence, that in the first dayes fight, Xerxes is said to haue three times leaped out of his Throne, fearing the destruction of his Armie by one handfull of those men, whom not long before he had vtterly despi∣sed: and when the second dayes attempt vpon the Greekes had prooued vaine, hee was altogether ignorant how to proceede further, and so might haue continued, had not a run-agate Graecian taught him a secret way, by which part of his Armie might ascend the ledge of Mountaines, and set vpon the backs of those who kept the Straits. But when the most valiant of the Persian Armie had almost inclosed the small forces of the Greekes, then did Leonidas, King of the Lacedaemonians, with his three hundred, and seuen hundred Thespians, which were all that abode by him, refuse to quit the place which they had vndertaken to make good, and with admi∣rable courage not onely resist that world of men which charged them on all sides; but issuing out of their strength, made so great a slaughter of their enemies, that they might well bee called vanquishers, though all of them were slaine vpon the place. Xerxes hauing lost in this last fight, together with twentie thousand other Souldiers and Captaines, two of his owne brethren, began to doubt what incon∣uenience might befall him by the vertue of such as had not beene present at these battailes, with whome hee knew that hee shortly was to deale. Especially of the he stood in great feare, whose manhood had appeared singular in this try∣all, which caused him very carefully to enquire what numbers they could bring in∣to the field. It is reported of Dieneces the Spartan, that when one thought to haue terrified him by saying, That the flight of the Persian arrowes was so thicke as would hide the Sunne: he answered thus; It is very good newes: for then shall we fight in the coole shade. Such notable resolution hauing as freely beene expressed in deedes, as it was vt∣tered in words, caused the Persian to stand in great doubt, when he heard that the Citie of Sparta could arme well-nigh eight thousand men of the like temper, and that the other Lacedaemonians, though inferiour to those, were very valiant men. Wherefore he asked counsell of , a banished King of the Spartans, who had alwaies well aduised and instructed him in the things of Greece, what course were fittest to bee taken in his further proceedings. The opinion of Demaratus was, That all the Land-forces would assemble together to defend the Isthmus, that straight necke of ground which joyneth Peloponnesus to the Continent. For which cause he aduised, That three hundred shippes well manned should be sent vnto the Coast of Laconia, to spoyle the Countrie, and to hold the Lacedaemonians, and their neighbours busied at home; whilest Xerxes at his leasure hauing subdued the , might afterward bring his whole power vpon them, who remaining destitute of succour, would be too weak alone to make resistance. To this purpose also the same Demaratus further aduised, that the said fleet of three hundred ships should seize vpon the Iland then called Cythera, now Cerigo, which lying neere to the Coast of Laconia, might serue as a fit place of Rendez vous vpon all occasions either of their own defence or endamaging the enemie: whereby that ancient speech of Chilon the Lacedemonian should be verified, that it were better for his Countrie-men to haue that Ile drowned in the sea, than stand so inconueniently as for them it did. What effect this counsell might haue taken had it been followed it is not easie to guesse. But a contrarie opinion of Achaemenes brother to King Xerxes was preferred as the safer. For the Persian fleet had bin sorely vexed with a grieuous tempest which continued three whole dayes together, wherein were lost vpon the coast of Magnesia foure hundred ships of war, besides other vessels innumerable, accor∣dingly as Artabanus had foreseene, that if any such calamity should ouertake them, there would not be found any Harbor wide enough to giue them succour. There∣fore Achaemenes perswaded his brother not to disperse his fleet; for if (said he) after the losse of foure hundred shippes we shall send away other three hundred to aduentures, then will the Greekes be strong enough by sea to encounter the rest of the Nauie, which holding altogether is inuincible. To this counsel Xerxes yeelded, hoping that his Land-armie and fleet should each of them stand the other in good stead, whilest both held one course, and lay not farre asunder. But herein he was farre deceiued; for about the same time that his armie had felt the valour of the Greekes by Land, his Nauie likewise made a sorrowfull proofe of their skill and courage at Sea. The Grecian fleet lay at that time at Artemisium in the straits of Eu∣boea, where the Persians thinking to incompasse them, sent two hundred sayle a∣bout the Iland to fall vpon them behind, vsing a like strategem to that which their King did practise against Leonidas in a case not vnlike, but with far different successe. For that narrow channell of the sea which diuideth Euboea from the maine, was in the same sort held by a Nauy of two hundred threescore and eleuen saile against the huge Persian Armada, as the straits of Thermopylae had formerly been maintained by Leonidas, till he was so circumuented as this Nauie might haue been, but was not. The departure of those two hundred ships that were sent about the Iland, and the cause of their voiage, was too well knowne in the Persian fleete, and soone enough disclosed to the Greekes, who setting saile by night, met them with a counter sur∣prise, taking and sinking thirtie vessels, inforcing the rest to take the Sea, where be∣ing ouertaken with foule weather, they were driuen vpon the rocks & cast al away. Contrariwise, the Nauie of the Greekes was increased by the arriuall of fiftie three Athenian ships, and one Lemnian, which came to their partie in the last fight. As these new forces incouraged the one side: so the feare of Xerxes his stir∣red vp the other to redeeme their losse with some notable exploit. Wherefore set∣ting aside their vnfortunate policie, they resolued in plaine fight to repaire their honour, and casting themselues into the forme of a Crescent, thought so to inclose the Greekes, who readily did present them battell at Artemisium. The fight endured from no one till night, and ended with equall losse to both parts. For though more of the Persians ships were sunke and taken, yet the lesser losse fell altogether as heauie vpon the Greekish sleet, which being small could worse beare it. Herein onely the Barbarians may seeme to haue had the worse, that they for sooke the place of fight, leauing the wracke and spoyles to the enemie, who ne∣uerthelesse were faine to abandon presently euen the passage which they had vn∣dertaken to defend, both for that many of their ships were sorely crusht in the bat∣taile, and especially because they had receiued aduertisement of the death of Leo∣nidas at Thermopylae. Before they waied anchors, general of the Athenians engraued vpon stone at the watering place an exhortation to the Ionians, that either they should reuolt vnto the Greekes or stand neutrall; which perswasion, he hoped would either take some place with them, or at the least make them suspected by the Persians. §. IIII. The attempt of XERXES vpon APOLLOE'S temple: and his taking of Athens. WHen Xerxes had passed the straites of Thermopylae, he wasted the coun∣try of the Phocians, and the regions adioyning: as for the inhabitants, they chose rather to flie, and reserue themselues to a day of battell, than to aduenture their liues into his hands, vpon hope of sauing their wealth by making proffer vnto him of their seruice. Part of his armie he sent to spoile the temple of Delphi; which was exceeding rich by meanes of many offerings that had there beene made by diuers Kings and personages; Of all which riches it was thought that Xerxes had a better Inuentorie than of the goods left in his owne Palace. To make relation of a great astonishment that fell vpon the companies which ariued at the Temple to haue sacked it, and of two Rocks, that breaking from the mount Parnassus, ouerwhelmed many of the Barbari∣ans, it were peraduenture somewhat superstitious. Yet Herodotus, who liued not long after, saith, That the broken Rocks remained euen to his memorie in the Temple of , whither they rowled in their fall. And surely this attempt of Xerxes was impious; for seeing hee beleeued that Apollo was a god, hee should not haue dared to entertaine a couetous desire of inriching himselfe by committing sa∣criledge vpon his Temple. Wherefore it may possibly be true, that licence to cha∣stise his impietie, in such manner as is reported, was granted vnto the Diuel, by that Holy one, who saith, Will a man spoile his gods? and elsewhere; Hath any nation chan∣ged Malac. c. 3. v. 8. their gods, which yet are no gods? Go to the Iles of Kittim, and behold, and send to Ke∣dar, Ierem. c. 2. v. & 10. and take diligent heed, and see whether there be any such things. Now this impietie of Xerxes was the more , for that the Persians alleadged the burning of Cy∣beles Temple by the , when they set fire on the Citie of Sardis in Asia, to be the ground and cause of the waste which they made in burnings of Cities and Temples in Greece. Whereas indeed, in the enterprise against Delphos, this Vizzor of holy and zealous reuenge falling off, discouered the face of couetousnesse so much the more vglie, by how much the more themselues had professed a detestation of the offence which the Athenians had committed in that kind by meere mischance. The remainder of that which Xerxes did, may be expressed briefly thus: He came to Athens, which finding for saken, he took & burnt the Cittadel & temple which was there∣in. The Cittadel indeed was defended a while by some of more courage than wise∣dome, who litterally interpreting Apollo's Oracle; that Athens should be safein wood∣den walls, had fortified that place with boords and Palissadoes: too weake to hold out long, though by their desperate valour so well maintained at the first assault, that they might haue yeelded it vpon tolerable conditions, had they not vainely relied vpon the prophecie: whereof (being somewhat obscure) it was wisely done of Themistocles, to make discretion the interpreter, applying rather the words to the present neede, than fashioning the businesse to words. §. V. How THEMISTOCLES the Athenian drew the Greekes to fight at Salamis. THe Athenians had, before the comming of Xerxes, remooued their wiues and children into Troezene, Aegina, & Salamis, not so highly pri∣zing their houses and lands, as their freedome, and the common liber∣tie of Greece. Neuerthelesse, this great zeale, which the Athenians did shew for the generall good of their Countrie, was ill requited by the other Greekes, who with much labour were hardly intreated to stay for them at Sa∣lamis, whilest they remooued their wiues and children out of the Citie. But when the Citie of Athens was taken, it was presently resolued vpon, that they should for∣sake the Ile of Salamis, and with-draw the fleet to Isthmus: which neck of land they did purpose to fortifie against the Persians, and so to defend Peloponnesus by Land, and Sea, leauing the rest of Greece, as indefensible, to the furie of the enemie. So should the Ilands of Salamis and Aegina haue beene abandoned, and the Families of the Athenians (which were there bestowed as in places of securitie) haue beene gi∣uen ouer into mercilesse bondage. Against this resolution Themistocles, Admirall of the Athenian fleet, very strongly made opposition; but in vaine. For the Pelo∣ponnesians so possessed with feare of losing theit owne, which they would not hazard, that no perswasions could obtaine of them, to regard the estate of their di∣stressed friends and Allies. Many remonstrances Themistocles made vnto them, to allure them to abide the enemie at Salamis; As first in priuate vnto Eurybiades the Lacedaemonian, Admirall of the whole fleet; That the selfe same feare which made them forsake those coasts of Greece, vpon which they then anchored, would after∣ward (if it found no check at the first) cause them also to the fleet, and euery one of the Confederates to with-draw himselfe to the defence of his owne Citie and estate: Then to the Councell of Warre which Eurybiades vpon this motion did call together (forbearing to obiect what want of courage might worke in them hereafter) he shewed that the fight at Isthmus would be in an open Sea, whereas it was more expedient for them, hauing the fewer ships, to determine the matter in the straights; and that, besides the safeguard of Aegina, Megara, and Salamis, they should by abiding, where they then were, sufficiently defend Isthmus, which the Barbarians should not so much as once looke vpon, if the Greekes obtained victorie by sea; which they could not so well hope for else where, as in that present place which gaue them so good aduantage. All this would not serue to retaine the Pe∣loponnesians, of whom one, vnworthie of , vpbraided Themistocles with the losse of Athens, blaming Eurybiades for suffering one to speake in the Councell, that had no Countrie of his owne to inhabite. A base and shamefull obiection it was, to lay as a reproch that losse, which being voluntarily sustained for the common good, was in true estimation by so much the more honourable, by how much it was the greater. But this indignitie did exasperate Themistocles, and put into his mouth a reply so sharpe, as auailed more than all his former perswasions. Hee told them all plainely, That the Athenians wanted not a fairer Citie, than any Nation of Greece could boaft of; hauing well-neere two hundred good ships of Warre, the bet∣ter part of the Graecian fleet, with which it was easie for them to transport their Fa∣milies and substance into any part of the World, and settle themselues in a more se∣cure habitation, leauing those to shift as well as they might, who in their extremitie had refused to stand by them. Herewithall he mentioned a towne in Italie belong∣ing of old to the State of Athens, of which towne hee said an Oracle had fore-told, That the Athenians in processe of time should build it a new, and there (quoth he) will we plant our selues, leauing vnto you a sorrowful remembrance of my words, and of your owne vnthankfulnesse. The Peloponnesians hearing thus much, began to enter into better consideration of the Athenians, whose affaires depended not, as they well perceiued, vpon so weake termes, that they should bee driuen to crouch to others; but rather were such, as might inforce the rest to yeeld to them, and con∣descend euen to the vttermost of their owne demands. For the Athenians, when they first embraced that resolution of leauing their grounds and houses to fire and ruine, if necessitie should inforce them so far, for the preseruation of their libertie; did imploy the most of their priuate wealth, and all the common treasure, in building a great Nauie. By these meanes they ho∣ped (which accordingly fell out) that no such calamitie should befall them by land, as might not well be counterpoised be great aduantages at sea: Knowing well, that a strong fleet would either procure victorie at home, or a secure passage to any o∣ther . The other States of Greece held it sufficient, if building a few new ships, they did somewhat amend their Nauie. Whereby it came to passe, that, had they been vanquished, they could not haue expected any other fortune than either present death, or perpetuall slauerie; neither could they hope to be victorious with∣out the assistance of the Athenians, whose forces by sea did equall all theirs toge∣ther; the whole consisting of more than three hundred and fourescore bottomes. Wherefore these Peloponnesians beginning to suspect their owne condition, which would haue stood vpon desperate points, if the fleet of Athens had forsaken them; were some perswaded, by the greater feare of such a bad euent, to forget the lesser, which they had conceiued of the Persians: and laying aside their insolent brauerie, they yeelded to that most profitable counsaile of abiding at Salamis. §. VI. How the Persians consulted about giuing battaile: and how THEMISTO∣CLES by policie held the Greekes to their resolution; with the vi∣ctorie at Salamis thereupon ensuing. IN the meane season the Persians had entred into consultation, whe∣ther it were conuenient to offer battell to the Greekes, or no. The rest of the Captains giuing such aduice as they thoughtwould best please the King their Master, had soon agreed vpon the fight: but Artemisia Queene of Halicarnassus, who followed Xerxes to this war in person, was of contrarie opinion. Her Counsell was, that the King himselfe directly should march toward Peloponnesus, whereby it would come to passe, that the Greeke Nauie (vnable otherwise to continue long at Salamis for want of prouision) should pre∣sently be disseuered, and euery one seeking to preserue his owne Citie and goods, they should, being diuided, proue vnable to resist him, who had wonne so far vpon them when they held together. And as the profit will bee great in forbearing to giue battell; so on the other side, the danger will bee more (said shee) which wee shall vnder-goe, than any need requireth vs to aduenture vpon; and the losse in case it fall vpon vs, greater than the profit of the victory which we desire. For if we com∣pell the enemies to flie, it is more than they would haue done, we sitting still: but if they, as better Sea-men than ours, put vs to the worst, the iourney to Pelopon∣nesus is vtterly dasht, and many that now declare for vs, will soone reuolt vnto the Greekes. Mardonius, whom Xerxes had sent for that purpose to the fleet, related vn∣to his Master the common consent of the other Captaines, & withall this disagree∣ing opinion of Artemisia. The King well pleased with her aduice, yet resolued vpon following the more generall, but farre-worse counsaile of the rest; which would questionlesse haue beene the same which gaue, had not feare and flatterie made all the Captaines vtter that, as out of their iudgement, which they thought most conformable to their Princes determination. So it was indeede that Xerxes had entertained a vaine perswasion of much good, that his owne pre∣sence vpon the shore to behold the conflict, would worke among the Souldiers. Therefore he incamped vpon the Sea-side, pitching his owne on the mount Aegaleus, which is opposite vnto the Ile of Salamis, whence at ease hee might safely view all which might happen in that action, hauing Scribes about him to downe the acts and behauiour of euery Captaine. The neere approch of the Bar∣barians, together with the newes of that timorous diligence, which their Countri∣men shewed in fortifying the Isthmus, and of a Persian Armie, marching a-pace thi∣ther, did now againe so terrifie and amaze the Peloponnesians, that no intreatie, nor contestation would suffice to hold them together. For they thought it meere mad∣nesse to fight for a Countrey alreadie lost, when they rather should endeuour to saue that which remained vnconquered; propounding chiefly to themselues what miserie would befall them, if losing the victorie, they should be driuen into Salamis, there to be shut vp, and besieged round in a poore desolate Iland. Hereupon they resolued forth-with to set saile for Isthmus: which had presently beene done, if the wisedome of Themistocles had not preuented it. For he perceiuing what a violent feare had stopt vp their eares against all good counsaile, did practise another course, & forth-with labour to preuent the execution of this decree; not suffering the very houre of performance to find him busie in wrangling altercation. As soone as the Councell brake vp, hee dispatched secretly a trustie Gentleman to the Persian Captaines, informing them truely of the intended flight, and exhorting them to send part of their Nauie about the Iland, which incompas∣sing the Greekes, might preuent their escape; giuing them withall a false hope of his assistance. The Persians no sooner heard than beleeued these good newes, well knowing that the victorie was their owne assured, if the Athenian fleet ioyned with them; which they might easily hope, considering what abilitie their Master had to recompence for so doing, both the Captaines with rich rewards, and the People with restitution of their , and Territories. By these meanes it fell out, that when the Greekes very early in the morning were about to waigh Anchor, they found themselues inclosed round with Persians, who had laboured hard all night, sending many of their ships about the Ile of Salamis, to charge the enemie in reare, and landing many of their men in the Isle of Psyttalea, which lycth ouer-against Sa∣lamis, to saue such of their owne, and kill such of the Graecian partie, as by any mis∣fortune should be cast vpon the shore. Thus did meere necessitie enforce the Grae∣cians to vndertake the battaile in the Straights of Salamis, where they obtained a memorable victorie, stemming the formost of their enemies, and chasing the rest, who falling foule one vpon another, could neither conueniently fight nor . I do not finde any particular occurrances in this great battaile to be much remarkable. Sure it is that the Scribes of Xerxes had a wearisome taske of writing downe many disasters that befell the Persian fleet, which ill acquited it selfe that day, doing no one peece of seruice worthie the presence of their King, or the registring of his Notaries. As for the Greekes, they might wel seeme to haue wrought out that victo∣rie with equall courage, were it not that the principall honour of that day was ascribed to those of Aegina, and to the Athenians, of whom it is recorded, That when the Barbarians did flie towards Phalerus, where the Land-armie of Xerxes lay, the ships of Aegina hauing possessed the Straights, did sinke or take them, whilest the Athenians did valiantly giue charge vpon those that kept the Sea, and made a∣ny countenance of resisting. §. VII. Of things following after the battaile of Salamis: and of the flight of XERXES. AFter this victorie, the Greekes intending, by way of , to deter∣mine which of the Captaines had best merited of them, in all this great seruice; euery Captaine, being ambitious of that honour, did in the first place write downe his owne name, but in the second place as best deseruing next vnto himselfe, almost euery Suffrage did concur vpon Themistocles. Thus priuate affection yeelded vnto vertue, as soon as her own turne was serued. The Persian King, as not amazed with this calamitie, began to make new preparation for continuance of warre; but in such fashion, that they which were best acquainted with his temper, might easily discerne his faint heart, through his painted lookes. Especially Mardonius, Author of the warre, began to cast a warie eye vpon his Master, fearing lest his counsell should be rewarded accor∣ding to the euent. Wherefore purposing rather to aduenture his life in pursuite of the victorie, than to cast it away by vnder-going his Princes indignation; he ad∣uised the King to leaue vnto him three hundred thousand men, with which forces he promised to reduce all Greece vnder the subiection of the Persian Scepter. Here∣withall he forgot not to sooth Xerxes with many faire words; telling him, that the cowardise of those Aegyptians, Phoenicians, and Cilicians, with others of the like met∣tall, nothing better than slaues, who had so ill be haued themselues in the late Sea∣seruice, did not concerne his honour, who had alwaies been victorious, and had al∣readie subdued the better part of Greece, yea taken Athens it selfe, against which the Warre was principally intended. These words found very good acceptance in the Kings eare, who presently betooke himselfe to his iourney homewards, ma∣king the more haste, for that he vnderstood, how the Greekes had a purpose to saile to Hellespont, and there to breake downe his bridge, and intercept his passage. True it was that the Greekes had no such intent, but rather wished his hastie departure, knowing that hee would leaue his Armie not so strong, as it should haue beene, had he in person remained with it. And for this cause did Eurybiades giue counsel, that by no meanes they should attempt the breaking of that bridge, lest necessitie should inforce the Persians to take courage, and rather to fight like men, than die like beasts. Wherefore Themistocles did, vnder pretence of friendship, send a false aduertisement to this timorous Prince, aduising him to conuay himselfe into Asia with all speed, before his bridge were dissolued: which counsell Xerxes tooke verie kindly, and hastily followed, as before is shewed. Whether it were so that hee found the bridge whole, and thereby repassed into Asia; or whether it were torne in sun∣der by tempests, and he thereby driuen to imbarke himselfe in some obscure vessel, it is not greatly materiall; though the Greekes did most willingly imbrace the later of these reports. Howsoeuer it were, this flight of his did well ease the Countrie; that was therby disburdened of that huge throng of people, which, as Locusts, had before ouerwhelmed it. §. VIII. The negotiations betweene MARDONIVS and the Athenians, as also be∣tweene the Athenians and Lacedaemonians; after the slight of XERXES. MARDONIVS with his three hundred thousand had withdrawn him∣selfe into Thessalie, whence sent Alexander, the sonne of Amyntas King of , as Embassadour to the , with promise of large amends for all their losses receiued; and of extending their Ter∣ritories as farre as their owne desires; allowing them to retaine their libertie and lawes, if they would make peace with Xerxes, and him in that Warre. The Athenians had now reentred their Citie, but not as yet brought backe their wiues and children; for as much as they well perceiued that the place could not be secure, till the Armie of Mardonius were broken and defeated. Wherefore the Lacedaemonians, vnderstanding what faire conditions this Embassadour would pro∣pound, were perplexed with very great , lest hee should finde good and ready acceptance. Hereupon, they likewise very speedily dispatched their Embassadours for Athens, who arriuing, before the Macedonian had audience, vsed the best of their perswasion to retaine the Athenians firme. They alleadged, that neither Xerxes nor Darius had any pretence of Warre against the rest of Greece, but had onely threatned the subuersion of Athens, till they and all their Confederates arming themselues in defence of that Citie, were drawne into the quarrell, wherein the A∣thenians without much crueltie of injustice could not leaue them. Wee know, said they, that yee haue indured great calamities, losing the fruit of the grounds, and being driuen to forsake the Towne, the houses whereof bee ruined, and vnfit for your habitation; in regard whereof, we vndertake to maintaine as our owne, your wiues and children amongst vs, as long as the war shall continue, hoping that yee, who haue alwaies procured libertie to others, will not now goe about to bring all Greece into slauerie and bondage. As for the Barbarians, their promises are large, but their words and oathes are of no assurance. It was needlesse to vse many argu∣ments to the Athenians, who gaue answere to Alexander in presence of the Spartan Embassadours; That whilest the Sunne continued his course, they would be ene∣mies to Xerxes, regarding neither gold nor any riches, with which he might seek to make purchase of their libertie. Concerning the maintenance of their wiues and children, it was a burden which they promised to sustaine themselues, only desiring the Lacedaemonians, that with all speede they would cause their Armie to march, for as much as it was not likely, that Mardonius would long sit still in Thessalie, hauing once receiued such a peremptorie answere. In this their opinion of Mardonius his readinesse to inuade Attica, they found themselues nothing deceiued. For hee, as soone as Alexander had returned their obstinate purpose of resistance, did foorth∣with leade his Armie towards them, and their Citie: they hauing now the second time quitted it, and conueyed themselues into places of more securitie abroad in the Countrie, where they expected the arriuall of their Confederates. From Athens he sent his Agent vnto them with instructions, not only to perswade them to acceptance of the conditions before to them propounded, but with great promises to allure the principall of them to his partie. His hope was that either the people, wearied with forsaking their houses so often, would be desirous to preserue them from fire, and to haue those which were alreadie laid waste, reedified at the Kings charges: Or if this affection took no place with them, but that needes they would relie vpon their old Confederates, whose succours did very slowly aduance forwards, yet perhaps the Leaders might bee wonne with great rewards, to draw them to this purpose; all which projects if they should faile, the destruction of A∣thens would be a good meane to please his Master, King Xerxes, who must thereby needes vnderstand, that Mardonius kept his ground, and feared not to confront the whole power of Greece, in the strongest part of their owne Countrie. But his ex∣pectation was beguiled in all these. For the Athenians so little regarded his offers, that when one Lycidas, or (as Demosthenes calls him) Cyrcilus, aduised the Senate to accept the conditons, and propound them to the people; all the Senators, and as many as abiding without the Counsaile-house heard what he had said, immediate∣ly set vpon him, and stoned him to death; not examining whether it were feare or money, that had mooued him to vtter such a vile sentence. Yea, the women of A∣thens, in the Ile of Salamis, hearing of his bad counsaile, and bad end, assembling to∣gether, did enter his house there, & put his wife and children to the like execution. All this brauerie notwithstanding, when they perceyued the slacknesse of the Pelo∣ponnesians in giuing them aide, they were to betake themselues to Salamis a∣gaine, the old place of their securitie. Remaining there, and seeing little forward∣nesse in those whom it most concerned to assist them, they sent verie seuere messa∣ges to Sparta, complaining of their slacknes, & threatning withal, to take such course as might stand best with their owne good, seeing that the common estate of all was so little regarded. These messengers were at the first entertained with dilatorie an∣sweres, which euery day grew colder, when as the Peloponnesian Wall, builded a∣thwart the Isthmus, was almost finished. But as the Lacedaemonians waxed carelesse and dull, so the Athenians hotely pressed them to a quicke resolution, giuing them plainely to vnderstand, that if they should hold on in those dilatorie courses, it would not be long ere the Citie of Athens tooke a new course, that should little please them. All this while the Persian fleet lay vpon the coast of Asia, not daring to draw neerer vnto Greece, as being now too weake at Sea. Likewise the Greekish Nauie contained it selfe within the Harbours vpon Europe side; both to doe seruice where neede should require at home; and withall to shunne the danger which might haue befallen any part of it, that being distracted from the rest, had aduen∣tured ouer far. So mutuall feare preserued in quiet the Ilands lying in the of the Seas. But it was well and seasonably obserued by a of Sparta, that the wall vpon Isthmus would to little purpose for the defence of Peloponnesus, if once the Athenians gaue eare to Mardonius: considering that many dores would be opened into that Demie-Iland, as soone as the Enemie should by winning the friendship of Athens, become the Master of the Seas about it. The Lacedaemonians vpon this admonition, making better pervsall of their own dangers, were very careful to giue satisfaction to the Athenian Embassadors, who not broo∣king their delaies, were vpon point of taking leaue, yea as it seemed, of renouncing their alliance. Wherefore dispatching away fiue thousand Spartans in the euening, vnder conduct of Pausanias; they gaue audience the next day to the Embassadours, whose complaints they answered with vehement protestations of their readinesse; deeply swearing that the Armie of Sparta was already farre vpon the iourney; and giuing them leaue to take vp other fiue thousand Lacedaemonians, out of the Region adioyning, to follow after them. The Athenians, though distasting such want of grauitie, in a matter so important, were neuerthelesse contented with the finall conclusion; and the number appointed of Lacedaemonian Souldiers, made what haste they could to incampe in Attica. The other Graecians were nothing slacke in sending forth Companies, whose neere approch caused Mardonius to forsake Attica as a rough Country, and there∣fore of much disaduantage to Horse, wherein consisted the best of his power. Before his departure he the Citie of Athens, beating downe the wals of it, and rui∣ning all that had formerly escaped the fury of Warre. §. IX. The great battaile of . IT were too long a rehearsall to shew all that hapned in many skir∣mishes betweene the Greekes and him, in the Countrie of Boeotia, which Mardonius had chosen to bee the seate of that Warre. Much time was spent before the quarrell was decided by trial of one maine battaile: for both parties did stand vpon their guard, each expecting when the other should assaile them. The Armie of Mardonius contained about three hundred thousand, which were by him chosen out of Xerxes his Armie; to whom were adioyned the forces of , Macedonie, Thessalie, and other parts of Greece, that now siding with the Persian, furnished his Campe with fiftie men. Against these the Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and their Confederates, had leauied an Armie of one hundred and ten thousand, of which fortie thousand were waightily armed, the rest were only assi∣stants to these fortie thousand, being armed more slightly, as rather to make excur∣sions and giue chase, than to sustaine any strong charges. These two Armies hauing eleuen daies confronted one the other, without per∣forming any memorable piece of seruice; Mardonius, whose victualls beganne to faile, resolued to begin the fray. The Greekes were promised victorie by an Oracle, if they fought in the Land of the Athenians, and in the plaine of Ceres & Proserpina, making prayers vnto certaine gods, Demi-gods, and Nymphs. But it was hard to finde the certaine place which the Oracle designed. For the plaine of Ceres was in∣deede in the Territorie of Athens; but there was also an old Temple of Ceres and Proserpina, neere vnto the place where they lay at that time encamped, as likewise the memorialls of those Nymphs, and Demi-gods, were in the same place, vpon Mount Cithaeron, and the ground serued well for foot-men against horse; onely the Land belonged vnto the Plataeans, and not vnto the Athenians. Whilest the Greekes were perplexed about the interpretation of this doubtfull Oracle; the Plataeans, to make all cleere, did freely bestow their land on that side the Towne vpon the Athenians. This magnificence of the Plataeans caused Alexander the Great, many ages after, to reedifie their Citie, which was ruined in the Peloponnesian warres. All things being readie for battaile; the Lacedaemonian Generall thought it most mecte, that the Athenians should stand opposite that day to the Medes and Persians, whom they had formerly vanquished at Marathon; and that he, with his , should entertaine the Thebans and other Greekes which followed Mardonius, as bet∣ter acquainted with their fight, and hauing beaten them often-times before. This being agreed vpon, the Athenians changed place with the Lacedaemonians; which Mardonius vnderstanding (whether fearing the Athenians, of whose valour the Medes and Persians had felt heauie proofe, or desiring to encounter the Spartans, as thinking them the brauest Souldiers of Greece ) hee did also change the order of his battaile, and oppose himselfe to Pausanias. All the Greekes might well perceiue how the Enemie did shift his wings, and Pausanias thereupon returned to his former Sta∣tion; which Mardonius noting, did also the like. So one whole day was spent in changing to and fro. Some attempt the Persians made that day with their Archers on horse-back, who did so molest the Greekes at their watering place, that they were faine to enter into consultation of retiring; because they could not without much losse to themselues, and none to the enemie, lie neere to that Fountaine which did serue all the Camp. Hauing therefore concluded among themselues to dislodge; and part of the Armie being sent away before day-light: perceiued their departure in the morning, and thereupon being encouraged by their flight, (which to him seemed to proceede out of meere cowardise) he charged them in reare with great violence. It may well be recorded as a notable example of patient valor, That the Lacedaemonians being ouer-taken by the Enemies horse, and ouer-whelmed great flights of Arrowes, did quietly sit stil, not making any resistance or defence, til the Sacrifices for victory were happily ended, though many of them were hurt and slaine, and some of especiall marke lost, before any signe of good successe appeared in the entrailes. But as soone as Pausanias had found in the Sacrifice those tokens, which the super∣stition of that Age and Countrie accounted fortunate; hee gaue the Signall of bat∣taile: and therevpon the Souldiers, who till then did sit vpon the ground, as was their manner, arose altogether, and with excellent courage receiued the charge of the Barbarians, that came thronging vpon them without any feare of such notable resistance. The rest of the Greeke Armie that was in march, being by Pau∣sanias, came in a-pace to succour the Lacedaemonians: onely that part of the Armie which was led by the Athenians, could not arriue vnto the place of the great battaile, because the Thebans, and other with the , gaue them checke by the way. Neuerthelesse, the Spartans with other their Assi∣stants, did so well acquite themselues, that the Persians were , and Mardonius with many thousands more slaine in the field; the rest fledde into the Campe, which they had fortified with woodden walls, and there defended them∣selues with such courage as desperate necessitie inforced them vnto, holding out the longer, because the Lecedaemonians were not acquainted with the manner of as∣saulting Fortresses, and Walls. In the meane season, the Athenians hauing found strong opposition of the Thebans and Thessalians, did with much labour and courage obtaine victorie, which hauing not long pursued, they came to helpe the Lacedaemo∣nians, whom they found wearily busied in assaulting the Campe, with more valour than skill. Wherefore they themselues vnder-tooke it, and in short space forced a passage through the Wall, at which breach first, and then on all sides, the Greekes entred with such furie, and iust desire of vengeance, that of three hundred thou∣sand they are said not to haue left three aliue, excepting those who fled away with Artabazus, when the Persian Armie first fell to rout. If the execution were so great, as is reported, an especiall of it was the foolish retrait, or rather flight into the Campe. For though it were so, that the place was well fortified, and the number of those who cast themselues into it, grea∣ter than of the Assailants; yet they being of seuerall Nations and Languages, and hauing lost their Generall with other principall Commanders, it was that they in such a terrour and astonishment should make good that piece of ground, lying in the heart of an Enemie Countrie, against an Armie of men, farre more valiant then themselues, and enflamed with present victorie. Therefore the same wall which for a few houres had preserued their liues, by holding out the E∣nemie, did now impale them, and leaue them to the slaughtering furie of vnpitti∣full Victors. Artabazus fled into Thrace, telling the people of Thessalie, and other Countries in his way, that hee was sent by Mardonius vpon some piece of seruice: For hee well knew, that had they vnderstood any thing of that great discomfiture, all places would haue been hostile vnto him, and sought with his ruine to purchase fauour of the vanquishers. Therefore making so large marches, that many of his Souldiers being feeble were left behinde and lost, hee came to Byzantium, whence hee shipped his men ouer into Asia. Such was the end of the vaine-glorious expe∣dition, vnder-taken by Xerxes against the Greekes, vpon hope of honour, and great Conquest, though sorting otherwise, accordingly as Artabazus had fore-seene, and rather worse, for as much as it began the quarrell, which neuer ended, before the ruine of the Persian Empire was effected by that Nation of the Greekes, despised and sought to haue beene brought into slauerie. Hereby it may seeme, that the vi∣sion appearing to Xerxes, was from God himselfe, who had formerly disposed of those things, ordaining the subuersion of the Persian Monarchie by the Greekes, who, thus prouoked, entred into greater consideration of their owne strength, and the weakenesse of their Enemies. §. X. The battaile of Mycale, with a strange accident that fell out in the be∣ginning of it: and examples of the like. THe same day on which the battaile was fought at Plataeae, there was another battaile fought at Mycale, a Promontorie, or Head-land in Asia, where the Persian fleet rode. Leutychides the Spartan, with Xantippus the Athenian, Admiralls of the Greeke Nauie, at the request of some Ilanders and Ionians, did saile into those parts, to deliuer the Samians, and procure the Ionians to reuolt from the Persian. Xerxes himselfe at this time lay at Sardis, a Citie in Lydia, not farre from the Sea-side, hauing left threescore thousand vnder the command of Tigranes for defence of Ionia and the Sea-coast. Therefore when Artayntes and Ithramitres, Ad∣miralls of the Persian fleet, vnderstood that the Greekes bent their course towards them; they did forth-with draw their ships a-ground, fortifying with Palissadoes and otherwise, as much ground as did seem needfull for the encamping of al their Land and Sea-forces. Leutychides at his arriuall, perceiuing that they meant to keepe within their strength, and resoluing to force them out of it, rowed with his Gallie close aboord the shore, and called vpon the Ionians (who more for feare then good wil were encamped among the Persians ) exhorting them in the Greeke tongue to re∣member libertie, and vse the faire occasion which they now had to recouer it. Here∣in he did imitate Themistocles, who had done the like at Euboea; trusting that either these perswasions would preuaile; or if the Persians did happen to vnderstand them, that it would breed some ielousie in them, causing them to fight in feare of their owne Companions. It neede not seeme strange, that this very same stratageme, which little or nothing auailed Themistocles, did now very happily succeede. For Xerxes being in his full strength, it was a matter of much difficultie, to perswade those Inhabitants of Asia to reuolt; who now, in his declining estate, gaue a willing eare to the sweet sound of libertie. The Persians likewise, who in their former bra∣uerie, little regarded and lesse feared any treason, to be contriued by their Subiects, were now so warie, that from the Samians which were amongst them, they tooke away their armes; the Milesians, whom they did suspect, but would not seeme to mistrust, they placed farre from them, as it were for defence of the straight passages of Mycale; pretending that these Milesians did best of all others know those places. But these deuices little auailed them. For the Samians perceiuing that they were held as Traitors, tooke courage in the heate of the fight, and laying hold vpon such weapons as came to hand, the Persians manfully within the Campe; which example the Ionians presently followed, being very glad to haue found some that durst beginne. It is said that while the Greeks were yet in a march towards the Ene∣mies campe, a rumour suddenly ranne in the Armie, that Mardonius was ouer∣throwne in Greece, which (though perhaps it was giuen out by the Captaines to en∣courage the Souldiers) was very true. For the battaile of Plataeae was fought in the morning, and this of Mycale in the euening of the same day. The like report of that great battaile, wherein Paulus Aemylius ouerthrew Per∣seus the last king of Macedon, was brought to Rome in foure daies, as Liuie with others doe record. And Plutarch hath many other examples of this kinde. As that of the battaile by the Riuer Sagra in Italie, which was heard of the same day in Peloponnesus: That of the battaile against the Tarquinians and the Latines, presently noised at Rome: And (which is most remarkable) the victorie obtained against Lu∣cius Antonius, who was Rebell to Domitian the Emperour. This Lucius Antonius being Lieutenant of the higher Germanie, had corrupted his Armie with gifts and promises, drawing the barbarous people to follow him, with great hope to make himselfe Emperour; which newes much troubling the Citie of Rome, with feare of a dangerous Warre; it was suddainely reported that Antonius was slaine, and his Armie defeated. Hereupon many did offer sacrifice to the gods, and shew all manner of publique ioy, as in such cases was accustomed. But when better inquirie was made, and the Author of these tidings could not be found; the Emperour Domitian betooke him∣selfe to his iourney against the Rebell; and being with his Armie in march, hee receiued aduertisement by Poste, of the Victorie obtained, and the death of An∣tonius: whereupon remembring the rumour noised before in Rome, of the selfe∣same victorie, hee found that the report and victorie were borne vpon one day, though twentie thousand furlongs (which make about fiue and twenty hundred miles) a-sunder. It is truely said of Plutarch, that this last example giues credit vnto many the like. And indeede it were very strange, if among so many rumours, be∣gotten by forgerie or mistakings, and fostered by credulous imagination, there should not be found (as happens in dreames among many thousand vaine and fri∣uolous) a fewe precisely true. Howbeit wee may finde, that God himselfe doth sometimes vse to terrifie those who presume vpon their owne strength, by these light meanes of tumultuous noises; as hee raised the siege of Samaria, by causing a sound of Horses and Chariots to affright the Aramites; and as he threatned Sena∣cherib, saying: Behold, I will send a blast vpon him, and hee shall heare a noise, and re∣turne Esay. c. 37. v. 7. to his owne Land. Wherefore it may well haue beene true, that God was plea∣sed by such a meane as this, to animate the Greekes; who (as Herodotus notes) went towards the Enemies with heauie hearts, being in great feare, lest their owne ad∣uenture should by no meanes fall out well; considering in what danger they had left their Countrie of Greece, which was readie to be subdued by Mardonius, whilest they went wandring to seeke out enemies a-far-off, vpon the coast of Asia. But the fame of the battaile fought at Plataeae being noised among them; euery man desired that his owne valour in the present fight, might be some helpe to worke out the full deliuerance of Greece. In this alacritie of spirit, they diuided themselues into two Battalions, whereof the Athenians led the one, by the way of the plaine, direct∣ly towards the enemies campe; the Lacedaemonians conducted the other, by the Mountaines and straight passages, to winne the higher ground. The Athenians did first set vpon the Campe (ere the Lacedaemonians could on the other part) and being desirous to get all the honour of the day to themselues, did so forcibly assault it, that they brake way through the Palissadoes and Gabions, and made themselues Masters of the place, slaying all that could not saue themselues by flight. In this fight the Samians did good seruice, as is formerly mentioned. But the Miletians, who vpon the like iealousie, were placed by the Persians on the tops of Mycale, to defend the passages; did now (as if they had beene set of pur∣pose to keepe them from running away) put as many to the sword as fell into their hands, letting none escape, except a very few, that fled through by-pathes. The Lacedaemonians that day did little seruice, for the businesse was dispatched ere they came in: Only they broke such companies as retyred in whole troups; making them flie dispersed in very much disorder, whereby the Milesians were enabled to doe the greater execution vpon them. This was the last fight of that huge Armie leauied against Greece, which was now vtterly broken, and had no meanes left to make offensiue Warre. §. XI. Of the barbarous qualitie of XERXES: with a transition from the Persian affaires to matters of Greece, which from this time grew more worthie of regard. XERXES lay at Sardis, not farre from the place of this battaile; but little minde had hee to reuenge either this or other his great losses, being wholly giuen ouer to the loue of his Brothers Wife: with whom when he could not preuaile by intreatie, nor would obtaine his desire by force, because he respected much his Brother her hus∣band, hee thought it best to make a match betweene his owne Sonne Darius, and the Daughter of this Woman; hoping by that meanes to finde occasion of such familiaritie as might worke out his desire. But whether it were so, that the cha∣stitie of the Mother did still reiect him, or the beauty of her Daughter allure him; he soone after fell in loue with his owne Sonnes wife, being a vicious Prince, and as ill able to gouerne himselfe in peace, as to guide his Armie in Warre. This yong Ladie hauing once desired the King to giue her the Garment which hee then wore, being wrought by his owne Wife; caused the Queene thereby to perceiue her husbands conuersation with her, which shee imputed not so much to the beautie of her Daughter-in-law, as to the cunning of the Mother, against whom thereupon shee conceiued extreme hatred. Therefore at a Royall feast, wherein the custome was that the King should grant their request, shee craued that the Wife of Masistes, her husbands Brother, the yong Ladies Mother, might bee giuen into her disposition. The barbarous King, who might either haue reformed the abuse of such a custome, or haue deluded the importunate crueltie of his Wife, by threatning her selfe with the like, to whatsoeuer shee should inflict vpon the innocent Ladie, granted the request; and sending for his brother, perswaded him to put away the Wife which he had, and take one of his Daughters in her stead. Hereby it seemes, that hee vnderstood how villai∣nously that poore Ladie should be intreated, whom hee knew to bee vertuous, and whom himselfe had loued. Masistes refused to put her away; alleaging his owne loue, her deseruing, and their common Children, one of which was mar∣ried to the Kings Sonne, as reasons important to mooue him to keepe her. But in most wicked manner Xerxes reuiled him; saying, That hee now should nei∣ther keepe the Wife which hee had, nor haue his Daughter whom hee had promised vnto him. Masistes was much grieued with these wordes, but much more, when returning home, hee found his Wife most butcherly mangled by the Queene Amestris, who had caused her Nose, Lippes, Eares, and Tongue to be cut off, and her Brests in like manner, which were cast vnto Dogges. Ma∣sistes enraged with this vilanie, tooke his way with his children, and some Friends, towards Bactria, of which Prouince hee was Gouernour, intending to rebell and auenge himselfe. But Xerxes vnderstanding his purpose, caused an Armie to bee leauied, which cut him off by the way, putting him and all his Company to the sword. Such was the Tyrannicall condition of the Persian Gouernement; and such are generally the effects of Luxurie, when it is ioyned with absolute power. Yet of Xerxes it is noted, that he was a Prince of much vertue. And therefore Alexander the Great, an Image of his ouer-throwne, and lying vpon the ground, said, That hee doubted, whether in regard of his vertue, hee should againe erect it, or, for the mischiefe done by him to Greece, should let it lie. But surely whatsoeuer his other good qualities were, he was foolish, and was a co∣ward, and consequently mercilesse. Therefore wee may firmely beleeue, that the vertue of Cyrus was very great, vpon which the foundation of the Persian Empire was so surely laid, that all the wickednesse and vanities of Xerxes, and other worse Princes, could not ouer throw it, vntill it was broken by a vertue almost equall to that which did establish it. In warres against the Aegyptians, the fortune of Xerxes did continue, as at the first it had beene very good; but against the generall estate of Greece, neither hee, nor any of his posteritie, did euer make offensiue warre, but receiued many los∣ses in Asia, to which the last at Mycale serued but as an introduction; teaching the Greekes, and especially the Athenians, that the Persian was no better Souldier at his owne dores, than in a forraine Countrie: whereof good triall was made forth-with, and much better proofe as soone as the affaires of Athens were quietly settled and assured. From this time forward I will therefore pursue the Historie of Greece, taking in the matters of Persia, as also the estate of other Countries, collaterally, when the order of time shall present them. True it is, that the Persian estate continued in her greatnesse, many Ages following, in such wise that the knowne parts of the World had no other Kingdome, representing the Maiestie of a great Empire. But this greatnesse depended only vpon the riches and power that had formerly beene acquired, few actions or none that were worthy of remembrance, excepting some Tragedies of the Court, and examples of that excessiue Luxurie, where-with both it, and all, or the most of Empires that euer were, haue beene e∣neruated, made vnweldie, and (as it were) fattened for the hungrie swords of poore and hardie Enemies. Hereby it came to passe, that Xerxes and his successours were faine to defend their Crownes with money and base policies; very seldome or ne∣uer (vnlesse it were with great aduantage) daring to aduenture the triall of plaine battaile with that little Nation of Greece, which would soone haue ruined the foundations laid by Cyrus, had not priuate malice and ielousie vrged euery Citie to enuie the height of her Neighbours walls, and thereby di∣uerted the swords of the Greekes into their owne bowels, which after the departure of Xerxes beganne very well, and might better haue continued, to hew out the way of conquest, on the side of Asia. CHAP. VII. Of things that passed in Greece from the end of the Persian Warre, to the beginning of the Peloponnesian. §. I. How Athens was rebuilt and fortified. AFTER that the Medes and Persians had receiued their last blow, and were vtterly beaten at Mycale: Leoty∣chides, who then commanded the Graecian Armie, leauing the pursuit of the warre to the Athenians, assisted by the reuolted Iones, returned with the La∣cedaemonians and other Peloponnesians to Sparta and o∣ther places, out of which they had been leauied. The Athenians in the meane while besieged Sestos, a Citie on the strait of the Hellespont, betweene which and Abydus, Xerxes had lately fastned his Bridge of Boats: where the inhabitants, desperate of succour, did not long dispute the defence thereof, but quitted it to the Greekes, who entertained themselues the Winter following on that side the Hellespont. In the Spring they drew homeward, and hauing left their wiues and children, since the inuasion of Attica, and the abandoning of Athens, in diuers Islands, and at Troezen, they now found them out, and returned with them to their owne places. And though the most part of all their houses in Athens were burnt and broken downe, and the walls of the Citie ouer-turned, yet they resolued first on their com∣mon defence, and to fortifie their City, before they cared to couer themselues, their wiues and children, with any priuate buildings: Whereof the Lacedaemonians being aduertised, and misliking the fortifying of Athens, both in respect that their owne Citie of Sparta was vnwalled, as also because the Athenians were growne more powerfull by Sea, than either themselues, or any other State of Greece, they dispat∣ched messengers to the Athenians to disswade them; not acknowledging any priuat mislike or ielousie, but pretending, that if the Persians should returne to inuade Greece a third time, the Athenians being in no better state to defend themselues than heretofore, the same would serue to receiue their enemies, and to bee made a Seate for the Warre, as Thebes had lately beene. To this the Athenians promised to giue them satisfaction by their owne Embassadors very speedily. But being resolued to goe on with their workes by the aduice of Themistocles, they held the Lacedaemoni∣ans in hope of the contrarie, till they had raysed their wals to that height, as they cared not for their mislikes, nor doubted their disturbance; and therefore (to gaine time) they dispatched Themistocles towards Lacedaemon, giuing him for excuse, that he could not deliuer the Athenians resolutions, till the arriuall of his fellow-Com∣missioners, who were of purpose retarded. But after a while, the Lacedaemonians expectation being conuerted into ielousie (for by the arriuall of diuers persons out of Attica, they were told for certaine, That the walls of Athens were speedily growne vp beyond expectation) Themistocles prayed them not to beleeue reports and vaine rumors, but that they would be pleased to send some of their own trustie Citizens to Athens, from whose relation they might resolue themselues, and deter∣mine accordingly. Which request being graunted, and Commissioners sent, The∣mistocles dispatched one of his owne, by whome hee aduised the Athenians, first to entertaine the Lacedaemonians with some such discourse as might retaine them a few dayes, and in conclusion to hold them among them, till him selfe and the other A∣thenian Embassadors, then at Sparta, had their libertie also to returne. Which done, and being also assured by his associates and Aristides, that Athens was already de∣fensible on all parts, Themistocles demaunding audience, made the Lacedaemonians know, That it was true that the wals of Athens were now raysed to that height, as the Athenians doubted not the defence of their Citie; praying the Lacedaemonians to beleeue, That when soeuer it pleased them to treat with the Athenians, they would know them for such, as right well vnderstood what appertained to a Common∣weale and their owne safetie, without direction and aduice from any other: That they had in the warre of Xerxes abandoned their Citie, and committed themselues to the woodden wals of their shippes, from the resolution of their owne counsels and courage, and not thereto taught or perswaded by others: and , in all that perillous warre against the Persians they found their owne judgements and the exe∣cution thereof in nothing inferior, or lesse fortunate, than that of any other Nati∣on, State, or Commonweale among the Greekes; And therefore concluded, that they determined to be Masters and Iudges of their owne affaires, and thought it good reason, that either all the Cities confedered within Greece should be left open, or else that the wals of Athens should be finished and maintained. The Lacedaemonians finding the time vnfit for quarrell, dissembled their mislike, both of the fortifying of Athens, and of the diuision, and so suffered the Athenians to depart, and receiued backe from them their owne Embassadors. The wals of Athens finished, they also fortified the Port Pyreus, by which they might vnder couert imbarke themselues vpon all occasions. §. II. The beginning of the Athenian greatnesse, and prosperous warres made by that State vpon the Persian. THe Athenians hauing settled things in good order at home, prepared thirtie Gallies for the pursuit of the warre against the Persians, to which the Lacedaemonians added other twentie; and with this Fleet, strengthened by the rest of the Cities of Greece confederated, they set sayle for , vnder the conduct of the Lacedaemonian; where after their landing hauing possest themselues of many principall places, they imbarked the Armie againe, and tooke land in Thrace, recouering from the Persians by force the Citie Bizantium, now Constantinople: from whence Pausanias, behauing himselfe more like a Tyrant than a Captaine, especially towards the Ionians lately reuolted from Xerxes, was called backe by the counsell of Lacedaemon, and not onely accused of many insolent behauiors, but of intelligence with the Medes, and Trea∣son against his Countrey. In his stead they imployed Docres, who either gaue the same cause of offence; or else the Athenians, who affected the first commaundement in that warre, practised the souldiors to complaine, though indeed the wise and ver∣tuous behauior of Aristides, Generall of the Athenian forces, a man of rare and in∣comparable sinceritie, had beene able to make a good Commaunder seeme ill in comparison of himselfe; and therfore was much more auaileable, in rendring those detested, whose vices affoorded little matter of excuse. Howsoeuer it were, the La∣cedaemonians being no lesse wearie of the warre, than the Athenians were eagre to pursue it, the one obtained their ease, and the other the execution and honor which they desired: for all the Greekes (those of Peloponnesus excepted) willingly subjected themselues to the commandement of the Athenians, which was both the beginning of their greatnesse in that present age, and of their ruine in the next . For the charge of the warre being now committed vnto them, they began to rate the confederated , they appointed and Treasurers, and beganne to leuie money, according to their discretion, for the maintenance of the generall de∣fence of Greece, and for the recouering of those places on Europe side, in Asia the lesse, and the Islands, from the Persians. This tribute (the first that was payed by the Greekes ) amounted to foure hundred and threescore Talents; which was raysed easily by the honest care of that just man Aristides, to whose discretion all the referred themselues, and no one man found occasion to complaine of him. But as the vertue of Aristides, and other worthy , brought vnto the Athenians great commoditie; so the desire which they conceiued of encreasing their commoditie, corrupted their vertue, and robbing of the generall loue, which had made them powerfull, abandoned their to the of her , which with her in the next age perished. For it was not long ere these foure hundred & threescore Talents were raysed to sixe hundred, long, after that, their Tyrannie had conuerted their followers into slaues, and extorted from them yeerely thirteene hundred Talents. The Isle of Delos was at the first appointed for the Treasure-house wherein these summes were layd vp; and where, at the generall , the Captaines of those forces, sent by the confederates, were for sake called to consultation. But the Athenians, who were stronger by sea than all Greece besides, had lockt vp the common treasure in an Island, vnder their owne protection, from whence they might transport it at their pleasure, as af∣terward they did. The generall Commaunder in this Warre was Cimon, the sonne of Miltiades, who first tooke Eiona, vpon the Riuer Strimon; then the of Sciros, inhabited by the Dolopes: they mastered the Caristij, and brought into seruitude the Naxij, contrarie to the forme of the confederacie: So did they other the inhabitants of Greece, if at any time they fayled of their contribution, or disobeyed their com∣maundements; taking vpon them and vsurping a kind of soueraigne authority ouer the rest: which they exercised the more assuredly, because they were now become Lords of the Sea, and could not be resisted. For many of the confederated Cities and Nations, wearie of the warre in their owne persons, and giuen vp altogether to their ease, made choise rather to pay their parts in money, than either in of warre, or in shippesl leauing the prouision of both to the Athenians. the one grew weake in all their Sea-defences, and in the exercise of the Warres; the o∣ther greatly strengthened their Nauie and their experiences, being alwayes armed and imployed in honourable Seruices, at the cost of those, who hauing lifted them into their Saddles, were now enforced to become their footmen. Yet was the Tribute-money, leuied vpon these their confederates, employed so well by the Athenians at the first (as ill proceedings are often founded vpon good be∣ginnings) that no great cause of repining was giuen. For they rigged out a great Fleet of Gallies, very well manned, wherewith Cimon the Admirall scouring the Asiaticke Seas, tooke in the Citie of Phaselis; which hauing formerly pretended neutralitie, and refused to relieue, or any way assist the Greekes, were enforced to pay Talents for a fine, and so to become followers of the Athenians, paying yeere∣ly contribution. From thence hee set sayle for the Riuer Eurymedon in Pamphylia, where the Persian Fleet rode, being of sixe hundred sayle, or (according to the most sparing report) three hundred and fiftie, and hauing a great Land-Armie, encamped vpon the shoare; all which forces hauing beene prouided for aduauncing the af∣faires in Greece, were vtterly defeated in one day, and two hundred shippes taken by the Athenians, the being broken to pieces, or sunke, euer they had swomme in the Seas. hauing in one day obtained two great victo∣ries, the one by the Sea, and the other by Land, was very soone presented with a third. For fourescore sayle of Phoenicians (who were the best of all Sea men, vn∣der the Persian commaund) to haue joyned themselues with the Fleet destroyed, arriued vpon the same Coast, ignorant of what had passed, and nothing lesse than what . Vpon the first notice of their approach, Ci∣mon weighed anchor, & meeting them at an head-Land, called Hydra, did so amaze them, that they only sought to runne themselues on ground; by which meane pre∣seruing few of their men, they lost all their shippes. These losses did so breake the courage of the Persian, that, omitting all hope of preuailing vpon Greece, he condis∣cended to whatsoeuer Articles it pleased the Athenians to propound, graunting li∣bertie vnto all the Greekes inhabiting Asia; and further couenanting, That none of his shippes of Warre should sayle to the Westward of the Isles, called Cyaneae and Chelidoniae. This was the most honourable peace that euer the Greekes made; neither did they in effect, after this time, make any warre that redounded to the profit or glory of the whole Nation, till such time as, vnder Alexander, they ouerthrew the Em∣pire of Persia; in which Warre few, or perhaps none of them, had any place of great commaund, but serued altogether vnder the Macedonians. §. III. The death of XERXES by the treason of ARTABANVS. BEsides these losses, which could not easily haue beene repaired, the troubles of the Empire were at this time such, as gaue just cause to the Persian of seeking peace vpon any tearmes not altogether into∣lerable. For Artabanus, the vncle of Xerxes, perceiuing, that the King his master did easily take small occasions to shead the bloud of such, as in kindred or place were neere vnto him, beganne to repose lesse hope of safetie in remaining faithfull, than of obtaining the Soueraignetie, by destroying a Prince that was so hated for his crueltie, and despised for his cowardise and misfortunes. Hauing conceiued this Treason, he found meanes to execute it by Mithridates an Eunuch, in such close manner, that (as if he himselfe had beene inno∣cent) he accused Darius the sonne of Xerxes, and caused him to suffer death as a Par∣ricide. Whether it be true, that by this great wickednesse he got the Kingdome, and held it seuen moneths; or whether intending the like euill to Artaxerxes the sonne of Xerxes, he was by him preuented and surprised, it were hard to affirme any cer∣tainetie. But all Writers agree vpon this, That taken he was, and with his whole familie put to death by extreme torments, according to the sentence, whereof the truth is more than the Verse. Raro antecedentem scelestum Deseruit pede poena claudo. Seldome the villaine, though much haste he make, Lame-footed Vengeance failes to ouer-take. §. IIII. The banishment of THEMISTOCLES: His flight to ARTAXERXES newly in Persia; and his death. ARTAXERXES being established in his Kingdome, and hauing so compounded with the Athenians, as the present necessitie of his af∣faires required, began to conceiue new hopes of better fortune against the Greekes, than he or his predecessors had euer hitherto found. For the people of Athens, when the Persians were chased out of Greece, did so highly value their owne merites in that seruice, that they not onely thought it fit for themselues to become the Commanders ouer many Townes and Islands of the Greekes, but, euen within their owne wals, they would admit none other forme of Gouernment than meerely Democraticall. Herein they were so insolent, that no integritie nor good desert was able to preserue the estate of any such as had borne great office, longer than, by flattering the rascall multitude, he was con∣tented to frame all his words and deedes to their good liking. This their intolerable demeanour much offended ; who, though in former times he had layed the foundations of his greatnesse vpon popularitie, yet now presuming vpon his good done to the State, hee thought that with great reason they might graunt him the libertie to checke their inordinate procee∣dings. But contrariwise, they were so highly offended with his often the benefits which they had receiued from him, that they layed vpon him the punish∣ment of Ostracisme, whereby he was banished for tenne yeeres, as a man ouer-bur∣thensome to the Commonwealth. Before the time of his returne was halfe expired, a new accusation was brought against him by the Lacedaemonians, who charged him of consulting with Pausanias, about betraying the whole Countrey of Greece vnto Xerxes. Heereupon Themi∣stocles finding no place of securitie against the malice of two such mightie Cities, was driuen, after many troublesome flights, and dangerous remouings, to aduenture himselfe into Persia; where he found Artaxerxes newly settled, and was by him ve∣ry honourably entertained. But the great hope which Artaxerxes had conceiued of aduauncing his affaires by the counsell and assistance of Themistocles, proued al∣together fruitlesse. For when the Athenians, in fauour of Inarus the Lybian, (who infested Aegypt, causing it to rebell against the Persian ) had sent a Fleet to Sea, lan∣ding an Armie in Aegypt, and scowring those Easterne Seas, to the great hinderance of Artaxerxes, and (for ought that I can vnderstand) to the manifest breach of that peace, which to their great honour they had concluded with ; then did the King send his Letters to Themistocles, requiring him to make good the hopes which he had giuen, of assuring the Persian estate against the Greekes. But whether Themistocles perceiued much vnlikelinesse of good successe, in lea∣ding a great Armie of dastardly Persians against the warlike people of Greece; or else (as in fauour of his vertue it is more commonly reported) the loue of his Countrey would not permit him to seeke honour by the ruine of it: sure it is, that being ap∣pointed by Artaxerxes to vndertake the conduct great forces against the Atheni∣ans, hee decided the great conflict betweene thankfulnesse to his well-deseruing Prince, and naturall affection to his owne ill-deseruing people, by finishing his life with a cup of poyson. §. V. How the Athenians, breaking the peace, which to their great honour they had made with the Persian, were shamefully beaten in Aegypt. was Artaxerxes driuen to vse the seruice of his owne Captaines in the Aegyptian warre, wherein it appeared well, That a just cause is a good defence against a strong enemie. An Fleet of two hun∣dred saile strong was sent forth vnder Cimon, to take in the Isle of Cyprus: which conquest seemed easie both to make and to maintaine, the Persian being vtterly broken at Sea, and thereby vnable to the Island. Now although it were so, that a peace had beene concluded, which was likely to haue beene kept sincerely by the Persian, who had made so good proofe of the Grae∣cian valour, that he was nothing desirous to build any shippes of Warre (without which the Greekes could receiue no harme from him) whereof if any one should be found sayling towards Greece, the peace was immediately broken, if not, his whole estate; yet all the Sea-coast (no small part of his Dominions) to the waste of an enemie too farre ouer-matching him. Yet whether the Athenians were in doubt, lest the league which in his owne worser fortunes hee had made with them, he would breake in theirs; and therefore sought to get such assurance into their hands, as might vtterly disable him from attempting ought against them; or whether the increase of their reuenues and power, by adding that rich and great I∣land to their Empire, caused them to measure honour by profit; they thought it the wisest way, to take whilest they might, whatsoeuer they were able to get and hold, and vnable to defend. The Ile of Cypres lying in the bottome of the straights betweene Cilicia, Syria and Aegypt, is very fitly seated for any Prince of State, that being mighty at Sea, doth either seeke to enrich himselfe by trade with those Countries, or to infest one or more of them when they are his enemies. And this being the purpose of the Athe∣nians, their Ambition which had already deuoured, in conceit, this Iland, was on the sodaine well nigh choaked with a greater morsell, to smatch at which, they let Cyprus alone, which they might easily haue swallowed and digested. For Inarus King of the Lybians confining Aegypt, hauing found how greatly the Country was exhausted by the late warres, and how weakely defended by very slender Persian garrisons, conceiued rightly, that if such small forces as the Satrapa or Viceroy could make on the sodaine of his owne Gardes, or leuie out of the ordinarie Garrisons, were by him defeated; the naturalls of the Countrey, not long since oppressed by Camby∣ses, and after a reuolt very lately subdued by Xerxes, would soone breake faith with him who had no other title to that kingdome than a good sword. Further, he per∣swaded himselfe that the people, vnable to defend themselues against the Persian without his assistance; would easily be drawne to accept him, the author of their deliuerance for king. Neither did this hope deceiue him. For hauing taken and cruelly slaine Achaemenes the Viceroy; diuers Cities forthwith declared themselues for him, and proclayming him king, shewed the most of their endeuour for prose∣cution of the warre. But hee considering his owne weakenesse, and that the meanes of the Aegyptians his were not answerable to their desires, perceiued wel, that to resist the power of Artaxerxes, farre greater forces than his and theirs were to be procured, at what price he obtained them. Therefore hearing of the great Athenian fleete, and knowing well the vertue of the souldiers therein embar∣qued; he inuited the Commaunders to share with him the kingdome of Aegypt, as a farre greater reward of their aduenture, than such an addition as that of Cyprus could be to their estate. Whether hee or they (if things had wholy sorted accor∣ding to their expectation) would haue beene contented with an equall share, and not haue fallen out in the partition, were perhaps a diuination . Hee was possessed of the peoples loue, they were of most power. But the issue of those affaires was such as left them nothing to cōmunicate but misfortunes, which they shared somewhat equally. Yet had the beginnings of their enterprise very good and hopefull successe: For they entred the Land as farre as to Memphis, the princi∣pall Citie; and of the Citie it selfe they tooke two parts: to the part, which was called the White wall, they layd such hard siege, that neither those forces of the Persians, which then were in Aegypt, were strong enough to remoue them; nei∣ther could Artaxerxes wel deuise what meanes to vse for the of that which was lost, or for the preseruation of the remainder. The best of his hope was by setting the Lacedaemonians vpon Athens, to enforce the Athenians to looke home∣wards to their owne defence. This was the first time that the Persian sought to pro∣cure of the Greekes one against the other, by them vp with gold to the entertainement of priuate quarrels, for the good of their common enemie. To this purpose he sent Megabazus to Sparta with much Treasure; who, after great expence, finding that the Lacedaemonians were nothing forward in imploying their whole force against the Athenians, whome in many conflicts of great importance they had found to be their matches, notwithstanding the absence of their Armie in Aegypt; he thought it his wisest way to imploy the rest of his money & meanes to their reliefe, who had now the space of sixe yeeres defended his masters right in Aegypt. Therefore he hastily dispatched another of his name, the sonne of Zopy∣rus, who arriuing in Aegypt, was first encountred by the reuolted people; ouer whome he obtained a victorie, which made him master of the Countrey, whilest the Athenians lay busied about Memphis the great Citie. It cannot be doubted, that long abode in a strange ayre, and want of supply, had much enfeebled the Atheni∣ans: sure it is, that when Megabazus, hauing reduced the Countrey to obedience, Prosopites an Iland between the Riuers of Taly and Phar∣mutiacus, two of the out lets of Nilus, to∣wards Alex∣andria. attempted the Citie it selfe, whether his former successe had amended the courage of the Persians, or want of necessaries made the Athenians inferior to themselues, he chased them out of Memphis, and pursued them so neere, as they were forst to fortifie themselues in the Isle of Prosopites, where Megabazus, after eighteene moneths siege, turning away one part of the Riuer by diuers Trenches, assaulted the Athenian without impediment of waters, tooke their Gallies, and put all to the Mendesus is an Island in the mouth of Nilus, between the out-let cal∣led Busiriticus and Diolcos. sword, saue a few that saued themselues by flight into Lybia; the same entertaine∣ment had fiftie other Gallies which they sent to the succour of the first two hun∣dred. For those Athenians hauing nothing that their Fleet and Armie was consumed, entred by the branch of Nilus, called Mendesium, and fell vnawares a∣mong the Phoenician Gallies and the Persian Armie; so as the Persians recouered all But the branch of Nilus, called Mendesium, in to the Sea by the Citie . Aegypt, but that part held by Amyrteus, and Inarus the King of , being by them taken and hanged. This was the end of the Athenians sixe yeeres warre in Aegypt, and the reward of their vanitie and indiscretion to vndertake many enterprises at once. §. VI. Of other Warres made by the Athenians for the most part with good successe, about the same time. NOtwithstanding these ouerthrowes in Aegypt, yet the Athenians in their home-warres waded through many difficulties, and held the re∣putation of their forces against the Lacedaemonians, Corinthians, and others, rather to their aduantage than otherwise. For as they were beaten neere vnto Halia by the Corinthians & Epidaurians, so they ob∣tained two great victories soone after; the one ouer the Peloponnesians, neere vnto Cecryphalia; the other ouer the Aeginets, neere vnto Aegina; where they sunke and carried away threescore and ten Gallies of their Enemies. Furthermore, they lan∣ded their forces on the suddaine, and besieged Aegina, from whence they could not be moued, notwithstanding that the Corinthians, to diuert them, inuaded Megara; where, after a great fight, with equall losse, the Corinthians, when they returned a∣gaine to set vp their Trophie, as Victors in the former battaile, were vtterly bro∣ken and slaughtered by the Athenian Garrisons, and Megarians, to their great losse and dishonour. Againe, as the Athenians were discomfited neere to Tanagra, by the Lacedaemoni∣ans, who returned from the succour of the Dorians against the Phocians, (at which time the Thessalian horse-men turned from their Allies the Athenians, and fought a∣gainst them) so about threescore daies after, the Athenians entred Boeotia vnder the conduct of Myronides, beating that Nation, they wanne Phocis on the gulfe Oeteus, and euened the walls of Tanagra to the ground. Finally, they enforced to render vpon most base conditions; as to beat downe the walls of their Citie, and to giue them hostages for Tribute; the siege whereof they had continued, not∣withstanding all their other brabbles and attempts elsewhere. Besides these victo∣ries they sackt and spoiled many places vpon the Sea-coast of Peloponnesus, belong∣ing to the Lacedaemonians; wan vpon the Corinthians, and ouerthrew the Sicyonians that came to their succour. were the vndertakings of the Athenians, and their Allies, during the time of those sixe yeeres that a part of their forces made warre in Aegypt. In the end whereof they attempted Thessalie, perswaded thereun∣to by Orestes, but were resisted King Pharsalus, who had chased Orestes out of his Dominions. They also , and had victorie ouer those that resi∣sted, after which they made with the for fiue yeeres, and sent Cimon into Cyprus with two hundred , but they were againe allured by Amyr∣teus one of the race of their former Kings, who held the Marish & Wooddie parts of Aegypt from the , to whom they sent sixtie of their ships. The rest of their Armie failing in their enterprise of Cyprus, and their fortunate and victorious Leader Cymon dying there, as they coasted the Iland, incountred a fleet of the Phoe∣nicians and , ouer both which Nations they returned victorious into Greece: as also those returned safe which were sent into Aegypt. §. VII. Of ARTAXERXES LONGIMANVS, that he was AHASHVEROSH the husband of Queene HESTER. THese Aegyptian troubles being ended, the raigne of Artaxerxes con∣tinued peaceable, wherof the length is by some restrained into twen∣tie yeeres, but the more and better Authors giue him fortie, some al∣low vnto him foure and fortie. He was a Prince of much humanitie, and noted for many examples of gentlenesse. His fauour was excee∣ding great to the Iewes, as appeareth by the Histories of Esdras and Nehemias, which fell in his time. To proue that this was the King who gaue countenance and aide to that great worke of building the Temple, it were a needelesse trauaile; considering that all the late Diuines haue very much paine, to shew that those two Prophets were licensed by him, and succoured in that building, in such sort as appeares in their writings. This was likewise that King Ahashuerosh who married Hester. Wherof if it be need∣full to giue proofe, it may suffice; That Ahashuerosh liued in Susa, raigning from India to Aethiopia, and therefore must haue beene a Persian; That he liued in peace, as ap∣peares by the circumstances of the Historie, and vsed the counsaile of the seuen Princes, the authoritie of which Princes beganne vnder Darius, the sonne of Hystas∣pes, wherefore he could be neither Cyrus nor Cambyses. The continuall Warres which exercised King Darius the sonne of Hystaspes, to∣gether with the certainety of his marriages with sundry wiues, from none of whom he was diuorced, but left his first wife Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, aliue in great honour, shee being mother to Xerxes the succeeding King; doe manifestly prooue that Hester was not his. Whereunto is added by Philo the Iew, That at the perswa∣sion of Mardochaeus, Ioiachim the high Priest the sonne of Iesua, caused the feast of Purim to be instituted in memorie of that deliuerance. Now the time of Iotachim was in the raigne of Artaxerxes, at the comming of Esdras, and Nehemias: Iesua his father dying about the end of Darius. The same continuance of warres, with other his furious and tragicall loues, wherewith Xerxes did consume such little time, as hee had free from warre, are e∣nough to proue, that the storie of Hester pertained not vnto the time of Xerxes, who liued but one and twentie yeeres, whereas the two & thirtieth of Ahasuerus or Ar∣tasastha is expressed by Nehemias. Againe, it is well knowne, that Xerxes in the se∣uenth yeere of his raigne (wherein this marriage must haue been celebrated) came not neere to Susa. Of the Princes that succeeded Artaxerxes Longimanus, to prooue that none of them could be Ahashuerosh, it is enough to say, that Mardochaeus ha∣uing beene carried from captiue, with Iechonia, by Nebuchadnezzar, was vnlikely to haue liued vnto their times. But of this Artaxerxes it is true, that he liued in Susa, raigned from India to Ae∣thiopia, liued in peace, was contemporarie with Ioiakim the high Priest: and further he had happily by his Lieutenants reclaimed the rebellious Aegyptians in that se∣uenth yeere of his raigne; which good fortune might well giue occasion to such a Royall feast, as is described in the beginning of the booke of Hester. This is the summe of the arguments, brought to proue the age of Hesters storie by the learned and diligent Krentzhemius, who addes the authorities of Iosephus, affirming the same, and of Philo, giuing to Mardochaeus eighteene yeeres more than Isaac the Pa∣triarch liued, namely, one hundred fourescore and eighteene yeers in all, which ex∣pire in the fiue and thirtieth of yeere of this Artaxerxes, if we suppose him to haue beene carried away captiue, being a Boy of ten yeeres old. §. VIII. Of the troubles in Greece, foregoing the Peloponnesian Warre. BVt it is fit that we now returne to the affaires of the Greekes, who from this time forward, more vehemently prosecuting their ciuill warres, suffered the Persians for many ages to rest in peace: this Aegyptian ex∣pedition being come to nought. Soone after this, the Lacedaemonians vndertooke the warre called, Sacred, recouered the and Ile of , and deliuered both to the inhabitants; but the Athenians regained the same, and gaue it in charge to the Phocians. In the meane while the banished Boeo∣tians their owne Land, and mastred two of their owne Townes possest by the Athenians, which they soone recouered againe from them; but in their returne towards Athens, the Boeotians, Euboeans, and Locreans, (Nations opprest by the Athe∣nians ) set vpon them with such resolution, as the Athenians were in that fight all slaine taken, whereby the Boeotians recouered their former libertie, restoring to the Athenians their prisoners. The Ilanders of Euboea tooke such courage vpon this, that they reuolted wholly from the Athenians, whom when Pericles intended to re∣conquer, he was aduertised that the Megarians, (who first left the Lacedaemonians, and submitted themselues to Athens ) being now wearie of their yoke, had slaine the Athenian Garrisons, and ioyned themselues with the Corinthians, Sicyonians, and Epidaurians. These newes hastened Pericles homeward with all possible speede; but ere he could recouer Attica, the Peloponnesians, led by Plistoanax, the sonne of Pau∣sanias, had inuaded it, pillaged, and burnt many parts thereof; after whose returne Pericles went on with his first intent and recouered Euboea. Finally, the Athenians be∣ganne to treat of peace with the Peloponnesians, and yeelded to deliuer vp all the places which they held in the Country of Peloponnesus: and this truce was made for thirtie yeeres. After sixe of these yeeres were expired, the Athenians (fauouring the Mylesians against the Samians ) inuaded Samos by Pericles, and after many repulses, and some great losses, both by Sea and Land, the citizens were forc't to yeeld them∣selues vpon most lamentable conditions; Namely, to deliuer vp all their ships, to breake downe their own walls, to pay the charge of the warre, and to restore what∣soeuer had beene taken by themselues, or by their practice, from the Athenians. In the necke of which followed that long and cruell Peloponnesian Warre, whereof I haue gathered this briefe following: the same contention taking beginning fiftie yeeres after the flight of Xerxes out of Greece. But because there was no Citie there∣of, which either in the beginning of this warre, or in the continuance of it, was not drawne into the quarrell: I hold it conuenient now at the first to shew briefly the estate of the Countrie at that time, and especially the condition of those two great Cities, Athens, and Sparta, vpon which all the rest had most dependance. CHAP. VIII. Of the Peloponnesian Warre. §. I. Vpon what termes the two principall Cities of Greece, Athens and Sparta, stood, at the beginning of the Peloponnesian Warre. GREECE was neuer vnited vnder the gouernement of any one Prince or Estate; vntill Philip of Macedon, and after him Alexander, brought them rather to a Vnion and League against the Persian, whereof they were Captaines, than into any absolute subiection. For e∣uery Estate held their owne, and were gouerned by Lawes farre different, and by their owne Magistrates, notwithstanding the power of the Macedonians, to whom they did yeld obedience no otherwise than as to such, who were (perforce) their leaders in the Persi∣an warre (deemed the General quarrell of Greece ) and tooke the profit and honor of the victorie, to their owne vse and increase of . But the Kings which af∣terwards raigned in Macedonia, did so farre enlarge their authoritie, that all Greece was by them brought vnder such obedience, as differed little from seruitude; very few excepted, who could hardly, sometimes with armes, and sometimes with gifts, preserue their liberty; of whom the Lacedamonians and Athenians were chiefe: which two people deserued best the plague of tyrannie, hauing first giuen occasion thereunto, by their great ambition, which wearied and weakened all the Countrie by perpetuall Warre. For vntill these two Cities of Athens and Sparta all Greece, drawing euery State into the quarrell, on the one or other side, and so gaue beginning to the Peloponnesian warre (the effects whereof in true estimation ceased not, before the time that Philip had ouer-mastred all, forasmuch as euery conclusion of one warre afforded hencefoorth matter to some new distraction of the whole Countrie) the warres, commenced betweene one Citie of Greece and an other, were neither great, of long continuance. All controuersies were soone de∣cided, either by the authoritie of the Amphictiones, who were the generall Councel of Greece; or by the power of the Lacedaemonians, whose aide was commonly held as good as the assurance of victorie. These Lacaedemonians had liued about foure hundred yeeres vnder one forme of Gouernment, when the Peloponnesian warre beganne. Their education was onely to practise feates of Armes; wherein they so excelled, that a very few of them were thought equall to very great numbers of any other people. They were poore, and cared not much for wealth; euery one had an equall portion of the common field, which sufficed to maintaine him in such manner of life as they vsed. For brauery they had none, and curious building or apparell they regar∣ded not. Their diet was simple, their feasts and ordinarie meales being in com∣mon Halls, where all fared alike. They vsed money of yron, whereof they could not be couetous nor great hoarders. Briefly, they liued Vtopian- like, saue that they vsed no other occupation than Warre, placing all their felicitie in the glory of their valour. Heereby it came to passe that in all enterprises, whereof they were partakers, the leading and high command was granted to them, and all Greece fol∣lowed their conduct. But the Athenians were in all points contrarie to this. For they sought wealth, and measured the honors of their victories by the profit; they vsed mercenarie Souldiers in their warres, and exacted great tribute of their Sub∣iects, which were for the most part Ilanders, compelled to obey them, because the Athenian fleet was great. As in forme of policy, and in course of life, so in conditions naturall, the diffe∣rence betweene these two people was very much. The Athenians were eager and violent, suddaine in their conclusions, and as hastie in the execution; The Lacedae∣monians very slow in their deliberations, full of grauitie, but very resolute, and such as would in cold bloud performe what the Athenians did vsually in flagrant. Wher∣by it came to passe, that the Lacedaemonians had all the Estates of depending vpon them, as on men firme and assured, that sought honour and not riches; wher∣as the Athenians were followed by such as obeyed them perforce, being held in straight subiection. But the Signorie of the Athenians was nothing large, vntill such time as the Persian Xerxes had inuaded Greece, pretending onely a quarrel to Athens: For then the Citizens perceiuing well, that the Towne of Athens could not be de∣fended against his great Armie of seuenteene hundred thousand men, bestowed all their wealth vpon a Nauie, and (assisted by the other Grecians ) ouerthrew the fleet of Xerxes, whose Land-forces were soone after discomfited by them, and the Greekes, who all serued vnder conduct of the Spartans. After these victories, the Athenians being now very mightie in fleet, reduced al the Ilands of the Greekish Seas vnder their obedience; imposing vpon them a hard tribute, for maintenance (as they ) of warre against the Persian; though indeede they imploied their forces chiefly, to the conquest of such Ilands, and hauen-Townes, of their owne Countrimen, as stood out against them. All which was easily suffered by the , who were In-landers, and men that delighted not in expeditions to be made farre from home. But afterwards perceiuing the power of the Athenians to grow great, they held them in much ielousie, and were very apt to quarrell with them; but much more willing to breed contention betweene them and other E∣states. Wherefore at such time as the Thebans would haue oppressed the Plataeans, when they of Plataea repaired to Sparta for succour, they found there no other aide, than this aduice, That they should seeke helpe at Athens. Hereby it was was , that the Athenians should be intangled in a long and tedious Warre, with their neighbours of Thebes. But it prooued otherwise; for their force was now so great, that all such occasions did onely serue to increase their honour and puissance. §. II. How Sparta and Athens entred into Warre. NEuerthelesse many Estates of Greece were very ill affected to Athens, because that Citie grew very insolent vpon suddaine prosperitie, and maintaining the weaker Townes against the stronger, incroched a∣pace vpon their Neighbours, taking their dependants from them. Especially the Corinthians were much inraged, because the people of the Iland Corcyra, their which had rebelled against them, and giuen them a great ouerthrow by Sea, was by the Athenians (who desired to increase their fleet by adioyning that of Corcyra vnto it) taken into protection, and the Corinthians thereby impeached of that reuenge which else they would haue taken. Now how∣soeuer it were so, that these dealings of the Athenians were not directly against the conditions of peace agreed vpon among the Greekes, yet were the complaints made at Sparta so vehement, that (though with much a-doe) they concluded to redresse by warre the iniuries done to their Allies. First therefore seeking religious pretences, they required the Athenians to expi∣ate certaine offences committed against the gods; whereto hauing for answere, That they themselues should expiate other the like offences, committed in Sparta; they beganne to deale plainely, and required that the people of some Townes, oppressed by the Estate of Athens, should be set at libertie; and that a decree made against those of Megara, whereby they were forbidden to enter any Port of the Athenians, should be reuersed. This last point they so earnestly pressed, that if they might obtaine it, they promised to absist from their purpose of making Warre. This they desired, not as a matter of any great importance (for it was a trifle) but only that by seeming to haue obtained somewhat, they might preserue their reputation without entring into a warre, which threatned them with greater diffi∣culties apparent, than they were very willing to vnder- . But the Athenians would yeeld to nothing; for it was their whole desire that all Greece should take notice, how farre they were from feare of any other Citie. Hereupon they prepared on both sides verie strongly, all that was needfull to the Warre; wherein the Lacedaemonians were Superiour, both in number and qualitie, being assisted by most of the Cities in Greece; and hauing the generall fauour, as men that pretended to set at libertie such as were oppressed: but the Athenians did as farre exceede them in all prouisions of Money, Shipping, Engines, and absolute power of command among their Subiects; which they held; and afterward found of greater vse in such neede, than the willing readinesse of friends, who soone grow wearie, and are not easily assembled. §. III. The beginning of the Peloponnesian Warre. THe first and second yeeres expedition was very grieuous to the Citie of Athens. For the fields were wasted, the Trees cut downe; the Countrie people driuen to flie, with Wiues, Children, and Cattaile, into the Towne; whereby a most furious pestilence grew in the Citie, such as before they had neither felt, heard of. Hereunto was the reuolt of the Mytilenians, in the Ile of Lesbos, and the siege of Plataea their con∣federated Citie, which they durst not aduenture to raise, besides some small ouer∣throwes receiued. The Lacedaemonians assembling as great forces as they could raise out of Peloponnesus, did in the beginning of Summer enter the Countrie of At∣tica, and therein abide, vntill victuals beganne to faile, wasting and destroying all things round about: The Gouernours of the Athenians would not suffer the peo∣ple to issue into the field against them; for they knew the valour of their Enemies; but vsed to send a fleet into Peloponnesus, which wasted as fast all the Sea-coast of their Enemies, whilest they were making in Attica. So the Peloponnesians being the stronger by Land, wanne the Towne of Plataea, which wanted rescue; the A∣thenians likewise being more mightie by Sea, did subdue which had re∣belled, but could not be succoured from Sparta. By these proceedings in that warre, the Lacedaemonians beganne to perceiue how vnfit they were to deale with such e∣nemies. For after that Attica was throughly wasted, it lay not greatly in their power to doe any offence equall to such harme as they themselues might, and did receiue. Their Confederates beganne to set forward very slowly in their expeditions into Attica; perceiuing well that Athens was plentifully relieued with all necessaries, which came by the Sea from the Ilands that were subiect vnto that Estate; and therefore these inuaders tooke small pleasure in beholding the walls of that migh∣tie Citie, or in wasting a forsaken field, which was to them a patterne of the calami∣ties, with which their owne Territorie was the whilest afflicted. Wherefore they beganne to set their care to build a strong Nauie, wherein they had little good suc∣cesse, being easily vanquished by the Athenians, who both had more and better ships, and were so skilfull in Sea-fights, that a few Vessels of theirs durst vndertake a great number of the Peloponnesians. §. IIII. Of the great losse which the Spartans receiued at Pylus. AMong other losses which the Spartans had felt by Sea; they receiued at Pylus a verie sore blow, that compelled them to sue for peace. A of Athenian ships bound for Corcyra, wasting in that passage, as their manner was, the coast of Laconia, and all the halfe Ile of Pelo∣ponnesus, was by contrarie windes detained at Pylus, which is a rag∣ged , ioyning to the maine, by a strange of Land. Before it there lies a small barren Iland of lesse than two miles compasse, and within that a creeke, which is a good harbour for ships, the force of weather being borne off by the head Land and Isle. This Promontorie the Athenians fortified, as well as in haste they might; and what was wanting in their artificiall fortification, was sup∣plied by the naturall and site of the place. By holding this piece of ground, and hauen, they in reason expected many aduantages against their enemies. For the Countrie adioyning was inhabited by the Messenians, who in ancient time had held very strong and cruell warre with Sparta; and (though quite subdued) they were held in straight subiection, yet was not the old so extinguished, that by the neighbourhood and assistance of the Athenians, it might not bee reui∣ued. Furthermore it was thought, that many ill-willers to the Lacedaemonians, and as many of their bond-slaues as could escape from them, would repaire to Pylus, and from thence make daily excursions into Laconia, which was not farre off: Or if other hopes failed, yet would the benefit of this hauen, lying almost in the mid∣way betweene them and Corcyra, make them able to sur-round all Peloponnesus, and waste it at their pleasure. The newes of these doings at Pylus, drew the thither in all out of Attica, which they had entred a few daies before with their whole : but now they brought not only their Land-forces, but all their Na∣uie, to recouer this , how bad a neighbour it might proue in time, they well foresaw, little fearing the grieuous losse at hand, which they there in few daies receiued. For when they in vaine made a generall assault on all sides, both by Sea and Land; finding that small Garrison which the Athenians had left, very resolute in the defence: they occupied the hauen, placing foure hundred and twentie men all of them, Citizens of Sparta, in the Iland before mentioned, at each end whereof is a channell, that leades into the Port; but so narrow, that only two ships in front could enter betweene the Isle and Pylus; likewise but feuen or eight ships could enter at once by the further channell, betweene the Iland and the Maine. Ha∣uing thus taken order to shut vp this new Towne by Sea, they sent part of their fleet to fetch wood, and other stuffe, where with to fortifie round about, and blocke vp the piece on all sides. But in the meane season, the Athenian fleet, hearing of their danger that were left at Pylus, returned thither, and with great courage entring the hauen, did breake and sinke many of their Enemies vessels; tooke , and infor∣ced the residue to runne themselues a ground. Now was the Towne secure, and the Spartans abiding in the Iland as good as lost. Wherefore the Magistrates were sent from Sparta to the camp (as was their custome in great dangers) to aduise what where best for the publike safetie; who when they did perceiue that there was no other way to rescue their Citizens out of the Ile, then by composition with their enemies, they agreed to entreat with the Athenians about peace, taking truce in the meane while with the Captaines at Pylus. The con∣ditions of the truce were, That the Lacedaemonians should deliuer vp all the ships which were in the coast, and that they should attempt nothing against the Towne, the Athenians against the camp: That a certaine quantitie of Bread, Wine, and Flesh, should be daily carried into the Isle, but that no ships should passe into the Iland secretly: That the Athenians should carrie the Lacedaemonian Embassadors to Athens, there to treat of peace, and should bring them backe, at whose returne the truce should end, which if in the meane time it were broken in any one point, should be held vtterly void in all: That when the truce was expired, the Athenians should restore the Peloponnesian ships, in as good case as they receiued them. The Embassadors comming to Athens, were of opinion, that as they themselues had be∣gunne the , so might they end it when they pleased. Wherefore they told the Athenians how great an honour it was that the Lacedaemonians did sue to them for peace, aduising them to make an end of warre, whilest with such reputation they might. But they found all contrarie to their expectation: For in stead of conclu∣ding vpon euen termes, or desiring of meete recompence for losse sustained; the Athenians demanded certaine Cities to bee restored to them, which had beene taken from them by the Lacedaemonians long before this warre beganne, refusing likewise to continue the of peace, vnlesse the Spartans which were in the Ile, were first rendred vnto them as prisoners. Thus were the Embassa∣dours returned without effect; at which time the truce being ended, it was de∣sired from the Athenian Captaines, that they should, according to their couenant, restore the ships, which had beene put into their handes. Whereto answere was made, that the condition of the truce was, That if any one article were broken, all should be held void; now (said the Athenians ) yee haue assaulted our Garrisons, and thereby are we acquited of our promise to restore the ships. This and the like friuolous allegations which they made, were but meere shifts; yet profit so farre o∣uer-weighed honour, that better answere none could be got. Then were the Lace∣daemonians driuen to vse many hard meanes, for conueiance of victuals into the ; which finally was taken by force, and the men that were in it carried prisoners to Athens, where it was decreed, that when the Peloponnesians next inuaded Attica, these prisoners should all be slaine. Whether fearing the death of these men, or with-held by the troubles, which (according to the Athenians hope) fell vpon them; the Lacedaemonians were now so farre from wasting Attica, that they suffered their owne Countrie to be continually ouer-runne, both by the Athenians, who landed on all parts of their coast, and by those which issued out of Pylus; which became the Rendeuous of all that were ill-affected vnto them. §. V. How the Lacedaemonians hardly, and to their great disaduantage, obtained a peace, that was not well kept. THerefore they indeuoured greatly to obtaine peace; which the Athe∣nians would not harken vnto. For they were so puffed vp with the continuance of good successe, that hauing sent a few bands of men in∣to Sicilie, to hold vp a faction there, and make what profit they might of the Sicilians quarrells; when afterward they heard that the diffe∣rences in that Ile were taken away, and their bands returned without either gaine or losse, they banished the Captaines, as if it had beene meerely through their de∣fault, that the Ile of Sicilie was not conquered; which (besides the longer distance) was in power to offend others, or defend it selfe, no whit inferiour vnto Peloponne∣sus. Yet was this their ouer-weening much abated shortly after, by some disasters receiued, especially in Thrace, where in a battaile which they lost at Amphipolis, Cleon, and Brasidas, Generalls of the Athenian and Lacedaemonian forces, were both slaine; which two had most beene aduersaries to the peace. As the Athenians by their losses were taught moderation; so the Lacedaemonians, who not felt the like wounds, but through the great Nauie which they had receiued at Pylus, were faine to proceede lamely in the warre, against such as, through commoditie of their good fleet, had all aduantage that could be found in expedition, were feruently de∣sirous to conclude the businesse, Fortune by any new fauour should reuiue the insolence, which was at this time well mortified in their Enemies. Neither was it only a consideration of their present estate, that vrged them to bring the treatie of peace to good and speedy effect; but other dangers hanging ouer their heads, and ready to fall on them, which vnlesse they compounded with the Athenians, they knew not how to auoide. The estate of Argos, which had ancient enmitie with them, was now, after a truce of thirtie yeeres well-nigh expired, ready to take the benefit of their present troubles, by ioyning with those who alone found them worke enough. Argos was a rich and strong Citie, which though inferiour to Sparta in valour, yet was not so vn warlike, nor held such ill correspondence with the neighbouring Estates, that the Lacedaemonians could euer farre vpon it, when they had little else to doe. This was a thing that in the beginning of this Warre had not beene regarded. For it was then thought, that by wasting the Ter∣ritorie of Athens with sword and fire, the quarrell should easily and in short time haue beene ended, whereby not only the Athenians should haue beene brought to good order, but the Corinthians and others, for whose sake the warre was vnder-ta∣ken, haue beene so firmely knit to the Lacedaemonians, that they should for loue of them haue abandoned the Argiues, to their owne fortunes. But now the vanitie of those hopes appeared, in that the Athenians abounding in ready money, and meanes to raise more, were able to secure themselues by a strong , from any great harme, that the Peloponnesians wanting wherewith to maintaine a Nauie, could doe vnto them, yea as Masters of the Sea, to wearie them out, as in effect alreadie they had done. As for the Confederates of Sparta, they could now endure neither warre nor peace; their daily trauailes, and many losses had so wearied and incensed them. Wherefore the Lacedaemonians were glad to vse the occasion, which the inclination of their enemies did then afford, of making a peace, which with much a-doe they procured, as seemed equall and easie; but were indeede impossible to be per∣formed, and therefore all their trauaile was little effectuall. The restitution of prisoners and places taken being agreed vpon; it fell out by lot, that the Lacedaemonians should restore first. These had won more townes vpon the continent from the Athenians, than the Athenians had from them; but what they had wonne, they had not won absolutely. For they had restored some Towns to such of their Allies, from whom the State of Athens had taken them; some, and those the most, they had set at libertie (as reason required) which had opened their gates vnto them, as to their friends and , & not compelled them to breake in as Enemies. Now concerning the Townes which were not in their owne hands, but had beene rendred vnto their Confederates, the Spartans found meanes to giue some satisfaction, by permitting the Athenians to retain others, which they had got∣ten in the warre; as for the rest, they promised more than afterwards they could performe. The Cities which they had taken into protection, could not endure to heare of being abandoned, neither would they by any meanes yeeld themselues in∣to the hands of their old Lords the Athenians, whom they had offended by reuol∣ting, notwithstanding whatsoeuer articles were drawne, and concluded, for their securitie, and betterance in time to come. This dull performance of conditions on the side of the Spartans, made the Athenians become as backward in doing those things which on their part were required; so that restoring only the prisoners which they had, they deferred the rest, vntill such time as they might receiue the full satisfaction, according to the agreement. But before such time as these difficul∣ties brake out into matter of open quarrell, the Lacedaemonians entred into a more straight alliance with the Athenians; making a league offensiue and defensiue with them. Hereunto they were moued by the backwardnesse of the Argiues, who be∣ing (as they thought) likely to haue sued for peace at their hands, as soone as things were once compounded betweene Athens and Sparta; did shew themselues plainly vnwilling to giue eare to any such motion. Thinking therefore, that by cutting from Argos all hope of Athenian succour, they should make sure worke, the Spartans regarded not the affections of other States, whom they had either bound vnto them by well-deseruing in the late warre, or found so troublesome, that their enmitie (if perhaps they durst let it appeare) were little worse than friendship. It bred great jelousie in all the Cities of Greece, to perceiue such a conjunction betweene two so powerfull Signories: especially one clause threatning euery one, that was any thing apt to feare, with a secret intent that might be harboured in their proud conceipts, of subduing the whole Countrie, and taking each what they could lay hold on. For besides the other articles, it was agreed, That they might by mutuall consent adde new conditions, or alter the old at their owne pleasures. This impression wrought so strongly in the Corinthians, Thebans, & other ancient Confederates of Sparta, that the hate which they had borne to the Athenians their professed Enemies, was vio∣lently throwne vpon the Lacedaemonians their vnjust friends: whereby it came to passe, that they who had lately borne chiefe sway in Greece, might haue beene aban∣doned to the discretion of their Enemies, as alreadie in effect they were, had the E∣nemies wisely vsed the aduantage. §. VI. Of the negotiations, and practices, held betweene many States of Greece, by occasion of the peace that was concluded. THe admiration wherein all Greece held the valour of Sparta as , and able to make way through all impediments, had beene so excessiue, that when by some sinister accidents, that Citie was compelled to take and seeke peace, vpon termes not sounding very honourable, this common opinion was not only abated, but (as hap∣pens vsually in things extreme) was changed into much contempt. For it was ne∣uer thought that any Lacedaemonian would haue endured to lay downe his weapons and yeeld himselfe prisoner, nor that any misfortune could haue beene so great, as should haue drawne that Citie to relieue it selfe otherwise than by force of Armes. But when once it had appeared that many of their Citizens, among whom were some of especiall marke, being ouer-laied by enemies, in the Iland before Pylus, had rather chosen to liue in captiuitie, than to die in fight; and that Pylus it selfe, sticking as a thorne in the foot of Laconia, had bred such anguish in that Estate, as vtterly wearying the accustomed Spartan resolution, had made it sit downe, and seeke to refresh it selfe by dishonourable ease: then did not only the Corinthians and Thebans beginne to conceiue basely of those men which were vertuous, though vn∣fortunate; but other lesser Cities joyning with these in the same opinion, did cast their eies vpon the rich and great Citie of Arges, of whose abilitie, to doe much, they conceiued a strong beliefe, because of long time it had done nothing. Such is the base condition, which through foolish enuie is become almost naturall in the greater part of mankinde. We curiously search into their vices, in whom, had they kept some distance, we should haue discerned only the vertues; and comparing in∣juriously our best parts with their worst, are justly plagued with a false opinion of that good in strangers which we know to be wanting to our selues. The first that published their dislike of Sparta were the Corinthians, at whose ve∣hement entreaty (though moued rather by enuie at the greatnesse of Athens day∣ly encreasing) the Lacedaemonians had entred into the present warre. But these Co∣rinthians did only murmure at the peace, alleadging as grieuances, that some townes of theirs were left in the Athenians hands. The Mantinaeans, who during the time of warre, had procured some part of the Arcadians to become their followers, and for∣sake their dependency vpon the State of Sparta, did more freely & readily discouer themselues; feare of reuenge to come working more effectually, than indignation at things already past. The Argiues feeling the gale of prosperous Fortune that began to fill their sailes, prepared themselues to take as much of it as they could stand vn∣der; giuing for that purpose vnto twelue of their citizens, a full and absolute commission to make alliance betweene them and any freecities of Greece (Athens and Sparta excepted) without any further trouble of propounding euery particular bu∣sinesse to the multitude. When the gates of Argos were set thus open to all com∣mers; the Mantinaeans began to lead the way, and many Cities of Peloponnesus fol∣lowing them entred into this new confederacy; some incited by priuate respects, o∣thers thinking it the wisest way to doe as the most did. What inconuenience might arise to them by these courses, the Lacedaemonians easily discerned, and therfore sent Embassadors to stoppe the matter at Corinth, where they well perceiued that the mischiefe had beene hatched. These Embassadors found in the Corinthians a very rough disposition, with a grauity expressing the opinion which they had conceiued of their present aduantage ouer Sparta. They had caused all Cities which had not entred yet into the alliance with Argos, to send their Agents to them, in whose pre∣sence they gaue audience to the Lacedaemonians; the purport of whose Embassie was this: That the Corinthians, without breach of their oath, could not forsake the alli∣ance, which they had long since made with Sparta, and that reason did as well binde them to hold themselues contented with the peace lately made, as religion enfor∣ced them to continue in their auncient confederacy, forasmuch as it had bin agreed betweene the Spartans and their associates, that the consent of the greater part, (which had yeelded vnto peace with Athens ) should binde the lesser number to performe what was concluded, if no Diuine impediment withstood them. Heere∣unto the Corinthians made answere, that the Spartans had first begun to do them o∣pen wrong, in concluding the warre wherein they had lost many places, without prouision of restitution; & that the very clause, alledged by the Embassadors, did ac∣quite them from any necessity of subscribing to the late peace, forasmuch as they had sworne vnto those people whom they perswaded to rebell against Athens, that they would neuer abandon them, nor willingly suffer them to fall againe into the tyrannous hands of the Athenians. Wherefore they held themselues bound both in reason and religion to vse all meanes of vpholding those, whom by common con∣sent they had taken into protection; for that an oth was no lesse to be accounted a Diuine impediment, than were pestilence, tempest, or any the like accident, hinde∣ring the performance of things vndertaken. As for the alliance with Argos, they said that they would doe as they should finde cause. Hauing dismissed the Embassadors with this answere, they made all hast to ioyne themselues with Argos, and caused o∣ther States to doe the like; so that Sparta and Athens were in a manner left to them∣selues, the Thebans and Megarians being also vpon the point to haue entred into this new confederacie. But as the affections were diuers, which caused this hastie confluence of sudden friends to Argos, it so likewise came to passe that the friend∣ship it selfe, such as it was, had much diuersitie both of sinceritie & of continuance. For some there were that hated or feared the Lacedaemonians: as the Mantinaeans and Eleans: these did firmly betake them selues to the Argiues, in whom they knew the same affection to be inueterate; others did only hate the peace concluded; & these would rather followed the Spartans than the Argiues in warre, yet rather the Argiues in war than the Lacedaemonians in peace. Of this number were the Corinthi∣ans, who knowing that the Thebans were affected like vnto themselues, dealt with them to enter into the societie of the , as they had done: but the different formes of gouernment, vsed in Thebes and Argos, caused the Thebanes to hold rather with Sparta, that was ruled by the principall men, than to incurre the danger of in∣nouation, by joyning with such as committed the whole rule to the multitude. This businesse hauing ill succeeded, the Corinthians beganne to bethinke them∣selues of their owne danger, who had not so much as any truce with Athens, and yet were vnprepared for warre. They sought therefore to come to some temporarie agreement with the Athenians, and hardly obtained it. For the Athenians, who had dealt with all Greece at one time, did not greatly care to come to any appointment, with one citie that shewed against them more stomach than force; but gaue them to vnderstand that they might be safe enough from them, if they would claime the benefit of that alliance, which Athens had lately made with Sparta and her depen∣dants; yet finally they granted vnto these Corinthians (which were loth to ac∣knowledge themselues dependants of Sparta ) the truce that they desired; but into priuate confederacie they would not admit them, it being an article of the league betweene them and the Spartans, That the one should not make peace nor warre without the other. Heerein, as in many other passages, may clearely be scene the great aduantage which absolute Lords haue as well in peace as in warre, ouer such as are serued by voluntaries. We shall hardly finde any one Signorie, that hath beene so constantly followed as Sparta was by so many States, and some of them little inferior to it self, being all as free: whereas contrariwise, the Athenians had lately, and by compulsiue meanes gotten their Dominion, wherein they demeaned themselues as Tyrants. But in performance of conditions agreed vpon, the Athcnians were able to make their wordes good, by excluding any State out of their Confederacie, and giuing vp such places as were agreed vpon: of which the Lacedaemonians could doe neither the one nor the other. For such Townes as their old Allies had gotten by their meanes in the late warre, could not bee restored without their consent, which had them in present possession; and particularly the Towne of Panacte, which the Thebans held, could by no meanes be obtained from them by the Lacedaemonians (who earnestly desired it; that by restitution thereof vnto the Athenians, as earnestly demanding it, themselues might recouer Pylus ) vnlesse they would agree to make a priuate alli∣ance with Thebes; which thereupon they were faine to doe, though knowing it to be contrarie to the last agreement betweene them and Athens. The Lacedaemonians hauing broken one article of the league made between them and the Athenians, that by so doing they might enable themselues to the perfor∣mance of another, were shamefully disappointed of their hopes by the Thebans, who did not giue vp the Towne of Panacte, till first they had vtterly demolished it, and made it of no worth to the Athenians. This was sought to haue beene excused by the Lacedaemonian Embassadours, who comming to Athens (whither sent home all prisoners that had beene detained at Thebes ) hoped with gentle words to salue the matter; saying, That from henceforth no enemie to Athens should nestle in Panacte, for it was destroied. But these Embassadours had not to deale with tame fooles. For the Athenians told them in plaine termes, That of three principall conditions agreed vpon in their late League, they had not performed any one, but vsed such base collusion as stood not with their honour: hauing made priuate the Thebans; hauing destroied a Towne that they should haue restored; their dependants by warre, to make good the couenants of peace. Hereupon they dismissed the Embassadors with rough , meaning with as rough deedes to anger those that sent them. There were at that time, both in Athens and Sparta, many that were ill-conten∣ted with the peace: among whom were the Ephori, chosen for that yeere, in Sparta; and Alcibiades a powerfull yong Gentleman in Athens. But the Ephori, though de∣siring to renew the warre, yet wished that first they might get from the Athenians as much as was to bee rendred to them by couenant, especially Pylus that had so sorely troubled them. , whose Nobilitie, riches, and fauour, with the peo∣ple, made him desire warre, as the meanes, whereby himselfe might procure some honourable emploiment, vsed all meanes to set the quarrell on foot, whilest the A∣thenians had yet both aduantage enough, as not hauing rendred ought saue their prisoners, and pretence enough to vse that aduantage of breaking the peace, by rea∣son that the Lacedaemonians (though indeede against their wills) had all co∣uenants with them. Now the State of Athens had fully determined to Pylus, and to performe nothing that the Lacedaemonians should, and might require, vntill they had first, without any longer halting, fulfilled all articles wher unto they were bound, euen to the vtmost point. This was enough to make them sweat, who ha∣uing already done the most that they could, had as yet got nothing in recompence, except the deliuerie of their Citizens, which were prisoners. But Alcibiades a speedie beginning of open warre, sent priuily to the Argiues, and gaue them to vn∣derstand how fitly the time serued for them to associate themselues with Athens, which was enough to giue them securitie against all Enemies. The vpon the first confluence of many Estates vnto their societie, had embraced great hopes of working wonders, as if they should haue had the conduct of all Greece against the Athenians, robbing Sparta of that honour, as hauing ill vsed it, and thereby leauing their old enemies in case of much contempt and disabilitie. But these suddaine apprehensions of vaine joy, were suddainely changed into as vaine feare; which ill agreed with the great opinion that had lately beene of Argos. For when the Thebans had refused their alliance; when the Corin∣thians had sought securitie from Athens; and when a false rumour was noised a∣broad, Athens, Thebes, and Sparta, were come to a full agreement vpon all points of difference; then beganne the to let fall their crests, and sue for peace vnto the Lacedaemonians, who needing it as much as they, or more, yet held their grauity, and were not ouer hastie to accept it. At this time, and in this perturbation, the of Alcibiades came very welcome to the Argiues, which were not now how to become the chiefe of all others, but how to saue themselues. Where∣fore they sent away presently to Athens, their owne Embassadours, accompanied with the Mantinaeans and , to make a league offensiue, and defensiue, between their Estates and the Athenians. Of this businesse the Lacedaemonians knew not what to thinke: for well they saw, that a combination tended to their great hurt, and therefore were desirous to it; but to keepe the loue of the Athenians, the new Ephori thought that more was alreadie done, than stood with their honour, or profit; others held it the way, hauing done so much, not to stick vpon a little more, but rather by full satisfaction, to retaine the friendship of that State, which was more to bee then all the rest of Greece. This resolution preuailing, they sent away such of their Citizens as were best affected to the peace, who comming to Athens with full commission to make an end of all controuersies, did earnestly labour in the Coun∣cell-house, to make the truth of things appeare, saying; that their Confederacie with the Thebans had tended to none other end than the recouerie of : con∣cerning which Towne, or any other businesse, that it much grieued the , to see things fall out in such wise as might giue to the Athenians cause of ; but that all should be done which in reason might bee required for ma∣king matters euen betweene them; to which purpose they shewed that themselues had absolute commission. Wherefore they that Pylus might be restored vn∣to them, and especially for the present, that the with the Argiues might be called a-side. Fauourable audience was giuen to this proposition, the rather be∣cause, they which promised amends, had power to make their words good. But all this faire likelihood of good agreement was dasht on the suddaine, by the practice of , who, secretly dealing with the Lacedaemonian Embassadours, perswa∣ded them well of his friendship towards their Citie, and aduised them to take all care that their absolute power to conclude what they pleased in the name of Sparta, might not be knowne to the Communaltie of Athens, lest the insolent multitude should thereupon grow and yeelde to nothing, vnlesse they could draw them to vnreasonable conditions. The Embassadours beleeued him, and their tale in the assembly of the people, as hee had aduised them. Here∣upon the same Alcibiades taking presently the aduantage, which their double dea∣ling affoorded, inueighed openly against them, as men of no sinceritie, that were come to Athens for none other purpose, than to hinder the people from strength∣ning themselues with friends, meaning to draw the Argiues and their to their owne alliance, as ( to their oath) already they had the . The people of Athens, whom a pleasing errand would hardly haue satisfied, or brought into a good opinion of the Lacedaemonians, (whose honest meanings had so ill beene seconded with good performance) were now so incensed with the double dealing of the Embassadours, and the strong perswasions of Alcibiades, that little wanted of concluding the league with . Yet for the present so did Ni∣cias, an honourable Citizen, and great friend to the peace, preuaile with them, that the businesse was put off, till he himselfe with other Embassadours might fetch a better answere from Sparta. It may seeme a great wonder, how so poore a tricke of Alcibiades was able to carrie a matter of such importance, when the Spartan Embassadours might haue cast the loade vpon his owne shoulders, by discouering the truth: But the grauitie which was vsually found in the Lacedaemonians, hindred them (per∣haps) from playing their game handsomely against so nimble a wit; and they wel haue been thought vntrusty men, had they professed themselues such as would say and vn-say for their most aduantage. Nicias and his Companions had a sowre message to deliuer at Sparta, being per∣emptorily to require performance of all conditions, and among the rest, that the Lacedaemonians should take the paines to rebuild Panacte, and should immediately renounce their alliance made with the Thebans; letting them vnderstand that o∣therwise the Athenians, without further delay, would enter into confederacie with the , and their Adherents. The Ephori at Sparta had no minde to forsake the Thebans, assured friends to their State; but wrought so hard, that the anger of the Athenians was suffered to breake out what way it could, which to mitigate, they would doe no more, than only (at the request of Nicias their honourable friend, who would not seeme to haue effected nothing) sweare a-new to keepe the articles of the league betweene them and Athens. Immediately therefore vpon returne of the Embassadours, a new league was made between the Athenians, Argiues, Manti∣naeans, & Eleans, with verie ample prouision for holding the same common friends and enemies; wherein, though the Lacedaemonians were passed ouer with silence, yet was it manifest that the whole intent of this confederacy did bend it selfe chief∣ly against them, as in short while after was proued by effect. At this time the Lacedaemonians were in ill case, who hauing restored all that they could vnto the Athenians, and procured others to doe the like, had themselues re∣couered nothing of their owne (prisoners excepted) for default of restoring all that they should. But that which did most of all disable them, was the losse of reputa∣tion, which they had not more impaired in the late warre by misfortunes, than in sundrie passages betweene them and the Athenians: to procure and keepe whose A∣mitie, they had left sundrie of their old friends to shift for themselues. Contrari∣wise the Athenians, by the treatie of peace, had recouered the most of that which they lost in warre; all their gettings they had retained; and were strengthned by the accesse of new Confederates. §. VII. How the peace betweene Athens and Sparta was ill kept, though not openly broken. IT was not long ere the Argiues and their fellowes had found busines where with to set the Athenians on worke, and make vse of this con∣iunction. For presuming vpon the strength of their side, they began to meddle with the Epidaurians, whom it concerned the State of Spar∣ta to defend. So, many acts of hostilitie were committed, wherein A∣thens and Sparta did (as principals) each the other, but came in collaterally, as to the aide of their seuerall friends. By these occasions the Corinthians, Boeotians, Phocians, Locrians, and other people of Greece, beganne a-new to range themselues vnder the Lacedaemonians, and follow their ensignes. One victorie which the Lacedaemonians obtained by their meere va∣lour in a set battaile, neere to Mantinaea, against the Argiue side, helped well to re∣paire their decaied reputation, though otherwise it yeelded them no great profit. The ciuill shortly after within Argos it selfe, betweene the prin∣cipall Citizens and the Commons, had almost throwne downe the whole frame of the new combination. For the chiefe Citizens getting the vpper hand, made a league with Sparta, wherein they proceeded so farre as to renounce the amity of the Athenians in expresse words, and forced the to the like. But in short space of time the multitude preuailing, reuersed all this, and hauing chased away their ambitious Nobilitie, applied themselues to the Athenians as closely as be∣fore. Beside these vprores in Peloponnesus, many assaies were made to raise vp troubles in all parts of Greece, and likewise in Macedon, to the Athenians; whose forces and readinesse for execution, preuented some things, reuenged other, and requited all with some prosperous attempts. Finally, the Athenians wanting matter of quarrell; and the Lacedaemonians growing wearie, they beganne to be quiet, retaining still that enmitie in their hearts, which they had sufficiently discouered in effects, though not as yet breaking out into termes of open warre. §. VIII. The Athenians sending two fleets to sacke Siracuse, are put to flight and vtterly discomfited. DVring this intermission of open warre, the Athenians re-intertained their hopes of subduing Sicil, whither they sent a fleet so mighty as neuer was set forth by Greece in any Age before or after. This fleet was very well manned, and furnished with all necessa∣ries to so great an expedition. All which came to nought; partly by the factions in Athens, whence Alcibiades Author of that voyage, & one of the Ge∣neralls of their fleet, was driuen to banish himselfe, for feare of such iudgement, as else he was like to haue vnder-gone, among the incensed people; partly by the in∣uasion which the Lacedaemonians made vpon Attica, whilest the forces of that State were so farrefrom home. Hereunto was added the aide of the King of Persia, who supplied the Peloponnesians with money. Neither was the successe of things in Sicilia such, as without helpe from Athens, could giue any likelyhood of a good end in that warre. For although in the begin∣ning, the enterprise had so well succeeded, that they besieged Siracuse, the chiefe Ci∣tie of the Iland, and one of the fairest Townes which the Greekes inhabited, obtay∣ning the better in sundry battailes by Land and Sea; yet when the Towne was re∣lieued with strong aide from Peloponnesus, it came to passe that the Athenians were put to the worse on all sides, in such wise that their fleet was shut vp into the hauen of , and could not issue out. As the affaires went very ill in Sicil, so did they at home stand vpon hard termes, for that the Lacedaemonians, who had beene formerly accustomed to make wearisome yeerely iournies into Attica, which hauing pilled and foraged, they re∣turned home; did now by counsell of Alcibiades, (who seeking reuenge vpon his owne Citizens was fled vnto them) fortifie the Towne of Decelea, which was neere to Athens, whence they ceased not with daily excursions to harrie all the Countrie round about, and sometimes giue alarme vnto the Citie it selfe. In these extremities, the peruerse obstinacie of the Athenians was very strange; who leauing at their backes, and at their owne doores, an enemie little lesse mighty than themselues, did yet send forth another into Sicil, to inuade a people no lesse puissant, which neuer had offended them. It often happens, that prosperous euent makes foolish counsaile seeme wiser than it was, which came to passe many times among the Athenians, whose vaine conceits was said to turn vnto the best. But where vnsound aduice, finding bad proofe, is obstinately pursued, neither Pallas nor Fortune can be iustly blamed for a misera∣ble issue. This second fleet of the Athenians, which better might haue serued to conuey home the former, that was defeated; after some attempts made to small purpose against the Siracusans, was finally (together with the other part of the Na∣uie, which was there before) quite vanquished, and bard vp into the hauen of Sira∣cuse, whereby the campe of the Athenians, vtterly depriued of all benefit by Sea, either for succour or departure, was driuen to breake vp, and flie away by Land, in which flight they were ouer-taken routed, and quite ouerthrown in such wise that scarce any man escaped. This mischiefe well deserued fell vpon the Athenians, who had wickedly con∣demned into exile Sophocles and Pthiodorus Generalls, formerly sent into that Ile, pretending that they had taken money for making peace in Sicil, whereas indeede there was not any meanes or possibilitie to haue made warre. Hereby it came to passe, that Nicias, who had the chiefe command in this vnhappie enterprise, did ra∣ther choose to hazard the ruine of his Countrie by the losse of that Armie, wherin consisted little lesse then all the power of Athens; then to aduenture his owne , his life, and his honour, vpon the tongues of shamelesse accusers, and the sen∣tence of Iudges before his triall resolued to condemne him, by retiring from Syra∣cuse, when wisdome and necessitie required it. For (said he) they shall giue sentence vpon vs, who know not the reason of our doings, nor would giue eare to any that would speak in our behalfe, but altogether harken to suspicious and vaine rumours that shall be brought against vs, yea these our Souldiers who now are so desirous to returne in safetie, in our danger be well contented to frame their tales to the pleasure of the lewd and insolent multi∣tude. This resolution of Nicias, though it cannot be commended (for it is the part of an honest and valiant man to doe what reason willeth, not what opinion expecteth, and to measure honour or dishonour by the assurance of his well-informed consci∣ence, rather than by the malicious report and censure of others) yet it may bee ex∣cused; since he had before his eies the iniustice of his people; and had well vnder∣stood that a wicked sentence is infinitely worse than a wicked fact, as being held a president and patterne, whereby oppression beginning vpon one, is extended as warrantable vpon all. Therefore his feare of wrongfull condemnation was such, as a constant man could not easily haue ouer-mastered; but when afterwards the Ar∣mie, hauing no other expectation of safetie then the faint hope of a secret flight, he was so terrified with an Eclipse of the Moone, happening when they were about to dislodge, that he would not consent to haue the camp break vp till seuen and twen∣tie daies were past. His timorousnesse was euen as foolish and ridiculous, as the issue of it was lamentable. For he should not haue thought that the power of the Hea∣uens, & the course of Nature, would be as vninst as his Athenians, or might pretend lesse euill to the slothfull, than to such as did their best. Neither doe I thinke that any Astrologer can alleage this Eclipse, as either a cause or prognostication of that Armies destruction, otherwise then as the follie of men did, by application, turne it to their owne confusion. Had C. Cassius the Roman, he, who slew Iulius Caesar, imi∣tated this superstition of Nicias, he had surely found the same fortune in a case very like. But when, he retyring, the broken remainder of Crassus his Armie defeated by the Parthian Archers was aduised, vpon such an accident as this, to continue where he then was, till the Sunne were past the signe of Scorpio; he made answere that hee stood not in such feare of Scorpio, as of Sagittarius. So aduenturing rather to abide the frowning of the Heauens, then the neerer danger of Enemies vpon earth, hoe made such a safe and honourable retrait, as did both shew his noble resolution, and giue a faire example to that good rule; — Sapiens dominabitur astris. Thus we see that God, who ordinarily works by a concatenation of meanes, de∣priues the Gouernours of vnderstanding, when he intends euill to the multitude; and that the wickednesse of vniust men is the readie meane to weaken the vertue of those who might haue done them good. §. IX. Of the troubles where-into the State of Athens fell, after the great losse of the Fleet, and Armie, in Sicilia. THe losse of this Armie was the ruine of the Athenian Dominion, and may bee well accompted a very little lesse calamitie to that Estate, than was the subuersion of the walls, when the Citie about yeeres after was taken by Lysander. For now began the subiects of the Athenian Estate to rebell, of whom, some they reduced vnder their o∣bedience; others held out; some for feare of greater inconuenience were set at li∣bertie, promising only to be their good friends, as formerly they had beene their Subiects; other hauing a kind of libertie by the Athenians, were not there∣with contented, but obtained a true and perfect libertie by force. Among these troubles it fell out very vnseasonably, that the principall men of being wea∣ried with the peoples insolencie, tooke vpon them to change the of that E∣state, and bring the gouernement into the hands of a few. To purpose con∣spiring with the Captaines which were abroad, they caused them to set vp the forme of an Aristocratic in the Townes of their Confederates; and in the meane time, some that were most likely to withstand this innouation, being slaine at A∣thens, the Commonaltie were so dismaid, that none durst speake against the Conspi∣rators, whose number they knew not, but man was afraid of his Neighbour, lest he should be a member of the league. In this generall feare the Maiestie of A∣thens was vsurped by 400. men, who in shew the ancient forme of pro∣ceeding, did cause al matters to be propounded vnto the people, and concluded vp∣on by the greater part of voices: but the things propounded were onely such as were first allowed in priuate among themselues; neither had the Commonaltie any other libertie, than only to approue and giue consent: for whosoeuer presumed any further, was quickly dispatched out of the way, and no inquirie made of the mur∣der. By these meanes were many decrees made, all tending to the establishment of this new Authoritie, which neuerthelesse indured not long. For the Fleet and Ar∣mie which then was at the Ile of Samos, did altogether detest dealings of the foure hundred vsurpers, and held them as Enemies; whereupon they reuoked Al∣cibiades out of banishment, & by his assistance procured that the supplies which the Persian King had promised vnto the , were by Tissaphernes his Lieute∣nant, made vnprofitable, through the slow and bad performance. Alcibiades had at the first beene very well entertained in Sparta, whilest his seruice done to that State was not growne to be the obiect of enuie. But when it appeared that in coun∣saile and good performance he so farre excelled the Lacedaemonians, that all their good successe was ascribed to his wit and valour, then were all the principall Citi∣zens wearie of his vertue; especially Agis one of their Kings, whose wife had so far yeelded her selfe to the loue of this Athenian, that among her inward friends shee could not forbeare to call her yong child by his name. Hereupon order was taken, that should be killed out of the way. But he discouering the Spartan tre∣cherie, conueighed himselfe vnto Tissaphernes, whom he so bewitched with his great beautie, sweet conuersation, and sound wit, that he soone became the Master of that barbarous Vice-roies affections, who had free power to dispose the great Kings tre∣sures and forces in those parts. Then beganne he to aduise Tissaphernes, not so farre foorth to assist the Lacedaemonians, that they should quite ouerthrow the State of A∣thens, but rather to helpe the weaker side, & let them one consume another, where∣by all should fall at length into the hands of the Persian. By this counsaile he made way to other practices, wherein by strength of his reputation (as the only fauourite of so great a Potentate) hee played his owne game, procuring his restitution. At length his banishment being repealed by the Armie, but not by the Citizens (who then were oppressed by the foure hundred) hee laboured greatly to reconcile the Souldiers to the Gouernors; or at least to diuert their heat another way, and turne it vpon the Common Enemie. Some of the foure hundred approued his motion, as being wearie of the tyrannie wherof they were partakers, partly because they saw it could not long endure, & partly for that themselues, being lesse regarded by the rest of their companions, than stood with their good liking, sought to acquit them∣selues of it as honestly as they might. But the most of that Faction laboured to ob∣taine peace of the Lacedaemonians, desiring chiefly to maintaine both their owne au∣thoritie, and the greatnesse of their Citie, if they might: but if this could not be, they did rather wish to preserue their owne power, or safetie at least, then the good E∣state of the Common-wealth. Therefore they made sundrie ouertures of peace to the Lacedaemonians, desiring to compound in as good termes as they might, and affir∣ming that they were fitter to be trusted than the wauering multitude; especially considering that the City of Sparta was gouerned by an Aristocratie, to which form they had now reduced Athens. All these passages betweene the foure hundred (or the most and chiefe of them) and the Lacedaemonians, were kept as secret as might be. For the Citie of Athens, hoping, without any great cause, to repaire their losses, was not inclined to make composition; from which vpon iuster ground the enemie was much more auerse, trusting well that the discord of the Athenians (not vnknowne abroad) might yeeld some faire opportunitie to the destruction of it selfe, which in effect (though not then presently) came to passe. And vpon this hope King Agis did sometimes bring his forces from Decelea to Athens, where doing no good, hee receiued some small losses. Likewise the Nauie of Peloponnesus made shew of at∣tempting the Citie, but seeing no likelihood of successe, they bent their course from thence to other places, where they obtained victories, which in the better Fortune of the Athenians might more lightly haue beene regarded, then in this their decaied estate. Yet it seemes, without any disparagement to their wisdome, they should rather haue forborne to present vnto the Citie, or to the Countries neere adioyning any terrour of the warre. For the within the walls might soone haue done more good then could be receiued from the Fleet or Armie without, which indeed gaue occasion to set the Citizens at vnitie, though it lasted not very long. The foure hundred, by meanes of these troubles, were faine to resigne their autho∣ritie, which they could not now hold, when the people hauing taken armes to repel forraigne enemies, would not lay them downe, till they had freed themselues from such as oppressed the State at home. Yet was not this alteration of gouernment a full restitution of the soueraigne command vnto the people, or whole body of the Citie, but onely to fiue thousand; which company the foure hundred (when their authoritie beganne) had pretended to take vnto them as assistance: herein seeming to doe little wrong or none to the Commonalty, who seldome assembled in greater number. But now when the highest power was come indeede into the handes of so many, it was soone agreed that Alcibiades and his Companions should bee re∣called from exile, and that the Armie at Samos should be requested to vndertake the gouernement: which was forthwith reformed according to the Souldiers desire. §. X. How ALCIBIADES wanne many important victories for the Athenians; was recalled from exile; made their Generall, and againe deposed. THis establishment of things in the Citie, was accompanied with some good successe in the warres. For the Lacedaemonians were about the same time ouerthrowne at Sea, in a great battaile, by the Athenian fleet, which had remained at Samos, to which Alcibiades afterwards joyning such forces as he could raise, obtained many victories. Before the Towne of Abydus, his arriuall with eighteene ships, gaue the honour of a great battaile to the Athenians; he ouerthrew and vtterly destroyed the fleet of the Lace∣damonians, commanded by Mindarus, tooke the Townes of Cyzicus, and Perinthus, made the Selymbrians ransome their Citie, and fortified Crysopolis. Hereupon let∣ters were sent to Sparta, which the Athenians, intercepting, found to containe the distresse of the Armie in these few words: All is lost; MINDARVS is slaine; the Souldiers want victualls; we know not what to doe. Shortly after this, Alcibiades ouerthrew the Lacedaemonians in fight by Land at Chalcedon, tooke Selymbria, besieged and Byzantium, now called Constantino∣ple, which euen in those dayes was a goodly, rich, and very strong Citie. Hereupon he returned home with very great welcome, and was made high Admirall of all the Nauie. But this his honour continued not long; for it was taken from him, and he dri∣uen to banish himselfe againe; only because his Lieutenant, contrarie to the ex∣presse command of Alcibiades, fighting with the enemies in his absence, had lost a great part of the fleet. The second banishment of Alcibiades was to the Athenians more harmeful than the first; and the losse which thereupon they receiued, was (though more heauie to them, yet) lesse to be pittied of others, than that which ensued vpon his former exile. For whereas at the first, he had sought reuenge vpon his owne Citie; now, as inured to aduersitie, he rather pittied their furie, who in time of such danger had cast out him that should haue repaired their weake estate, than sought by procu∣ring or beholding the calamitie of his people, to comfort himselfe after injurie re∣ceiued. Before they, who were instituted in the place of Alcibiades, arriued at the fleet, he presented battaile to Lysander the Lacedaemonian Admirall, who was not so confident vpon his former victorie, as to vndertake Alcibiades himselfe, bringing ships more in number (notwithstanding the former losse of fifteene) than his ene∣mies had, and better ordered than they had beene vnder his Lieutenant. But when the decree of the people was published in the Nauie, then did Alcibiades with-draw himselfe to a Towne vpon Hellespont, called Bizanthe, where hee had built a Castle. §. XI. The battaile at Arginusa, and condemnation of the victorious Athenian Captaines by the people. AFter this time, the Athenians receiuing many losses & discomfitures, were driuen to flie into the Hauen of Mytelene, where they were straightly besieged both by Land and Sea. For the raising of this siege necessity inforced them to man all their Vessells, and to put the vtter∣most of their forces into the hazzard of one battaile. This battaile was fought at Arginusae, where Callicraditas, Admirall of the Laced amonians, losing the honor of the day, preserued his owne reputation by dying valia ntly in the fight. It might well haue beene expected, that the ten Captaines, who joyntly had com∣mand in chiefe ouer the Athenian fleet, should for that good daies seruice, and so happy a victorie, haue receiued great honour of their Citizens. But contrariwise they were forth-with called home, and accused, as if wilfully they had suffered many of the Citizens, whose ships were broken and sunke, to be cast away, when by appointing some Vessels to take them vp, they might haue saued them from being drowned. Hereto the Captaines readily made a very iust answere; That they pur∣suing the victorie, had left part of the fleet, vnder sufficient men, to saue those that were wrackt; which if it were not well accomplished, it was, because a tempest ari∣sing about the end of the fight, had hindred the performance of that, and other their intendments. This excuse auailed not: For a lewd fellow was brought forth, who said, That he himselfe escaping in a meale-tubbe, had beene intreated by those who were in perill of drowning, to desire of the people reuenge of their deaths vpon the Captaines. It was very strange, that vpon such an accusation maintained with so slender euidence, men that had well deserued of their Countrie should bee ouer∣throwne. But their enemies had so incensed the rascall multitude, that no man durst absolue them, saue only Socrates the wise and vertuous Philosopher, whose voice in this judgement was not regarded. Sixe of them were put to death, of whom one had hardly escaped drowning, and was with much a-doe relieued by other vessells in the storme: but the Captaines which were absent escaped; for when the furie of the people was ouer-past, this judgement was reuersed, and the accusers called into question for hauing deceiued and peruerted the Citizens. Thus the Athenians went about to free themselues from the infamie of injustice; but the diuine justice was not a-sleepe, nor would be so deluded. §. XII. The battaile at Aegos-Potamos, wherein the whole State of Athens was ruined; with the end of the Peloponnesian Warre. THe Peloponnesian fleet vnder Lysander, the yeere next following, ha∣uing scowred the Aegean Seas, entred Hellespont, where (landing Souldiers) it besieged and tooke the Towne of Lampsacus. Hereup∣on all the Nauie of Athens, being an hundred and fourescore saile, made thither in haste, but finding Lampsacus taken before their com∣ming, they put in at Sestos, where hauing refreshed themselues, they sailed to the Riuer called, Aegos-Potamos, which is (as we might name it) Goates-brooke, or the Riuer of the Goate; being on the Continent, opposite to Lampsacus: and there they cast Anchors, not one whole league off from Lysander, who rode at Lampsacus in the harbour. The next day after their arriuall they presented fight vnto the Peloponne∣sians, who refused it, whereupon the Athenians returned againe to Aegos-Potamos, and thus they continued fiue dayes, brauing euery day the Enemie, and returning to their owne harbour when it drew towards euening. The Castle of Alcibiades was not farre from the Nauie, and his power in those places was such as might haue greatly auailed his Countrimen, if they could haue made vse of it. For he had waged Mercinaries, and making warre in his owne name vpon some people of the Thracians, had gathered much wealth, and obtained much reputation among them. He perceiuing the disorderly course of the Athenian Com∣manders, repaired vnto them, and shewed what great inconuenience might grow, if they did not soone fore-see and preuent it. For they lay in a roade subject to eue∣ry weather, neither neere enough to any Towne where they might furnish them∣selues with necessarie, nor so farre off as had beene more expedient. Sestus was the next Market-Towne; thither both Souldiers and Mariners resorted, flocking away from the Nauie euerie day, as soone as they were returned from brauing the Enemie. Therefore Alcibiades willed them either to lie at Sestus, which was not farre off, or at the least to consider better how neere their enemie was, whose feare proceeded rather from obedience to his Generall, than from any cowardise. This admonition was so farre despised, that some of the Commanders willed him to meddle with his owne matters, and to remember that his authoritie was out of date. Had it not beene for these opprobrious words, hee could (as hee told his familiars) haue compelled the Lacedaemonians, either to fight vpon vnequall termes, or vtterly to quit their Fleet. And like enough it was that hee might so haue done by transporting the light-armed Thracians his Confederates, and others his Followers ouer the Straights, who assaulting the Peloponnesians by Land, would either haue compelled them to put to Sea, or else to leaue their ships to the mercy of the Athenians. But finding their acceptance of his good counsaile no better than hath beene rehearsed, he left them to their fortune, which how euill it would be he did prognosticate. Lysander all this while defending himselfe by the aduantage of his Hauen, was not carelesse in looking into the demeanour of the Athenians. When they depar∣ted, his manner was to send forth some of his swiftest Vessels after them, who ob∣seruing their doings, related vnto him what they had seene. Therefore vnderstan∣ding in what carelesse fashion they romed vp and downe the Countrie; he kept all his men a-boord after their departure, and the day gaue especiall charge to his Scouts, That when they perceiued the Athenians, disembarking, as their custome was, and walking towards Sestos, they should forth with returne, and hang vp a bra∣zen shield in the Prow, as a token for him to weigh Anchor. The Scouts performed their charge, and Lysander being in a readinesse, made all speed that strength of Oares could giue, to Aegos-Potamos, where he found ve∣ry few of his enemies a-boord their Ships, not many neere them, and all in great confusion vpon the newes of his approch. Insomuch that the greatest industrie which the Athenians then shewed, was in the escape of eight or nine ships, which knowing how much that losse imported, gaue ouer Athens as desperate, and made a long flight vnto the Ile of Cyprus, all the rest were taken, and such of the Souldiers as came in to the rescue cut in pieces. Thus was the warre which had lasted seuen and twentie yeeres, with variable suc∣cesse concluded in one houre, and the glory of Athens in such wise eclipsed, that she neuer afterward shone in her perfect light. Immediately vpon this victorie Lysander, hauing taken such Townes as readily did yeeld vpon the first fame of his exploit, set sayle for Athens, and ioyning his forces with those of Agis and Pausanias, Kings of Sparta, summoned the Citie, which finding too stubborne to yeeld, and too strong to bee wonne on the sud∣den, hee put forth againe to Sea, and rather by terrour than violence, compelling all the Ilands, and such Townes of the Ionians, as had formerly held of the Athe∣nians, to submit themselues to Sparta, hee did thereby cut off all prouision of vi∣ctuals, and other necessaries, from the Citie, and inforced the people by meere fa∣mine to yeeld to these conditions: That the long walles, leading from the to the Port, should bee throwne downe; That all Cities subiect to their , should be set at libertie; That the Athenians should bee Masters only of their owne Territories, and the fields adioyning to their Towne; And that they should keepe no more then twelue Ships; That they should hold as Friends or E∣nemies, the same, whom the Lacedaemonians did, and follow the Lacedaemonians as Leaders in the Warres. These articles being agreed vpon, the walls were throwne downe with great re∣joycing of those who had borne displeasure to Athens; and not without some con∣sultation of destroying the Citie, and laying waste the Land about it. Which ad∣uice, although it was not entertained, yet were thirtie Gouernours, or rather cru∣ell Tyrants, appointed ouer the people, who recompensed their former insolencie and injustice ouer their Captaines, by oppressing them with all base and intolera∣ble slauerie. The only small hope then remaining to the Athenians, was, that Alcibiades might perhaps repaire what their owne folly had ruined. But the thirtie Ty∣rants perceiuing this, aduertised the Lacedaemonians thereof, who contriued, and (as nowe domineering in euery quarter) soone effected his suddaine death. Such end had the Peloponnesian Warre. After which the Lacedaemonians abu∣sing the reputation, and great power, which therein they had obtained, grew ve∣ry odious to all Greece, and by Combination of many Cities against them, were dispossessed of their high authoritie, euen in that very Age, in which they had subdued Athens. The greatest foile that they tooke was of the Thebans, led by Epaminondas, vnder whom Philip of Macedon, Father to Alexander the Great, had the best of his education. By these Thebans, the Citie of Sparta (besides other great losses receiued) was sundrie times in danger of being taken. But these haugh∣tie attempts of the Thebans came finally to nothing; for the seuerall Estates and Si∣gnories of Greece, were growne so jealous one of anothers greatnesse, that the La∣cedaemonians, Athenians, Argiues, and Thebans, which were the mightiest, associating themselues with the weaker partie, did so counterpoize the stronger, that no one Citie could extend the limits of her jurisdiction so farre as might make her terrible to her Neighbours. And thus all parts of the Countrie remained rather euenly ballanced, than well agreeing, till such time as Philip, and after him Alexander, Kings of Macedon, (whose forefathers had beene dependants, and followers, yea almost meere Vassalls to the Estates of Athens and Sparte ) found meanes, by making vse of their factions, to bring them all into seruitude, from which they neuer could be free, till the Romanes presenting them with a shew of libertie, did themselues in∣deede become their Masters. CHAP. IX. Of matters concurring with the Peloponnesian Warre, or shortly following it. §. I. How the affaires of Persia in these times. DVRING the times of this Peloponnesian Warre, and those other lesse expeditions foregoing it, Artaxerxes Longimanus, hauing peaceably injoyed a long raigne ouer the Persians, left it by his death either to Darius, who was called Darius Nothus, or the Bastard, whom the Greeke Historians (lightly passing ouer Xerxes the second, and Sogdianus, as Vsurpers, and for their short raigne little to be regarded) place next vnto him, or to Xerxes the second, who, and his brother Sogdianus after him (seeming to haue bene the sonnes of Hester ) held the Kingdome but one yeere betweene them, the yonger succeeding his elder brother. It is not my purpose (as I haue said be∣fore) to pursue the Historie of the Persians from henceforth, by rehearsall of all the particulars, otherwise then as they shall be incident to the affaires of . It may therefore suffice to say, That Xerxes the second, being a vicious Prince, did after a moneth or two, if not by surfeit, then by treachery of his as riotous bro∣ther Sogdianus. Likewise of Sogdianus it is found, that being as ill as his brother, and more cruell, he slew vnjustly Bagorazus a principall Eunuch, and would haue done as much to his brother Darius the Bastard, had not hee foreseene it, and by raising a stronger Armie than this hated King Sogdianus could leauie, seized at once vpon the King and Kingdome. Darius hauing slaine his brother, held the Empire nineteene yeeres. Amyrtaeus of Sais an Aegyptian rebelled against him, and hauing partly slaine, partly chased out of the Land the Persian Garrisons, allied himselfe so firmely with the Greekes, that by their aide he maintained the Kingdome, and deliuered it ouer to his posteritic, who (notwithstanding the of their ciuill Warres) main∣tained it against the Persian, all the daies of this Darius, and of his sonne Artaxerxes Mnemon. Likewise Amorges, a subject of his owne and of the Roiall bloud, being Lieutenant of , rebelled against him; confederating himselfe with the . But the great calamitie, before spoken of, which fell vpon the Athenians in Sicil, hauing put new life into the Spartans, and giuen courage to the Ilanders and others, subject to the State of Athens, to shake off the yoke of their long continued bondage: It fell out well for Darius, that the being destitute of mo∣ney, wherewith to defray the charge of a great Nauie, without which it was impos∣sible to aduance the warre against the State of Athens, that remained powerfull by Sea, were driuen to craue his assistance, which he granted vnto them, first vpon what conditions best pleased himselfe, though afterwards the articles of the league betweene him and them were set downe in more precise termes; wherein it was concluded, That he and they should make warre joyntly vpon the Athenians, and vpon all that should rebell from either of them, and (which was highly to the Kings honour and profit) that all the Cities of Asia, which had formerly beene his, or his Predecessours, should returne to his obedience. By this Treatie, and the warre en∣sung (of which I haue already spoken) he recouered all that his Grand-father and Father had lost in Asia. Likewise by assistance of the Lacedaemonians got Amorges a-liue into his hands, who was taken in the Citie of Iasus; the Athenians wanting either force or courage to succour him. Neuerthelesse Aegypt still held out against him; the cause whereof cannot bee the emploiment of the Persian forces on the parts of Greece, for he abounded in men, of whom he had enough for all occasions, but they wanted manhood, which caused him to fight with gold, which effected for him by Souldiers of other Nations, and his naturall , what the valour of his owne Subjects was insufficient to performe. Darius had in marriage Parysatis his owne sister, who bare vnto him (besides other children) Artaxerxes called Mne∣mon, that is to say, the Mindfull, or the Rememberer, who succeeded him in the Kingdome; and Cyrus the yonger, a Prince of singular vertue, and accounted by all that knew him, the most excellent man that euer Persia bred after Cyrus the Great. But the old King Darius, intending to leaue vnto his elder sonne Artaxerxes the in∣heritance of that great Empire, did cast a jealous eye vpon the doings of Cyrus, who being Lieutenant of the lower Asia, tooke more vpon him than befitted a Sub∣ject: for which cause his father sent for him, with intent to haue taken some very sharpe course with him, had not his owne death preuented the comming of his yonger sonne, and placed the elder in his Throne. Of the warre betweene these brethren, and summarily of Artaxerxes, we shall haue occasion to speake somewhat in more conuenient place. §. II. How the thirtie Tyrants got their Dominion in Athens. I Hold it in this place most conuenient to shew the proceedings of the Greekes, after the subuersion of the walls of Athens, which gaue end to that warre called the Peloponnesian warre, but could not free the vnhappy Countrie of Greece from ciuill broiles. The thirtie Gouer∣nours, commonly called the thirtie Tyrants of Athens, were chosen at the first by the people to compile a body of their Law, and make a collection of such ancient Statutes, as were meetest to be put in practice: the condition of the Ci∣tie standing as it did in that so sodaine alteration. To this charge was annexed the supreme authoritie, either as a recompence of their labours, or because the necessi∣tie of the times did so require it, wherein the Law being vncertaine, it was fit that such men should giue judgement in particular causes, to whose judgement the Lawes themselues, by which the Citie was to bee ordered, were become subiect. But these thirtie hauing so great power in their hands, were more carefull to hold it, than to deserue it, by faithfull execution of that which was committed to them in trust. Therefore apprehending such troublesome fellowes, as were odious to the citie, though not punishable therefore by law, they condemned them to death; which proceeding was by all men highly approued, who cōsidered their lewd conditions, but did not withall bethinke themselues, how easie a thing it would be vnto these thirtie men, to take away the liues of Innocents, by calling them perturbers of the peace, or what else they listed, when condemnation without due triall and proofe had beene once well allowed. Hauing thus plausibly entred into a wicked course of gouernement, they thought it best to fortifie themselues with a sure guard, they brake out into those disorders, which they must needes commit for the esta∣blishing of their authoritie. Wherefore dispatching two of their owne companie to Sparta, they informed the Lacedaemonians, that it was the full intent of the thirtie, to keepe the City free from all rebellious motions, to which purpose it behoued them to cut off such as were seditious; and therefore desired the to send them a Garrison, which they promised at their owne cost to . This mo∣tion was well approued, and a guard sent, the Captaine of which was so well enter∣tained by the thirtie, that none of their could want his high commenda∣tions at Sparta. Hereupon the Tyrants beganne to take heart, and looking no more after base and persons, inuaded the principall men of the City, ar∣med men from House to House, who drew out such as were of great reputation, and likely, or able to make any head against this forme of gouernement: whereby there was such effusion of bloud, as to Theramenes (one of the thirtie) see∣med very horrible, and vnable to escape vengeance. His dislike of their proceedings being openly discouered, caused his fellowes to bethinke themselues, and prouide for their owne security, and his destruction, lest he should make a Captaine of the discontented (which were almost the whole Citie) and his owne peace with their ruine. Wherefore they selected three thousand of the Citizens, whom they thought , and gaue vnto them some part of publike authority, the rest they disarmed; and hauing thus increased their owne strength, and weake∣ned their opposites, they began a fresh to shead the bloud, not only of their enemies, but of such whose money, or goods, might inrich them, and for the paiment of their guard. And to this purpose they concluded, that euery one of them should name one man, vpon whose goods he should , putting the ow∣ner to death. But when Theramenes vttered his detestation of so ; then did Critias, who of all the thirtie was most tyrannicall, accuse him to the Councell, as a treacherous man, and ( one maine priuiledge of the three thousand was, that none of them should suffer death at the appointment of the thirtie, but haue the accustomed trial) he took vpon him to strike out of that number the name of Theramenes, and so reduced him vnder the triall and sentence of that order. It was well alleaged by Theramenes, that his name was not more to be blotted out of the Catalogue, than any other mans, vpon which consideration, he aduised them all to no otherwise of his case, than as of their owne, who were liable to the same forme of proceeding: but (euery man choosing rather to his owne life by silence, than presently to draw vpon himselfe the danger, which as yet con∣cerned him little, and perhaps would neuer come neere him) the Tyrants silence as consent, condemned him forth with, and compelled him to drinke poyson. §. III. The conspiracie against the thirtie Tyrants, and their depositior. AFter the death of Theramenes, the thirtie began to such outrage, as excelled their former villanies. For hauing three thousand (as they thought) firme vnto them, they robbed all others without feare or shame, despoiling them of lands and goods, and causing them to into banishment, for safeguard of their liues. This flight of the Citi∣zens procured their , and the generall good of the City. For the banished Ci∣tizens, who were fled to Thebes, entred into consultation, and resolued to hazard their liues in setting free the Citie of Athens. The very thought of such a practice had been treason at home, which had no other danger abroad, than might be found in the execution. men, or thereabout, were the first vndertakers, who with their Thrasybulus tooke Phyla, a place of strength in the Territorie of Athens. No sooner did the heare of their exploit, than to pre∣uent further danger; assembling the three thousand, and their Lacedaemonian , with which force they attempted Phyla, but were with some losse of their men re∣pelled. Finding the place too strong to be taken by assault, they intended to it; which purpose came to nought by meanes of snow that , and other weather, against which they not made prouision. Retiring therefore to the Ci∣tie, which aboue all they were to make good, they left the most of their guard, and two companies of Horse, to wearie out them which lay in Phyla, with a flying siege. But it was not long the followers of Thrasybulus were encreased from seuenty to seuen hundred, which aduentured to giue charge vpon those guards, of whom they cut off aboue an hundred & twenty. These small but prosperous beginnings, added more to the number of those in Phyla, who now with a thousand men got entrance into Piraeus, the suburbe of Athens, lying on the Port. Before their comming, the thirtie had resolued to fortifie the Towne of Eleusine, to their owne vse, whereinto they might make an easie retrait, and saue themselues from any sudden perill. It may well seeme strange, that whereas their barbarous manner of gouernement had brought them into such danger, they were so farre from to obtaine mens good wil, that contrariwise, to assure themselues of Eleusine, they got al of the place who could beare armes into their hands by a traine, and wickedly (though vnder forme of iustice) murthered them all. But, Sceleribus tutum per est iter, the mischiefes which they had alreadie done were such, as left them no hope of going back ward, nor any other apparant likelihood of safetie, than by extending their crueltie vnto all, seeing few or none were left, whom they could trust. When Thra∣sybulus and his fellowes, who as yet were termed , had taken the Piraeus, then were the three thousand armed againe by the Tyrants, and brought to it; but in this enterprise Thrasybulus had the better, and repelled his enemies, of whom although there were slaine to the number of seuentie, onely yet the victory seemed the greater, because Critias, & one other of the thirty, perished in that fight. The death of Critias, and the stout defence of Piraeus, together with some exhorta∣tions vsed, by Thrasybulus to the Citizens, wrought such effect, that the thirtie were deposed. Neuerthelesse there were so many of the three thousand, who hauing communicated with the thirty in their misdeeds, feared to be called to a sharpe ac∣count, that no peace, nor quiet forme of gouernement could be established. For Embassadors were sent to Sparta, who crauing aide against Thrasybulus, and his fol∣lowers, had fauourable , and a power sent to their assistance, both by Land and Sea, vnder the conduct of Lysander, and his Brother; whom Pausanias the Spar∣tan King did follow, raising an Armie of the Cities confederate with the Lacedaemo∣nians. And here appeared first the iealousie, wherein some people held the State of Sparta. The Boeotians, and Corinthians, who in the late warres had been the most bitter enemies to Athens, refused to follow Pausanias in this expedition; alleaging that it stood not with their othes, to make warre against that people, who had not hitherto broken any one article of the league: but fearing, indeede, lest the Lacedae∣monians should annexe the Territorie of Athens to their owne Demaines. It is not to bee doubted, that Pausanias tooke this answere in good part. For it was not his purpose to destroy those against whom he went, but only to crosse the proceedings of Lysander, whom he enuied. Therefore hauing in some small skirmishes against them of Thrasybulus his party, made a shew of warre, finally wrought such meanes, that all things were compounded quietly: the thirtie men, and such others, as were like to giue cause of tumult, being sent to Sparta. The remainder of that tyrannicall faction, hauing with drawne themselues to Eleusine, were shortly after found to at∣tempt some innouation; wherevpon the whole City rising against them, took their Captaines, as they were comming to Parlie, and slew them: which done, to auoide further inconuenience, a law was made, that all iniuries past should be forgotten, and no man called into question for wrongs committed. By which order, wisely made, and carefully obserued, the Citie returned to her former quietnesse. CHAP. X. Of the expedition of CYRVS the younger. §. I. The grounds of CYRVS his attempt against his brother. THE matters of Greece now standing vpon such termes, that no one Estate durst oppose it selfe against that of Lacaedemon; young Cyrus, brother to , King of Persia, hauing in his fathers life time very carefully prosecuted the warre against Athens, did send his mes∣sengers to Sparta, requesting that their loue might ap∣peare no lesse to him, than that which he had shewed towards them in their dangerous warre against the Athenians. To this request, being the Lace∣daemonians gaue a sutable answere, commanding their Admirall to performe vnto Cyrus all seruice that hee should require of him. If Cyrus had plainely discouered himselfe, and the Lacedae∣monians bent their whole power to his assistance, very like it is, that either the King∣dome of Persia should haue been the recompence of his deserts, or that he perishing in battaile, as after he did, the subuersion of that Empire had forth with ensued. But it pleased God, rather to shew vnto the Greekes the waies, which vnder the Macedo∣nian Enfignes, the victorious foot-steps of their posteritie should measure; and ope∣ning vnto them the riches, and withall the weakenesse of the Persian, to kindle in them both desire and hope of that conquest, which he reserued to another genera∣tion; than to giue into their hands that mightie Kingdome, whose houre was not yet come. The loue which Parysatis, the Queene-Mother of Persia bare vnto her yonger sonne, being seconded by the earnest fauour of the people, and ready de∣sires of many principall men, had moued this yong Prince, in his fathers old age, to aspire after the succession. But being sent for by his Father (as hath before beene shewed) whose meaning was to curbe this ambitious youth; hee his brother Artaxerxes established so surely by the old Kings fauour, that it were not safe to attempt any meanes of displanting him, by whose disfauour, himself might easily lose the place of a Viceroy, which he held in Asia the lesse, and hardly bee able to maintaine his owne life. The neerest neighbour to Cyrus of all the Kings Deputies in the lower Asia, was Tissaphernes, a man compounded of cowardise, tre∣cherie, craft, and all vices which accustomably branch out of these. This man ac∣companied Cyrus to his Father, vsing by the way all faire shewes of friendship, as to a Prince, for whom it might well be thought, that Queene Parysatis had obtained the inheritance of that mightie Empire. And it was very true, that Parysatis had v∣sed the best of her endeuour to that purpose, alleaging that (which in former ages had bin much auaileable to Xerxes, in the like disceptation with his elder brother) Artaxerxes was borne whilest his father was a priuate man, but Cyrus, when he was a crowned King. All which not sufficing; when the most that could bee obtained for Cyrus, was the pardon of some presumptuous demeanour, and confirmation of his place in Lydia, and the parts adioyning: then did this Tissaphernes discouer his nature, and accuse his friend Cyrus to the new King Artaxerxes, of dangerous trea∣son intended against his person. Vpon this accusation, whether true or false, very easily , Cyrus was arrested, and by the most vehement intreatie of his Mo∣ther very hardly deliuered, and sent back into his owne Prouince. §. II. The preparations of CYRVS, and his first entrie into the Warre. THe forme of gouernement which the Persian Lieutenants vsed in their seuerall Prouinces, was in many points almost Regall. For they made Warre and Peace, as they thought it meete, not onely for the Kings behoofe, but for their owne reputation; vsually indeede with the Kings enemies, yet sometimes one with another: which was the more easily tolerated, because their owne heads were held only at the Kings plea∣sure, which caused them to frame all their doings to his will, whatsoeuer it were, or they could coniecture it to be. Cyrus therefore being settled in Lydia, began to con∣sider with himselfe, the interest that he had in the Kingdome; the small assurance of his brothers loue, held only by his Mothers intercession; the disgrace endured by his late imprisonment; and the meanes which he had by loue of his owne peo∣ple, and that good neighbourhood of the Lacedaemonians, whom he had bound vnto him, to obtaine the Crowne for himselfe. Neither was it expedient that he should long sit idle, as waighting till occasion should present it selfe: but rather enterprise somewhat whilest yet his Mother liued, who could procure a good interpretation to all his actions, if they were no worse than only questionable. Hereupon he first beganne to quarrell with Tissapherues, and seized vpon many Townes of his iuris∣diction, annexing them to his owne Prouince; which displeased not Artaxerxes at all, who (besides that hee was of condition somewhat simple) being truly paid by Cyrus the accustomable Tributes out of those places, was well contented to see his brothers hot spirit exercised in priuate quarrels. But Tissaphernes, whose base con∣ditions were hated, & cowardise despised, although he durst not aduenture to take armes against Cyrus, yet perceiuing that the Milesians were about to giue vp them∣selues into the hands of that yong Prince, as many other townes of the Ionians had done, thought by terrour to preserue his reputation, and keepe the Towne in his owne hands. Wherefore he many, and many he banished, who flying to Cy∣rus, were gently entertained, as bringing faire occasion to take armes, which was no small part of his desire. In leuying Souldiers he vsed great policie; for he took not only the men of his owne Prouince, or of the Countries adioyning, whose liues were readie at his will; but secretly he furnished some Graecian Captaines with mo∣ney, who being very good men of warre, entertained Souldiers therewith, some of them warring in Thrace, others in Thessalie, others elsewhere in Greece; but all of them ready to crosse the Seas, at the first call of Cyrus, till which time they had se∣cret instructions to prolong their seuerall warres, that the Souldiers might held in continuall exercise, and readie in armes vpon the sudden. Cyrus hauing sent a power of men to besiege Miletus, forth with summoned these bands of the Greekes, who very readily came ouer to his assistance, being thirteene thousand very firme Souldiers, and able to make head (which is almost incredible) against the whole power of Artaxerxes. With this Armie, and that which he had leuied before, hee could very easily haue forced Miletus, and chased away Tissaphernes out of Asia the lesse: but his purpose was not so to lose time in small matters, that was to be im∣ploied in the accomplishment of higher designes. Pretending therefore that the Pisidians, a people of Asia the lesse, not subiect to the Persian, inuaded his Terri∣torie, he raised the siege of Miletus, and with all speed marched Eastward, leauing Tissaphernes much amazed, who had no leisure to reioyce that Cyrus had left him to himselfe, when he considered, that so great an Army, and so strong, was leuied against the Rouers of Pisidia, but rather against the great King his Master. For which taking a band of fiue hundred horse, hee posted away to carrie tidings to the Court, of this great preparation. §. III. How CYRVS tooke his iourney into the higher Asia, and came vp close to his Brother. THe tumult which his comming brought was very great, and great the exclamations of the Queen Statira, against Parysatis, the Queene-Mo∣ther, whom she called the Author and occasioner of the warre. But whilest the King in great feare was arming the high Countries in his defence, the danger hastned vpon him very fast. For Cyrus made great marches, hauing his numbers much increased, by the repaire of his Countrimen, though most strengthned by the accesse of seuē hundred Greeks, and of other foure hundred of the same Nation, who reuolted vnto him from the King. How terrible the Greekes were to the Barbarians, he found by triall in a Muster, which (to please the Queene of Cilicia, who had brought him aide) made in Phrygia; where the Greekes by his direction making offer of a charge vpon the rest of his Armie, which contained a hundred thousand men, the whole Campe (not perceiuing that this was but a brauerie) fled a-maine, the victuallers and baggagers forsaking their cab∣bins, and running all away for very feare. This was to Cyrus a ioyfull spectacle, who knew very well, that his brother was followed by men of the same temper, and the more vnlikely to make resistance, because they were prest to the warre a∣gainst their will and dispositions, whereas his Armie was drawne a-long by affection and good will. Neuerthelesse he found it a very hard matter to perswade the Greekes to passe the Riuer of Euphrates. For the very length of the way which they had troden, wearied them with conceit of the tedious returne. Therefore he was driuen, being yet in Cilicia, to seeke excuses, telling them, that Abrocomas, one of the Kings principall Captaines, and his owne great enemy, lay by the Riuer, against whom he requested them to assist him. By such deuices, and excessiue promise of reward, he brought them to Euphrates, where some of the Greekes considering, That whoso passed the Riuer first, should haue the most thankes, and might safely re∣turne if the rest should refuse to follow them, they entred the Foords, whereby were all finally perswaded to doe as some had begunne, and being allured by great hopes, they resolued to seeke out Artaxerxes, wheresoeuer he was to be found. The King in the meane time hauing raised an army of nine hundred thousand men, was not so confident vpon this huge multitude, as to aduenture them in triall of a plaine battaile. Abrocomas, who with three hundred thousand men, had vnder-taken to make good the Straights of Syria, which were very narrow, and fortified with a strong wall, and other defences of nature, and art, which made the place to seeme impregnable, had quitted the passage, and retired himself toward the Kings forces, not daring to look Cyrus in the face, who despairing to finde any way by Land, had procured the Lacedaemonian fleete, by the benefit whereof to haue transported his Armie. I doe not finde that this cowardise of Abrocomas, or of his Souldiers, who arriued not at the Campe, till fiue daies were past after the battaile, receiued either punishment, or disgrace; for they, toward whom he with-drew himselfe, were all made of the same metall. Therefore Artaxerxes was vpon the point of retiring to the vttermost bounds of his Kingdom, vntill by Teribazus, one of his Captaines, he was perswaded not to a∣bandon so many goodly Prouinces to the Enemie, who would thereby haue gathe∣red addition of strength, and (which in the sharpe disputation of Title to a King∣dome is most auaileable) would haue growne superior in reputation. By such ad∣uice, the King resolued vpon meeting with his brother, who now began to se∣cure, being fully perswaded, that Artaxerxes would neuer dare to abide him in the field. For the King hauing cast vp a Trench of almost fortie miles in length, about thirtie foot broad, and eighteene foote deepe, intended there to haue encamped: but his courage failing him, he abandoned that place, thinking nothing so safe, as to be farre distant from his enemies. §. IIII. The battaile betweene CYRVS and ARTAXERXES. THe Armie of Cyrus hauing ouercome many difficulties of euil waies, and scarcitie of victuals, was much encouraged by perceiuing this great feare of Artaxerxes, & being past this trench, marched carelesly in great disorder, hauing bestowed their Armes in Carts, and vpon Beasts of carriage; when on the sudden one of their Vaunt-currors, brought newes of the Kings approch. Hereupon with great tumult they armed themselues, and had ranged their battailes in good order vpon the side of the Riuer Euphrates, where they waited for the cōming of their enemies, whom they saw not till it was after-noone. But when they saw the cloud of dust raised by the feete of that huge multitude, which the King drew after him, and perceiued by their neere approch how well they were marshalled, comming on very orderly, in silence, whereas it had beene expected, that rushing violently with loude clamours, they should haue spent all their force vpon the first brunt; and when it appeared that the fronts of the two Armies were so vnequall in distent, being all embattailed in one bodie and square, that Cyrus taking his place (as was the Persian maner) in the mid∣dest of his owne, did not with the corner, and vtmost point therof, reach to the halfe breadth of Artaxerxes his battaile, who carried a front proportionable to his num∣ber, exceeding nine times that of Cyrus: then did the Greekes begin to distrust their owne manhood, which was not accustomed to make proofe of it self, vpon such ex∣cessiue oddes. It was almost incredible, that so great an Armie should bee so easily chased. Neuerthelesse, it quickly appeared, that these Persians, hauing learned (contrary to their custome) to giue charge vpon their enemies with silence; had not learned (for it was contrary to their nature) to receiue a strong charge with cou∣rage. Vpon the very first offer of on-set, made by the Greekes, all that beastly of cowards fled amaine, without abiding the stroke, or staying till they were within reach of a Dart. The Chariots armed with hookes and sithes (whereof Artaxerxes had two hundred, and Cyrus not twentie) did small hurt that day, because the dri∣uers of them leaping downe, fled away on . This base demeanour of his ene∣mies gaue so much confidence to Cyrus, and his Followers, that such as were about him forth-with adored him as King. And certainely, the Title had beene assured vnto him that day, had not he sought how to declare himselfe worthy of it, ere yet he had obtained it For, perceiuing that Artaxerxes, who found that part of the field which lay before him voide, was about to encompasse the Greeks, and to set vp∣on them in the reare, he aduanced with sixe hundred Horse, and gaue so valiant a charge vpon a squadron of sixe thousand, which lay before the King, that he brake it, slaying the Captaine thereof, Artagerses, with his owne hands, and putting all the rest to flight. Hereupon his whole companie of sixe hundred, very few excepted, began to follow the chase, leauing Cyrus too ill attended, who perceiuing where the King stood in troupe, vncertaine whether to fight, or leaue the field, could not containe himselfe, but said; I see the man: and presently with a small of men about him ranne vpon his brother, whom he strake through the Curace, and wounded in the brest. Hauing giuen this stroke, which was his last, receiued im∣mediately the fatall blow, which gaue period at once to his ambition and life being wounded vnder the eye with a , throwne by a base-fellow, wherewith astonied, he dead from his horse, or so hurt, that it was vnpossible to haue recouered him, though all which were with him, did their best for his safety; not caring after∣wards for their owne liues, when once they perceiued that Cyrus their Master was slaine. Artaxerxes caused the head and right hand of his brother to bee forthwith stricken off, and shewed to his people, who now pursuing them, fled apace, calling vpon the name of Cyrus, and desiring him to pardon them. But when this great ac∣cident had breathed new courage into the Kings troupes, & vtterly dismaied such Persian Captaines, as were now, euen in their owne eies, no better than rebels; it was not long the Campe of Cyrus was taken, being quite abandoned, from whence , making all speede, arriued quickly at the quarter of the Greekes, which was about three miles from the place where Cyrus fell. There hee met with Tissaphernes, who hauing made way through the battaile of the Greekes, was readie now to joyne with his Master in spoiling their Tents. Had not the newes, which Artaxerxes brought with him of his brothers death, beene sufficient to counter∣uaile all disasters receiued; the exploit of Tissaphernes in breaking through the Greekes would haue yeelded little comfort. For Tissaphernes had not slaine any one man of the Greekes, but contrariwise, when he gaue vpon them, opening their battaile, draue him with great slaughter through them, in such , that he rather escaped as out of an hard passage, than forced his way through the squadron of the Greekes. Hereof the King being informed by him, and that the Greekes, as Masters of the field, gaue chase to all that came in their sight; they ranged their Companies into good order, and followed after these Greekes, intending to set vpon them in reare. But these good Souldiers perceiuing the Kings approch, turned their faces, and made head against him; who not intending to seeke honour with danger of his life, wheeled about and fled, being pursued vnto a certaine Village, that lay vnder a Hill, on the top whereof he made a stand, rather in a brauerie, than with purpose to attempt vpon these bold-fellowes any further. For he knew well that his brothers death had secured his estate, whom he would seeme to haue slaine with his owne hand, thinking that fact alone sufficient to giue reputation to his valour; and this reputation he thought that he might now preserue wel enough, by shewing a man∣ly looke, halfe a mile off. On the top of this Hill therefore he aduanced his Stan∣dard, a golden Eagle displaied on the top of a Speare. This ensigne might haue en∣couraged his people, had not some of the Greekes espied it, who not meaning that he should abide so neere them, with all their power marched toward him. The King discouering their approch, fled vpon the spurre; so that none remained in the place of battaile, saue only the , who had lost that day not one man, nor taken any other harme, than that one of them was hurt with an arrow. Much they wondred that they heard no newes of Cyrus, but thinking that hee was pursuing the Armie, they thought it was fittest for them, hauing that day done enough, to returne to their quarter, and take their Supper, to which they had good , because the expectation of the Kings comming had giuen them no leisure to dine. §. V. The hard estate of the Greekes after the fight; and how ARTAXERXES in vaine sought to haue made them yeeld vnto him. IT was now about the setting of the Sunne, and they bringing home darke night with them, found their Campe spoiled, little, or nothing being left, that might serue for food: so that wanting victualls to sa∣tisfie their hunger, they refreshed their wearie bodies with sleepe. In the meane season Artaxerxes returning to his Camp, which he entred by Torch-light, could not enjoy the pleasure of his good fortune entire, because he percciued that the basenesse of his people, and weakenesse of his Empire, was now plainely discouered to the Greckes: which gaue him assurance, that if any of these who had beheld the shamefull demeanor of his Armie, should liue to carry tidings home, it would not be long, ere with greater forces they disputed with him for his whole Signoric. Wherefore hee resolued, to trie all meanes, whereby hee might bring them to destruction, and not let one escape to carrie tidings of that which he had leene: to which purpose hee sent them a braue message the next morning; Charging them to deliuer vp their Armes, and come to his Gate, to awaite there vpon his Mercie. It seemes that he was in good hope to haue found their high cou∣rages broken, vpon report of his brothers death: but he was greatly decciued in that thought. For the Greekes being aduertised that morning from Ariaeus, a principall Cōmander vnder Cyrus, that his Master being slaine, he had retired himselfe to the place of their last encamping, about eight miles from them, whence intending to re∣turne into Ionia, his meaning was to dislodge the next day, awaiting for them so long if they would joyne with him, but resoluing to stay no longer: they sent an∣swere back to Ariaeus, that hauing beaten the King out of the field, and finding none that durst resist them, they would place Ariaeus himselfe in the Kings Throne, if he would joyne with them, and pursue the victorie. Before they receiued any re∣ply to this answere, the Messengers of Artaxerxes arriued at the Campe, whose er∣rand seemed to the Captaines very insolent: One told them that it was not for the Vanquishers to yeeld their Weapons; another, that he would die ere hee yeelded to such a motion; a third asked, whether the King, as hauing the victoric, required their Weapons; if so, why did he not fetch them? or, whether he desired them in way of friendship; for then would they first know, with what courtesie hee meant to requite their kindnesse. To this question Phalinus a Graecian, waiting vpon Tissa∣phernes, answered; That the King hauing slaine Cyrus, knew no man that could pretend any Title to his Kingdome, in the middest whereof he held them fast en∣closed with great Riuers, being able to bring against them such numbers of men, as they wanted strength to kill if they would hold vp their throats, for which cause he accounted them his prisoners. These words, to them, who knew themselues to be free, were nothing pleasant. Therefore, one told Phalinus, that hauing nothing left, but their Armes & Valour, whilest they kept their Armes, their Valour would be seruiceable, but should they yeeld them, it was to be doubted, that their bodies would not long remaine their owne. Hereat Phalinus laughed, saying; This yong∣man did seeme a Philosopher, and made a pretty speech; but that his deepe specula∣tion shewed his wits to be very shallow, if he thought with his Armes, and his Va∣lour, to against the great King. It seemes that Phalinus being a Courtier, and imploied in a businesse of importance, thought himself too profound a States∣man, to be checkt in his Embassage by a bookish discourser. But his wisdome here∣in failed him. For what soeuer he himselfe was (of whom no more is knowne than that he brought an vnhonest message to his owne Countrimen, perswading them basely to surrender their Weapons, & Liues, to the mercilesse Barbarians ) this yong Scholler by him despised, was that great Xenophon, who, when all the principall Commanders were surprised by of the Persians, being a priuate Gentle∣man, and hauing neuer seene the warres before, vnder-tooke the conduct of the Ar∣mie, which he brought safe into Greece, freeing it from all those, and from greater dangers than Phalinus could propound. Some there were who promised to be faith∣full to the King, as they had beene to Cyrus, offering their seruice in Aegypt, where they thought Artaxerxes might haue vse of them. But the finall answere was, That without Weapons they could neither doe the King good as Friends, nor defend themselues from him as Enemies. Hereupon Phalinus deliuered the Kings further pleasure, which was to grant them Truce, whilest they abode where they thē were, denouncing Warre if they stirred thence; Whereunto hee required their answere. Clearchus the Generall told him, they liked it. How (saith Phalinus ) must I vnder∣stand you? as choosing peace if we stay, otherwise warre, said Clearchus. But whe∣ther warre or peace? quoth this politique Embassadour. To whom Clearchus (not willing to acquaint him with their purpose,) Let our doings tell you; and so dis∣missed him, no wiser than he came. All that day the Greckes were to vp∣on their Horses, Asses, and other Beasts, which they rosted with arrowes, darts, and woodden targets, throwne away by the Enemies. §. VI. How the Greekes beganne to returne home-wards. AT night they tooke their way towards Ariaeus, to whom they came at mid-night; being for saken by foure hundred foot, and forty horse, all Thracians, who fled ouer the King, by whom how they were en∣tertained, I doe not finde. Like enough it is that they were cut in pie∣ces; for had they been kindly vsed, it may well bee thought that some of them should haue accompanied Tissaphernes, and serued as Stales to draw in the rest. Ariaeus being of too base a temper, and birth, to thinke vpon seeking the King∣dome for him selfe, with such assistance as might haue giuen it vnto Cyrus, was very well pleased to make couenant with them for mutuall asfistance vnto the last: Wherunto both parts hauing sworne, he aduised them to take another way home∣ward, which should bee somewhat longer, yet safer and fitter to relieue them with victuals, than that by which they came. The next day, hauing made a wearisome march, and tired the Souldiers, they found the Kings Armic which had coasted them, lodged in certaine Villages, where they purposed themselues to haue en∣camped: towards which Clearchus made directly, because hee would not seeme by declining them to shew feare, or weakenesse. That the Kings men were contented to remoue, and giue place to their betters, it cannot be strange to any that hath con∣sidered their former behauiour; Nor strange, that the Graecians being wearie and hungrie, and lying among enemies in an vnknowne Countrie, should be very feare∣full: but it is almost past beliefe, that the noise which was heard of these poore men, calling one to another tumultuously, as the present condition inforced them to doe, should make the Persians out of their Campe, and so affright the great King, that in stead of demanding their Armes, he should craue peace of them. The next day very early, came messengers from Artaxerxes, desiring accesse for Em∣bassadours, to entreat of peace. Were it not that such particulars doe best open the qualitie of the persons, by whom things were managed, I should hold it fitter, to runne ouer the general passages of those times, than to dwel among circumstances. But surely it is a point very remarkeable, That when Clearchus had willed the Mes∣sengers to bid the King prepare for battaile, because the Greekes (as he said) wanting whereupon to dine, could not endure to heare of truce till their bellies were full; Artaxerxes dissembling the indignitie, was contented sweetly to swallow downe this pill, sending them guides, who conducted them to a place where was plentie of victuals to relieue them. §. VII. How TISSAPHERNES, vnder colour of peace, betraied all the Captaines of the Greekes. HItherto the Greekes, relying vpon their owne vertue, had rather aduan∣ced their affaires, than brought thēselues into any straights or termes of disaduantage. But now came vnto them the subtile Fox Tissapher∣nes, who circumuenting the chiefe Commanders by fine sleights, did mischieuously entrappe them, to the extreme danger of the Armie. He told them, that his Prouince, lying neere vnto Greece, had caused him greatly to desire, that their deliuerance might be wrought by his procurement; knowing well that in time to come, both they, and their Countrimen at home, would not be vn∣thankefull for such a benefit. Here withall hee forgot not to rehearse the great ser∣uice that he had done to his Master, being the first that aduertised him of Cyrus his intent, and hauing not only brought him a good strength of men, but in the day of battaile shewed his face to the Greekes, when all others turned their backs: that he, together with the King, did enter their Campe, and gaue chase to the Barbarians that stood on the part of Cyrus. All this (quoth hee) did I alledge to the King, en∣treating that he would giue me leaue to conduct you safe into Greece; in which suite I haue good hope to speede, if you will send a milde answere to him, who hath wil∣led me to aske you, for what cause yee haue borne Armes against him. The Cap∣taines hearing this, were contented to giue gentle words, which Tissaphernes relating to the King, procured (though very hardly as he said) that peace should bee gran∣ted: the conditions whereof were; That they should passe freely through all the Kings Dominions, paying for what they tooke, and committing no spoile: yet that it should be lawfull forthem to take victuals by force, in any place that refused to affoord them an open Market. Hereunto both parties hauing sworne, the League was concluded, and Tissaphernes returning to the King to take leaue, and end all bu∣sinesse, came vnto them againe after twentie daics, and then they set forward. This interim of twenty daies, which Tissaphernes did spend at the Court, ministred great occasion of mistrust to his new Confederates. For besides his long absence, which alone to breede doubt; the Brethren, and Kindred of Ariaeus, repairing dai∣ly to him, and other Persians to his Souldiers, did work him and them so with assu∣rance of pardon, and other allurements, that hee daily grew more strange to the Greekes, than he had beene. This caused many to aduise Clearchus, rather to forward as well as he might, than to relie vpon couenants, and sit still whi∣lest the King laied to entrap them. But he on the contrarie perswaded them, to rest contented whilest they were well, and not to cast themselues againe into those difficulties, out of which they were newly freed by the late Treatie; reciting withall their owne wants, and the Kings meanes, but especially the Oathes mutu∣ally giuen and taken, where with hee saw no reason why the enemie should haue clogged himselfe if hee meant mischiefe, hauing power enough to doe them harme by a faire and open Warre. Tissaphernes was a very honourable Man (if honour may bee valued by great∣nesse and place in Court) which caused his Oath to bee the more esteemed; for as much as no inforcement, or base respect, was like to haue drawne it from him. But his falshood was such, both in substance and in may fitly expound that saying, which proceeded from the fountaine of Truth, I hate a rich man a lyar. A lye may finde excuse when it growes out of feare for that passion hath his ori∣ginall from weakenesse. But when Power, which is a Character of the Almightie, shall be made the supporter of vntruth, the falshood is most abominable; for the offender, like proud Lucifer, aduancing his owne strength against the diuine Iustice, doth commit that sinne with an high hand, which commonly producech lamen∣table effects, and is followed with sure vengeance. It was not long ere found meanes to destroy all the Captaines, whom hee subtilly got into his power by a traine; making the Generall Clearchus himselfe the meane to draw in all the rest. The businesse was contriued thus: Hauing trauailed some daies together in such wise, that the Persians did not encampe with the Grcekes, who were very jea∣lous of the great familiaritie, appearing betweene Tissaphernes, and Ariaeus; Clearchus thought it conuenient to roote out of Tissaphernes his braines all causes of distrust, whereof many had growne in that short time. To which purpose obtaining priuate conference with him, he rehearsed the oath of Confederacie, which had past be∣tweene them, shewing how religiously he meant to keepe it, and repeating the be∣nefits, which the Greekes did receiue by the helpe of Tissaphernes, he promised that their loue should appeare to him not vnfruitful, if he would make vse of their seruice against the Mysians or Pisidians, who were accustemed to infest his Prouince, or a∣gainst the Aegyptians, who were then Rebels to the great King. For which cause he desired him, that whereas al diuine and humane respects had linked them together, he would not giue place to any close accusation or suspition, whereby might grow sudden inconuenience to either of them, vpon no just ground. faithlesse Per∣sian was very much delighted with this speech, which ministred faire occasion to the execution of his purpose. Therefore he told chus, that all this was by him wisely considered, wishing him further to call to minde how many waies hee could haue vsed to bring them to confusion, without perill to himselfe, especially by bur∣ning the Countrie, through which they were to passe, whereby they must needes haue perished by meere famine. For which cause hee said that it had beene great folly, to seeke by perjurie, odious to God and Man, the destruction of such as were alreadie in his hands; But the truth was, that his owne loue to them had moued him to worke their safetie, not onely for those ends which Clearchus had recounted, of pleasures that might redound to himselfe, and the King, by their assistance: but for that he might by their friendship, hope to obtaine what Cyrus had mist. Finally, he inuited the credulous Gentleman to Supper, and sent him away so well assured of his good will, that he promised to bring all the Captaines with him to the same place, where, in presence of them all, Tissaphernes likewise promised to tell openly, which of them had by secret information sought to raise dissension between them. Clearchus himselfe being thus deceiued, with great importunitie drew all the chiefe Commanders, and many of the inferiour Leaders, to repaire with him to the camp of Tissaphernes, whither followed them about two hundred of the common Soul∣diers as it had beene to some common Faire. But being there arriued, Clearchus with other the fiue principall Coronels, were called into the Tent, the rest staying without, where they had not waited long ere a signe was giuen, vpon which they within were apprehended, and the residue slaine. Forthwith certaine bands of Per∣sian Horse-men scoured the field, killing as many Greekes as they met, and riding vp to the very Campe of the Graecians, who wondred much at the tumult, whereof they knew not the cause, till one, escaping sorely wounded, informed them of all that had beene done. Hereupon the Greekes took Armes in haste, thinking that the enemy would forthwith haue assailed their Campe. Anon they might perceiue the Embassadours of Tissaphernes, among whom were his owne brother, and Ariaeus, followed with three hundred Horse, who called for the principall men in the Ar∣mie, saying, that they brought a message from the King, which Ariaeus deliuered to this effect. That Clearchus hauing broken his faith, and the league made, was justly rewarded with death; that Menon and Proxenus, two other of the siue Co∣ronels, for detecting his treacheric, were highly honoured; and finally, that the King required them to surrender their Armes, which were due to him, as hauing belonged vnto his seruant Cyrus. When some altercation had followed vpon this message, Xenophon told the Embassadours, that if Clearchus had in such sort offen∣ded, it was well that he was in such sort punished: but he willed them to send back Menon and Proxenus, whom they had so greatly honoured, that by them, as by common friends to both Nations, the Greekes might be aduised how to answere the Persian. Hereunto the Embassadours knew not how to frame any reply, and there∣fore departed without speaking one word more. Clearchus, and the other foure were sent to Artaxerxes, by whose commandement their heads were striken off. I hold it not amisse to preuent the order of time, annexing to this perfidiousnesse of Tissaphernes, the reward which he afterward receiued. He saw his Prouince wasted by the Greekes, against whom receiuing from his Master conuenient aide of men and money, did so ill manage his affaires, that neither subtiltie, nor perjurie (to which he failed not to haue recourse) auailing him; finally, the King was jealous of his cunning head, and sent a new Lieutenant into those parts, who tooke it from his shoulders. Such was the of his treacherie, which made him so mis∣trusted at home, that the seruice which he could not doe, he was thought vpon pri∣uate ends to neglect; and so hated abroad, that he knew not which way to flye from the stroke, all the world being shut against him. But now let vs returne to the pro∣speritie, where in hee triumphed without great cause, hauing betrayed brauer men than himselfe, and intending to bring the like mischiefe vpon the whole Armie. §. VIII. How XENOPHON heartened the Greekes, and in despight of TISSA∣PHERNES went off safely. GReat was the heauinesse of the Souldiers, being now destitute of Lea∣ders, and no lesse their feare of the euill hanging ouer their heads, which they knew not how to auoide. Among the rest, Xenophon, whose learning supplied his want of experience, finding the deepe sadnesse of the whole Armie to be such as hindred them from taking any course of preuenting the danger at hand, began to aduise the vnder Officers of Proxenus his companies, whose familiar friend he had beene, to bethinke them∣selues of some meane, whereby their safetie might be wrought, and the Souldiers encouraged: setting before their eyes whatsoeuer might serue to giue them hope, and aboue al perswading them in no wise to yeeld to the mercy of their barbarous enemies. Hereupon they desired him to take vpon him the charge of that Regiment; and so together with him, the same night calling vp such as were remaining of any ac∣count, they made choice of the fittest men to succeede in the places of those who were slaine, or taken. This being done, and order set downe for disburdening the Armie of all superfluous impediments, they easily comforted themselues for the losse of Tissaphernes his assistance, hoping to take victuals by force better cheap than he had beene wont to sell them; To which purpose they intended to take vp their lodging two or three miles further, among some plentifull Villages, and so to pro∣ceede, marching towards the heads of those great Riuers, which lay in their way, and to passe them where they were foordable. Many attempts were made vpon them by Tissaphernes, whom they, seruing on foot, were not able to requite for the harme which they receiued by the Persian Archers, who shot at a farther distance than the Greekes could reach. For this cause did Xenophon prouide slings, wherewith he ouer-reached the enemy; and finding some Horses fit for seruice, that were im∣ployed among the carriages, he set men vpon them; training likewise his Archers to shoote compasse, who had beene accustomed to the point blanke. By these meanes did hee beare off the Persians who assailed him; and sometimes gaue them chace with that band of fiftie Horse, which being well , with a firme bodie of footmen, and seconded with of the light-armed-shot and flingers, the enemie to lie a-loose. Tissaphernes not daring to come to handie gripes with these resolute men, did possesse the tops of Mountaines, and places of aduantage, by which they were to passe. But finally, when their valour made way through all such difficulties, he betooke himselfe to that course, which was indeede the surest, of burning the Countrie. With great sorrow did the Greekes behold the Villages on fire, and thereby all hope of victuals cut off. Some aduised to defend the Coun∣trie, as granted by the enemie himselfe to be theirs; others to make more fires, if so perhaps the Persians might be ashamed to doe that which were the desire of such as made passage in hostile manner; But these were comforts. The best counsaile was, that being neere vnto the Carduchi, a people enemie to the Persian, they should enter into their Countrie passing ouer some high Mountaines which lay betweene them. This course they followed, which could not haue auailed them, if Tissapher∣nes had begunne sooner to cut off their victuals, rather then to seeke to force, or to circumuent them by his fine wit. §. IX. The difficulties which the Greeke Armie found in passing through the Land of the Carduchi. ENtring vpon the Land of the Carduchi, they were encountred with many difficulties of waies, but much more afflicted by the fierce In∣habitants, who, accustomed by force to defend themselues against the huge Armies of the Persian, were no way inferiour to the Greekes in daring, but only in the Art of warre. They were verie light of foot, skilfull Archers; and vsed the Sling well; which weapons in that mountainous Countrie were of much vse against these poore trauailers, afflicting them in seuen daies which they spent in that passage, farre more than all the power of the great King had done. Betweene the Territorie of these Carduchi, and the parts of Arme∣nia confining them, ranne Centrites a great Riuer, vpon which the Greekes refreshed themselues one day, reioycing that they had so well escaped these dangers, and ho∣ping that the remainder would proue easie. But the next morning they saw cer∣taine troupes of Horse, that lay to forbid their passage. These were leauied by the Kings Deputies in those parts; Tissaphernes and his Companies hauing taken their way towards Ionia. The Riuer was broade and deepe, so that it was not possible for such as would enter it, to make resistance against those which kept the opposite bankes. To increase these dangers the Carduchi following vpon them, lay on the side of a Mountaine, within lesse than a mile of the water. But it was their good hap to discouer a Foord, by which the greater number of them passing ouer, did easily chase away the Subiects of the Persian, and then sending backe the most expedite men, gaue succour to the Reare-ward, against which the Carduchi being slightly ar∣med, could not on plaine ground make resistance hand to hand. These Carduchi seeme to haue inhabited the Mountaines of Niphates, which are not farre from the Spring of Tygris; though Ptolomie place them far more to the East vpon the Riuer of Cyrus in Media, wherein he differs much from Xenophon, whose relation being grounded vpon his owne knowledge, doth best in this case deserue credit. Of the Riuer Centrites (as of many other Riuers, Townes, and Places, mentioned by Xenophon ) I will not labour to make a coniecture, which may endure the seueritie of a Critick. For Ptolomie, and the whole Nation of Geographers, adde small light to this expedition: only of this last, I thinke it the same which falleth into Tigris, not much aboue Artasigarta springing out of Niphates, and running by the Towne of Sardeua in Gordene, a Prouince of Armenia the Great, wherein the Greekes hauing passed Centrites did arriue. §. X. How Gouernour of Armenia, seeking to entrap the Greekes with termes of fained peace, was disappointed and shamefully beaten. THe Armie finding in Armenia good prouision, marched without any disturbance about fiftie or three score miles to the heads of the Riuer Tigris, and passing ouer them, trauailed as farre further without re∣sistance, till they were encountred by Teribazus at the Riuer , which Xenophon commends as a goodly water, though small; but Pto∣lomie and others omit it. Teribazus gouerned that Countrie for the Persian, and was in great fauour with Artaxerxes, whose Court may seeme to haue beene a Schoole where the Art of falshood was taught as wisdome. He desired peace of the Greeks, which was made vpon this condition, that they should take what they pleased, but not burne downe the Townes and Villages in their way. As soone as he had made this league, he leauied an Armie, & besetting the Straights of certaine Mountaines which they were to passe, hoped wel to make such benefit of their security, as might giue him the commendation of being no lesse craftily dishonest than Tissaphernes. Yet his cunning failed of successe. For a great snow fell, which caused the Greekes to make many fires, and scatter themselues abroad in the Villages. Teribazus also made many fires, and some of his men wandred about seeking reliefe. By the fires he was discouered, and by a Souldier of his that was taken prisoner, the whole was reuealed. Heereupon the Greekes, taking this captiue with them for a guide, sought him out; and comming vpon his Campe, did so affright him, that before the whole Armie could arriue there, the shout which was raised by the Vaunt-currors, chased him away. They tooke his Pauilion, wherein (besides many slaues, that were Artificers of voluptuousnesse) verie rich furniture was left by the treacherous coward, who returned no more to challenge it. From hence the Armie went north∣ward, and passing Euprates, not far below the springs thereof, trauailed with much difficulty through deepe snow, being followed aloofe by the enemy, who durst not approach them, but did cut off such as they found stragling behinde. The Inhabi∣tants of the Countrie, through which they marched, had their wintring houses vn∣der ground, wherein was found great plentie of victuals, and of cattaile, which like∣wise did winter in the same Cellars with the owners. Hauing refreshed themselues in those parts, and taken sufficient after the miserable iourney, which had con∣sumed many of them with extreme cold; they departed, leading with them many bond-slaues, and taking away (besides other Horses and Cattaile) some Colts that were bred vp for the great King. §. XI. The passage of the Armie to Trabizonde, through the Countries bordering vpon the Riuer of Phasis, and other ob∣scure Nations. SO without impediment they came to the Riuer Phasis, neere where∣vnto the people called Taochi, and Chalybes were scated. These Nations ioyned together, and occupying the tops of a ledge of Moun∣taines, which the Greekes were to passe, made countenance of warre: but some companies being sent by night to seize vpon a place of e∣quall height to that whereon the enemies lay, making good the piece of ground which they had taken, secured the ascent of the rest; which caused these people to flie, euery one retyring to the defence of his owne. The first vpon whose Countrie the Greekes did enter were the Taochi, who conuaying all their prouision of victuals into strong holds, brought the Armie into much want, vntill with hard labour one place was forced, wherein great store of cattaile were taken; the people, to auoide captiuitie, threw themselues head-long downe the rocks, the very women throw∣ing downe first their owne children, and then casting themselues vpon them. Here was taken a great bootie of Cattaile, which serued to feed them, trauailing through the land of the Chalybes, of whom they got nothing but strokes. The Chalybes were a very Nation, well armed at all points, and exceeding fierce. They encoun∣tred the Greekes hand to hand, killing as many as they tooke prisoners, and cutting off their heads, which they carried away, singing and dancing, to the great griefe of their companions liuing; who were glad, when after seuen daies iourney they e∣scaped from those continuall skirmishes, wherewith they had been vexed by these Barbarians. Hence trauailing through a good corne-Countrie, inhabited by an ob∣scure Nation called the Scythini, they came to a rich Towne, the Lord wherof, and of the Region adioyning, vsed them friendly, and promised to guide them to a Mountaine, whence they might discouer the Euxine- Sea. From Gymnias (which was the name of his Towne) he led them through the Territorie of his enemies, desiring them to waste it with sword and fire. After fiue daies march, they came to a Mountaine called Teches, being (as I thinke) a part of the Mountaines called , whence their guide shewed them the Sea; towards which they bent their course, and passing friendly through the Region of the Macrones, (with whom by meanes of an interpreter, found among themselues, who borne in that place had beene sold into Greece, they made a good peace) they arriued in the Land of Colchos, wherein stands the Citie of Trabisond a Colonie of the Greekes, situate in the bottome of the Sea. Trabisond, called then Trapezus, a Colonie of the Greekes. The Colchi entertaining them with hostilitie, were requited with the like; for the Armie hauing now good leisure to repose themselues among their friends the Trapezuntians, did spoile the Countrie thirtie daies together, forbearing onely the Borderers vpon Trabizonde, at the Citizens request. §. XII. How the Armie beganne at Trabizond to prouide a Fleet, wherewith to returne home by Sea: how it came into the Territorie of Sinope, and there prosequuted the same purpose. HAuing now found an Hauen Towne, the Souldiers were desirous to take shipping, and change their tedious Land-iournies into an easie Nauigation. To which purpose Cherisophus a Lacedemonian, one of the principall Commanders, promised by meanes of Anaxibius the Lacedaemonian Admirall, who was his friend, that he would prouide Vessels to embarke them. Hauing thus concluded, they likewise tooke order for the staying of such ships as should passe that way, meaning to vse them for their na∣uigation. Lest all this prouision should be found insufficient for the transportation of the whole Armie, Xenophon perswaded the Cities adioyning to cleare the waies, and make an easie passage for them by Land; whereunto the Souldiers were vtterly vnwilling to giue , being desirous to returne by Sea, but the Countrie fearing what inconuenience might grow by their long stay, did readily condescend to Xeno∣phons request. Two ships they borrowed of the Trapezuntians, which they man∣ned and sent to Sea: the one of them sailed directly into Greece, forsaking their Companions, who had put them in trust to bring ships into the Port of : the other tooke Merchants and passengers, whose goods were safely kept for the owners, but the Vessels were staied to increase the fleet. After long abode, when victuals beganne to faile, by reason that all the Land of the Colchi, neere vnto the Campe was alreadie quite wasted, they were faine to embarke their sickmen, with the women, children, and such of the baggage as might best be spared, in those few ships which they had already prouided. The rest of the Armie tooke their way by Land to Cerasus, a Greeke Towne, where the fleet likewise arriued. Here the Armie being mustered, was found to consist of eight thousand and six hundred men From hence they passed through the Countrie of the a Nation of Pon∣tus Cappadocicus Mosynaci, who were diuided into factions. The stronger partic, despising their friendship, caused them to ioyne with the weaker, whom they left Masters of all. The next place of their abode was a Port Towne in the same Region. Cotyora, a Greeke Towne likewise, and a Colo∣nie of the Sinopians, as Trapezus and Cerasus were; but the entertainement which here they found was very churlish, hauing neither an open Market affoorded to them, nor the sick-men that were among them admitted into any house. Hereupon the Soul diers entred the Towne by force, and (committing no outrage) bestowed those which were sicke in conuenient lodgings, taking into their owne hands the custody of the Gates. Prouision for the Armie they made by strong hand, partly out of the Territorie of the Paphlagonians, partly out of the Lands belonging to the Towne. These newes were vnwelcome to a Port-Towne in Leucolyria, a Colonie of the Mylesians. Sinope, whence Embassadours were sent to the Camp, who complaining of these dealings, and threatning to joyne with the Paphlagonians, if redresse could not otherwise be had, were roundly answered by Xenophon, That meere necessitie had enforced the Armie to teach those of Cotyora good manners in so bad a methode: letting them know, that he feared not to deale with them and the Paphlagonian at once; though perhaps the Paphlagonian would be glad to take Sinope it selfe, to which, if cause were giuen, they would lend assistance. Vpon this answere the Embassadors grew better aduised, promising all friendship that the State of Sinope could shew, and commanding the Towne of Cotyora to re∣lieue the Souldiers as well as they might. Further, they promised to assist them with shipping, letting them vnderstand how difficult the passage by Land would proue, in regard of the many and great Riuers, as Thermodon, Iris, Halys, and Par∣thenius, which crossed their way. This good counsaile, and the faire promises ac∣companying it, were kindly accepted by the Armie, which well perceiued, that the Citie of Sinope would spare for no cost, to be freed from such a neighbourhood. It was therefore decreed that they would passe the rest of the way by Sea; prouided that if there should want such number of Vessels as might serue to embarke euery one man of them, then would they not put from the shore. §. XIII. Of dissension which arose in the Armie; and how it was embarked. HItherto the danger , and miseries of weather & wants, had kept the companie in firme vnitie; which now beganne to dissolue and to thaw, by the neighbouring aire of Greece, warming their heads with priuate respects to their seuerall ends and purposes. Whilest they, who were sent as Agents from the Campe, remained at Sinope; Xenophon considering the strength and valour of his men, and the opportunitie of the coast wheron they lay, thought it would be an honorable worke to build a Ci∣tie in those parts, which were soone like to proue great and wealthie, in regard both of their owne puissance, and of the great repaire of the Greekes into that quarter. For this cause he made sacrifice, according to the superstition of his time and Coun∣trie, diuining of his successe by the entrailes of beasts. The Sooth-sayer whom hee imployed had receiued a great reward of Cyrus, for coniecturing aright, that Ar∣taxerxes would not giue in ten daies: hee therefore, hauing preserued his money carefully, was desirous to be soone at home, that he might freely enioy his gettings. By him the purpose of Xenophon was diuulged, which was interpreted ac∣cording to the diuersitie of mens opinions; some approuing the motion, but the greater part reiecting it. They of Sinope and Heraclea, being informed of this con∣sultation, were sore afraide, lest the pouertie of the Souldiers, who had not where∣with to maintaine themselues at home, should giue successe to the proiect. Which to preuent, they promised to supply the Armie with a sufficient fleet, and likewise offered money to some of the Captaines, who thereupon vnder-tooke to giue the Souldiers pay, if they would presently set saile for Greece. One of these Captaines being a banished man, desired them to follow him into Troas; another offered to leade them into Cherronesus. Xenophon who desired only the common good, was pleased greatly with these propositions and professed openly that hee would them to set forward, and hold together in any case, punishing him as a Traitor that should for sake the Armie, before such time as they were at their iournies end. Silanus the Sooth-sayer, who had vttered Xenophons purpose, was heereby staied from outrunning his fellowes, and driuen to abide with his wealth among poore men, longer than stood with his good liking. Also the other Captaines were much troubled and afraid, when they perceiued, that ships were prepared sufficient for their Nauigation, but that the money promised to them, and by them to the Souldiers, came not. For the people of Sinope, and Heraclea, knowing that the Armie was now resolued for the voiage, & that , whom they feared, had perswa∣ded them to this resolution; thought it the wisest way to furnish them with a Nauy whilest they were in good readinesse to depart, but to keepe the money to them∣selues. The Captaines therefore who being disappointed by Townes, found themselues in great danger of their men, whom they had deceiued with fair hopes, repented much of their hastie offers, & signifying as much to Xenophon, praied him to make proposition to the Armie, of taking the ships, and sayling to Phasis, where they might seize vpon Lands, & plant themselues in such wise as should stand best with their good liking. But finding him cold in the businesse, they began to worke the principall of their own followers, hoping by them to draw in all the rest. These newes becomming publike, bred a suspition of Xenophon, as if he had wonne the rest of the Captaine to his purpose, and meant now to carrie the Armie quite another way from their owne home. Wherefore assembling the Companies, he gaue them satisfaction, and withall complained of some disorders which he caused them to re∣dresse. A generall inquisition was likewise made of offences committed since the death of Cyrus; which being punished, all were in quiet. Shortly after came Embassadours from Corylas, Lord of the Paphlagonians, who sending presents desi∣red peace of the Greekes: the Embassadours were friendly entertained, and peace concluded, which needed not to haue been sought, for that the Greckes hauing now their fleet in a readinesse, did soone weigh Anchors, and set saile for Harmene the Port of Sinope, whither Cherisophus came, bringing with him a few Gallies from the Admirall Anaxibius, who promised to giue the Armie pay as soone, as they came into the parts of Greece. §. XIIII. Another great dissension and distraction of the Armie. How the muti∣ners were beaten by the Barbarians, and rescued by XENOPHON. THe neerer that they approched to Greece, the greater was their desire to make prouision for themselues, that they might not returne home emptie-handed. Wherefore trusting well that if the charge of the Armie were absolutely committed to one sufficient man, hee might the more conueniently procure the good of them all, they determi∣ned to make Xenophon sole Commander of all, in whose fauour as well the Captains as the common Souldiers were very earnest and violent. But he, either fearing to displease the Lacedaemonians, who were iealous of him already (being incensed by that fugitiue who forsooke the Armie at Trabizond, flying with one of their two ships) or moued by some tokens appearing to him in the entrails that threatned ill successe to his gouernment, procured with vehement contention, that this honour was laied vpon Cherisophus a Lacedaemonian. It seemes that Xenophon, considering the vexations incident to the conduct of a voluntarie Army, wanting pay, did wisely in yeelding to such tokens as forbad him to accept it: especially, knowing so well their desire, which was by right or by wrong to get wealth wheresoeuer it might bee found, without all regard of Friend or of Foc. Cherisophus had beene Generall but sixe or seuen daies, when he was deposed, for hauing been vnwilling to robbe the Towne of Heraclea which had sent presents to the Campe, and beene very benefi∣ciall vnto them in lending ships for their transportation. Two daies they had sailed by the coast of Asia, when being past those great Riuers, which would haue giuen impediment to their iourney by Land, they touched at Heraclea, where consulting how to take their way on wards, whether by Land or Sea, one seditious man began to put them in minde of seeking to get somewhat for themselues; telling them that all their prouision would be spent in three daies, and that being now come out of the enemies Countrie, victuals and other necessaries could not bee had without money; for which cause he gaue aduice to send messengers into the Towne of He∣raclea, giuing the Citizens to vnderstand what their wants were, and demanding of them three thousand pieces of money, called Cyzicens, which summe amounteth to two thousand and fiue hundred pound starling, or thereabout. This motion was greatly applauded, and the summe raised to tenne thousand Cyzicens at least: which to require, they thought Cherisophus, as being Generall, the fittest man; o∣thers had more desire to send Xenophon: but in vaine, for they both refused it, and renounced the action as dishonest. Lest therefore either of these should faile in ma∣naging the businesse which agreed not with his disposition, others of more impu∣dencie and lesse discretion were sent, who in such wise deliuered their insolent mes∣sage; that the Citizens taking time to deliberate vpon their request, brought what they could out of the fields into the Towne, and shutting the Gates, did forthwith man the walls. When the Souldiers perceiued themselues to be disappointed of their purpose, they fel to mutiny, saying, That their Leaders had betraied them: and being for the more part of them Arcadians, and Achaeans, they forsooke immediately Cherisophus and Xenophon, choosing new Leaders out of their owne number. Aboue foure thousand and fiue hundred they were, all heauily armed, who electing ten Captaines, sailed into the Port of Calphas, which is in the mid-way betweene Heraclea and Bizantium, with purpose to assaile the Bythinians on the sud∣daine. With Cherisophus there abode two thousand and one hundred, of whom one thousand and foure hundred were armed weightily: Xenophon had two thousand foot, three hundred whereof were lightly armed, and fortie horse, which smal band had done good seruice alreadie, and could not haue beene spared now. Cherisophus had agreed with Cleander Gouernour of Bizantium, to meet him at the mouth of the Riuer Calphas, whither Cleander promised to bring some Gallies to conuey him ouer into Greece; for which cause he tooke his way thither by Land, leauing to Xenophon such shipping as he had, who passing some part of the way by Sea, landed vpon the Confines of Heraclea, and Thracia Asiatica, intending to make a cut through the mid-land-Countrie to the Propont. The Mutiners, who had landed at Calpas by night, with purpose to take spoiles in Bythinia, diuided themselues into ten Compa∣nies, euery Captaine leading his owne Regiment into some Village, fiue or sixe miles from the Sea, in the greater Townes were two Regiments quartered; and so was that part of the countrie surprised on the suddaine, & sacked all at one time. The place of Rendeuous was an high peece of ground, where some of them arri∣ued, finding no disturbance; others, not without much trouble and danger; two Companies were broken and defeated, only eight men escaping, the rest were all put to the sword. For the Thracians which had slipt at first our of the Souldiers hands, did raise the Countrie, and finding the Greekes loden with bootie, tooke the aduantage of their disorder, cutting in pieces those two Regiments: which done, they attempted the rest, encompassing the hill whereon they encamped. One great aduantage the Thractans had, that being all light armed, they could at pleasure make retrait from these Arcadians, & Achaeans: who wanting the assistance of horse, and hauing neither Archers nor Slingers among them, were driuen to stand meere∣ly vpon their defence, bearing off with great danger, and many wounds receiued, the Darts and Arrowes of the Barbarians, till finally they were driuen from their watering place, and enforced to craue parly. Whatsoeuer the articles of compositi∣on were, the Thracians yeelded to all; but pledges for assurance they would giue none, without which the Greekes well knew, that all promises of such people, especi∣ally so incensed, were nothing worth. In the meane time Xenophon holding his way quietly through the In-land Region, did enquire of some Trauailers, whether they knew ought of any Graecian Armie, passing along those parts: and by them true information of the desperate case into which these Gallants had foolishly throwne themselues, he marched directly towards the place where they lay, taking with him for guides them who gaue him the intelligence. His horse-men hee sent before to discouer, and to scowre the waies; the light-armed foot-men tooke the hill-tops on either hand, all of them setting fire on whatsoeuer they found com∣bustible, whereby the whole Countrie seemed to be on a light-flame, to the great terrour of the enemies, who thought that some huge Armie had approched. That night he encamped on a Hill, within fiue mile of the Arcadians, encreasing still the number of his fires, which hee caused hastily to be quenched soone after Supper. The enemies perceiuing this, thought certainely that hee would haue fallen vpon them in the darke, which caused them in all haste to dislodge. Early the next mor∣ning Xenophon comming thither in very good order, to haue giuen battaile, found that his deuice, to affright the Thracians, had taken full effect; but hee maruailed that the Greekes were also departed, concerning whom he learned by enquirie, that they remoued at breake of day, and perceiued by signes that they had taken the way to the Port of Calpas, in which journey hee ouertooke them. They embraced Him, and His, with great joy: Confessing that they themselues had thought the same which the enemies did, looking that hee should haue come by night, wherein fin∣ding themselues deceiued, they were afraid lest he had forsaken them, and there∣fore hastened away, to ouertake him, and joyne with him. So they arriued at the Hauen of Calpas, where it was decreed, That whosoeuer from thenceforth made a∣ny motion to disioyne the Armie, should suffer death. §. XV. Of diuers pieces of seruice done by XENOPHON; and how the Armie retur∣nedinto Greece. The occasions of the betweene the Lacedae∣monians and the Persian. THe Hauen of Calpas lay vnder a goodly head-land, that was very strong, and abounding with all kinde of Graine and Fruits, except Oliues. There was also Timber for building and shipping, and a very conuenient sea for a great Citie. All which commodities, that might haue allu ed the Souldiers to stay there, and to plant, caused them to haste away, fearing lest Xenophon should some deuice to haue settled himselfe and them in that place. For the greater part of them had good meanes to liue at home, neither did they so much for hope of gaine follow Cyrus in that Warre, as in regard of his Honour, and the loue which they bare vnto him: the poorer sort were such as left the Parents, Wiues, and Children, to whom (though failing of the riches which they had hoped to purchase) they were now desirous to returne. But whether it were so that Xenophon found aduantage by their owne superstition, to make them stay, which they greatly suspected; or whether signes appearing in the entrailes, did indeede forbid their departure: so long they were inforced to abide in the place till victualls failed, neither would the Captaines leade them forth to forrage the Countrie, vntill the Sacrifices should promise good successe. Cherisophus was dead of an Ague, and his ships were gone, being returned to the Heracleans, of whom they were borrowed. His followers were joyned to the rest of the Armie, which the greater it was, the more prouision it needed, and the sooner felt want. For which cause, he that was chosen Coronell into the place of Cherisophus, would needs aduenture to gratifie the Souldiers with the spoile of some Villages that stood neere at hand; in which enterprise he found ill successe, the whole Countrie lying in waite to entrap him, and an Armie of Horse being sent by Pharnabazus the Satrapa, or Vice-roy of Phrygia, to the assistance of these Thracians, which troupes falling vpon the Greekes that were scat∣tered abroade in seeking bootie, slew fiue hundred of them, and chased the rest to a certaine Mountaine thereby. The newes of this ouerthrow comming to Xenophon, he led forth a part of the Armie to the rescue of those that suruiued, and brought them safe to the Campe; vpon which the Bythinians made an offer that night, and breaking a Corps du garde, slew some, pursuing the rest to the very Tents. This new courage of the enemie, together with the present condition of the Armie, so disheartened and vnfurnished of necessaries, caused the Greekes to remoue their Campe to a place of more strength; which hauing intrenched, and committed to the defence of such as were least able to indure trauaile, Xenophon with the firmest and best able men went forth, both to burie those which were lately slaine, and to abate the pride of the Thracians, and their Assistants. In this journey his demea∣nour was very Honourable. For hauing giuen buriall to the dead, the Enemie was discouered, lying on the tops of the Hills adjoyning, to whom (notwithstan∣ding the way was very rough, and troublesome, so that some thought it a matter of too great danger, to leaue at their backes a wood scarce passeable) hee marched directly, telling his men plainely, that hee had rather follow the enemie with halfe the number, than turne his back to them with twice as many, and letting them further know, that if they did not charge the Barbarian, hee would with the greater resolution to pursue them; from whom if they could safely re∣tire to the campe, yet what should they doe there, wanting victualls to sustaine them in the place, and ships, to carrie them away? wherefore hee willed them ra∣ther to fight well that day, hauing eaten their dinners, than an other day fasting; and not to regard the vneasie returne, which might serue to stay Cowards from running away, but to wish vnto the Enemie a faire and easie way, by which hee might from them. These perswasions were followed with so valiant execu∣tion, that both Persians and Bythinians being chased out of the field, abandoned the Countrie forthwith, remouing their Families, and leauing all that could not sodainely bee conueighed away, to the discretion of the Greekes, who at good leisure gathered the haruest of these bad Neighbours fields. This was the last fight which they had on the side of Asia. For they were not only suffered quietly to enjoy the spoile of the Countrie, but when the opinion grew common in those parts, that it was the intent of Xenophon to plant a Colonie on the Port of Calpas, Embassadours were sent from the Neighbour people, to desire friendship, and make of their best assistance. But the Souldiers had no minde to stay. Wher∣fore entring further into Bythinia, they tooke a great bootie, which they carried a∣way to Chrysopolis, a Citie neere vnto Chalcedon, where they sold it. Pharnabazus, Lieutenant in Phrygia to Artaxerxes, did greatly feare, lest their long stay in that Countrie might breede in them a desire to visite his Prouince, where they might haue found great wealth, and little power to guard it. Therefore he sent to the Lacedaemonian Admirall, him with much instance and large promises to waft them ouer into Europe; to whom Anaxibius the Admirall condescending, promised to giue the Souldiers pay, as soon as they arriued at Bizantium. So they carried out of Asia at the intreatie of the Persian, who in the height of his pride had thought them so surely imprisoned with mighty Riuers, that he not on∣ly denied to permit their quiet departure, but willed them to surrender their Armes into his hands, and so to yeeld their liues to his discretion. How discourte∣ously they were intreated by Anaxibius, and how to requite his injurious dealings, they seized vpon Bizantium, which by Xenophous perswasion they forbare to sacke, I hold it superfluous to relate. For the residue of their doings appertaine little to the generall course of things. But this expedition, as in all ages it was glorious, so did it both discouer the secrets of Asia, and stirre vp the Greekes to thinke vpon greater enterprises, than euer their forefathers had vndertaken. Likewise it was the only remarkable action which the time affoorded. For the Roman warres did hi∣therto extend no further than to the next neighbouring Townes of Italie; and in Greece all things were quiet, the Lacedaemonians ruling insolently, but without di∣sturbance. True it is, that the seedes of the Warre shortly following, which the Lacedaemonians made vpon Artaxerxes, were already sowne, before these companies returned out of the high Countries of Asia. For the Townes of Ionia, which had sided with yong Cyrus against Tissaphernes, if not against the great King, prepared to rebell, which they thought safer, than to fall into the hands of Tissaphernes, who was now appointed Lieutenant, both of his old Prouince, and of all that had belonged to Cyrus. Wherefore the Ionians besought the Lacedaemonians to send them aide, whereby to recouer their libertie; and obtained their request. For a power was sent ouer, vnder conduct of Thimbro a Spartan, who bestowed his men in such Townes as had already reuolted, to secure the Cities and their Fields, but not to make any offen∣siue Warre. CHAP. XI. Of the affaires of Greece, whilest they were managed by the Lacedaemonians. §. I. How the Lacedaemonians tooke courage by example of XENOPHONS Armie, to make Warre vpon ARTAXERXES. IT seemes that the Lacedaemonians did well in how ill part Artaxerxes tooke their fauour shewed vnto his brother, and yet were timorous in begin∣ning an open warre against him, thinking it sufficient to take all care that no aduantage might slip, which could serue to strengthen their estate, by finding the Persian worke beyond the Sea. But when Xenophons Armie had reuealed the basenesse of those effeminate Asiatiques, and rehearsed the many victories which they themselues had gotten, vpon termes of extreme disaduantage; then was all Greece filled with desire of vndertaking vpon this huge vnweldie Empire, thinking it no hard matter for the joynt-forces of that whole Nation, to hew out the way to Susa, whereof one hand∣full had opened the passage to Babylon, and further, finding no power that was able to giue them resistance, in all that long journey of foure and thirty thousand two hundred and fifty fiue furlongs, spent in going and returning, which make of Eng∣lish miles about foure thousand two hundred foure score and one, a very painefull march of one yeere and three moneths. Neuerthelesse the ciuill distraction where∣with Greece was miserably torne, and especially that hot fire of the Theban Warre, which, kindled with Persian gold, brake forth sodainly into a great flame, drew backe out of Asia the power of the Lacedaemonians, to the defence of their owne estate; lea∣uing it questionable whether Agesilaus, hauing both the same, and farre greater forces, could haue wrought proportionable effects. Sure it is, that in the whole space of two yeeres, which he spent in Asia, his deedes procured more commenda∣tion of magnanimitie and faire behauiour, than of stout courage, and great, or profi∣table atchieuements. For how highly so euer it pleased Xenophon, who was his friend, and follower in this, and in other warres, to extoll his vertue; his exploits be∣ing only a few incursions into the Countries lying neere the Sea, carry no propor∣tion to Xenophons owne journey, which I know not whether any Age hath paralle∣led: the famous retrait of Conon the Briton with six thousand men from Aquileia, to his owne Countrie, through all the breadth of Italie, and length of France, in despite of the Emperor Theodosius, being rather like it than equall. But of Agesilaus and his warres in Asia and Greece, we shall speake more in due place. §. II. The prosperous beginnings of the warre in Asia. THIMBRO receiuing Xenophons men, beganne to take in Townes, and to all such as were willing to from the Persian, who were many, and some of them such, as had beene highly beholding to the King; who seeme to haue had no other cause of discontent, than that they were to liue vnder the gouernement of Tissaphernes, whom all others did as vehemently hate as the King his Master did loue him. The managing of the warre begunne by Thimbro, was for his oppressions taken out of his hands, and committed to Dercyllidas a Spartan, who behaued himselfe as a good man of Warre, and a wise Commander. For whereas the rule of the low-Coun∣tries of Asia was diuided betweene Pharnabazus and Tissaphernes, who did ill agree, Pharnabazus being the worthier man, but the other by his Princes fauour the grea∣ter, and hauing the chiefe command in those warres against the Greekes; Dercyllidas who did beare a priuate hatred to Pharnabazus (knowing well that Tissaphernes was of a mischieuous nature, and would be sorry to see his Corriuall throughly bea∣ten, though to the Kings losse) made an appointment with Tissaphernes, and forth∣with entred Aeolis, which was vnder the jurisdiction of Pharnabazus, which Pro∣uince, in few daies, he brought into his owne power. That Countrie of Aeolis had about the same time suffered a violent alteration, which gaue easie successe to the attempts of Dercyllidas. Zenis a Dardanian had beene Deputie to Pharnabazus in those parts; after whose death his wife Mania procured his Office, wherein shee behaued herselfe so well, that shee not only was beloued of the people vnder her gouernement: but enlarged her Territorie, by the conquest of certaine Townes adjoyning; and sundry times gaue assistance to Pharnabazus in his warres against the Mysians and Persians. For shee had in pay some Companies of Greekes, whose valour by her good vsage did her great seruice. But somewhat be∣fore the arriuall of Dercyllidas in those parts, a Sonne-in-law of hers, called Midias, whom shee trusted and loued much, being blinded with ambition, found meanes to stifle her, and kill her sonne of seuenteene yeeres old; which done, he seized vp∣on two of her principall Townes, wherein her treasure lay, hoping to haue beene admitted into possession of her whole estate. Being denied entrance by her Soul∣diers, that lay in Garrison, he sent Messengers with presents to Pharnabazus, desiring him to make him Gouernour in the place of Mania. His presents were not only re∣jected by Pharnabazus, but reuenge of his foule treason threatned, whereby the wicked villaine was driuen into tearmes of almost vtter desperation. In the meane time came Dercyllidas, to whom the Townes of Mania, that held against Midias, did quickly open their Gates. One only Towne stood out foure daies (against the will of the Citizens, who were couetous of libertie) the Gouernour striuing in vaine to haue kept it to the vse of Pharnabazus. Now remained only two Cities Gergethe and Scepsis, which the Traitour held, who all men, as being loued of none, sent Embassadours to Dercyllidas, leaue to speake with him, and pledges for his securitie: vpon the deliuerie of which hee issued out of Scepsis, and comming into the Campe, made offer to joyne with the Greekes vpon such conditi∣ons as might seeme reasonable. But he was plainely told by Dercyllidas, that other condition there was none, than to set the Citizens freely at libertie. And presently vpon these words they marched toward Scepsis. When Midias perceiued that it was in vaine to striue against the Armie, and the Townes men, who were all of one minde; hee quietly went along with Dercyllidas; who remaining but a few houres in the Citie, did a sacrifice to Minerua, and then leading away the Garrison of Midias, he left the Citie free, and departed toward Gergethe. Midias did not his Companie, but followed him, earnestly intreating that hee might be suffered to re∣taine Gergethe: but comming to the Gates, he was bidden to command his Souldi∣ers that they should be opened, for (quoth Dercyllidas ) I must here likewise doe a sa∣crifice to Minerua. The Traitor, not daring to make deniall, caused his Mercinaries to open the Gates, whereby Dercyllidas, taking possession of the place, tendred pay to the Garrison, who did not refuse to serue vnder his Ensignes. This done, all the goods of Mania were seized vpon, as belonging to one that had beene subject to Pharnabazus, who was enemie to the Greekes: and so the murderous wretch was sent away naked, not knowing in what part of the World hee might finde any place to hide his detested head. Dercyllidas, hauing in eight daies taken nine Cities, purpo∣sed for the ease of his Confederates to winter in Bythinia, to which end hee tooke Truce with Pharnabazus, who had not any desire of Warre. That Winter; and the Sommer ensuing, the Truce being recontinued held; in which time, besides the wasting of Bythinia, the neck of Land joyning Cherronea to the Maine, was fortified, being foure or fiue miles in breadth, by which meanes eleuen Townes with much good Land belonging to them, were freed from the incursions of the wild Thractans; and made fit and able to victuall the Campe. Likewise the Citie of was ta∣ken, which was of great strength, and very well stored with prouision. After this, Dercyllidas had command from Sparta, to diuert the warre into Caria, where was the seate of Tissaphernes; for that hereby it was thought not vneasie to recouer all the Townes of Ionia: Pharax the Admirall of the fleet (which was a yeerely Office) being appointed to joyne with him. Though it was manifeft that Thissaphernes had neglected Pharnabazus in time of necessity, yet was he not in his owne danger requi∣ted with the like. For Pharnabazus hauing respect to the Kings seruice, came to as∣sist his priuate enemie Tissaphernes, & so passing into Caria, they thrust Garrisons in∣to all places of ftrength; which done, they marched towards Ionia, hoping to finde the Townes ill manned for resistance. As these Persians were desirous to keepe the warre from their owne dores, so was Dercyllidas willing to free his Confederates the Ionians from the spoile and danger of the warre, by transferring it into Caria. For which cause he passed the Riuer of Maeander, and not looking to haue bin so soone encountered, marched carelesly through the Countrie: when on the very sodaine the whole Armie of Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus was discouered, confisting of Per∣sians, Carians, and some Mercinarie Greekes, who were all marshalled in very good order to present battaile. The oddes was too apparent, both in numbers of men, and in readinesse, as also in aduantage of ground: for the Persian had a great multi∣tude of Horse, the Greeke very few and feeble, being to fight in an open plaine. Therefore all the Ionians, together with the Ilanders and others, of such places as bordered vpon the Kings Dominions, did either betake themselues to present flight; or abiding a while for shame, did plainely discouer by their lookes, that they meant not to be more bold than wise. Only Dercyllidas with his Peloponnesians re∣garding their honor, prepared to endure the fight: which must needs haue brought them to destruction, if the counsaile of Pharnabazus had beene followed, who per∣ceiuing the opportunitie of so great a victorie, was not willing to let it slip. But Tissaphernes, who naturally was a coward, seeing that countenance of resistance was made, beganne to consider what strange defence the Souldiers of Xenophon had shewed, and thinking that all the Greekes were of the like resolution, held it the wi∣sest way to craue parly; the conclusion of which was, That a truce should be made, to last vntill Tissaphernes might receiue answere from the King, and Dercyllidas from Sparta, concerning the demands propounded in the Treatie, which were on the one part, that all the Greekes in Asia might enjoy their owne libertie and lawes, but con∣trariwise on the other side, that the Lacedaemonians should depart Asia, and leaue the Townes to the Kings pleasure. This Treatie was of none effect; only it serued to free the Greekes from the present danger, and to gaine time vnto Tissaphernes, who desired to auoide the warre by procrastination, which he durst not aduenture to fi∣nish by triall of a battaile. §. III. How the Lacedaemonians tooke reuenge vpon the Eleans for old displeasure. The discontents of the Corinthians and Thebans, conceiued against the State of Sparta. IN the meane season the Lacedamonians, who found none able to with∣stand them in Greece, beganne to call the Eleans to accompt for some disgraces receiued by them during the late warres, when leisure was wanting to the requitall of such pettie iniuries. These Eleans being Presidents of the Olympiaque games, had set a fine vpon the Citie of Sparta, for Non-paiment of which, they forbade them to come to the solemnitie; and publiquely whipt one of them, that was a man of note, for presuming to con∣tend their decree. Likewise they hindred Agis King of Sparta, from doing sacrifice to Iupiter; and in all points vsed great contempt toward the Spartans, who now had no businesse that could hinder them from taking : and therefore sent a peremptorie message to the Eleans, commanding them to at libertie the Cities which they held in subiection. This was the vsuall pretence which they made the ground of all their warres: though little they cared for the libertie of such Townes, which they caused afterwards to become followers, and little better than meere Vassals of the Lacedaemonians. In their late warres with Athens, the strong opposition which they found, caused this goodly Title of libertie to worke verie slowly: but hauing now to doe with a State of great spirit and small force, it gaue present successe to their desires. Two yeeres together they sent an Armie into the Countrie of the Eleans: the first yeere an earthquake (held in those times a prodi∣gious signe, and which did alwaies forbid the prosecution of any enterprise in hand) caused them to retire: the second yeere, all the Townes of the Eleans did hastily re∣uolt, and the Citie it selfe was driuen to submission; consenting both to suffer their old subiects freely to enioy their libertie, and to haue her owne walls throwne downe. Only the Presidentship of the Olympian games was left vnto them, which, it was not to be doubted that they would in time comming vse modestly, finding themselues to stand at the mercy of Sparta. In this expedition all the Greekes were assistant to the Lacedaemonians, excepting the Corinthians and Boeotians, whose aide hauing been of as much importance in the late Peloponnesian Warre, as the force of Sparta it selfe, they could not smoother their dislike of their vnequall diuision fol∣lowing the victorie; which gaue to Sparta the command of al Greece; to Thebes, and Corinth, only Athens, but such a securitie as was worse than the danger. For when the equall greatnesse of two Estates did counterpoise each the other, it was in the power of these Neutral Common-weales to adhere to either, as the condition of their affaires required; but when to reuenge iniuries, they had by mortall hatred prosecuted the warre to extremitie, leauing the one Ci∣tie naked of power and friends, the other mightily encreased in both, it was then (if not necessarie to obey the greatnesse which themselues had made yet) foolish and dangerous to prouoke it. Neuerthelesse, it was not the purpose of the Spartans to take occasion of any quarrell, which they could not finish at pleasure, till such time as they had by victorie or composition made some good end with the Persian, to∣ward whom they bent all their care and forces. §. IIII. The passage of AGESILAVS Asia. His warre with TISSAPHERNES. How TISSAPHERNES was put to death, and the warre diuerted into an∣other Prouince, through perswasion and gifts of TITHRAVSTES his successor. How carlesse the Persian Lieutenants were of the Kings good. AGESILAVS newly made king of Sparta, was to haue the ho∣nour of the victory, which not without cause, he expected vpon those of Asia; and therefore procuring a great Armie to ioyne with that of Dercyllidas, he tooke his way in great pompe to Aulis in Boeotia, a Ha∣uen, lying opposite to the Iland of Euboea, in which place Agamemnon (leading the power of all Greece to the warre against Troy, many Ages before) had embarked his men. In imitation of Agamemnon hee meant also to do sacrifice in Aulis, which the Thebans, Lords of that Countrie, would not permit, but saying that the performance of such ceremonies in that place, belonged vnto their Officers, they were so vnable to conceale their malice, that sending some Companies of horse, they threw downe his sacrifice from the Altar. It was not then conuenient time for Agesilaus to entangle himselfe and his Countrie in any new warre; there∣fore waiting better opportunitie of reuenge, he quietly swallowed the contumelie, and followed his maine intendment. Hauing landed his men at Ephesus, he was en∣tertained by Tissaphernes with a Treatie of peace, wherein Agesilaus peremptorily requiring that the Persian should restore to liberty all the Greek Townes in Asia, was promised that the King, being first informed to his demand, should send answere to his good liking, if he would in the meane while make truce. Truce was therfore made, which Tissaphernes had sought, onely to winne time of making prouision for the warre, and getting supply of men and money from Artaxerxes; whilest was busie in setling the Estates of his confederate Cities on that side of the Sea. The end of this long vacation from warre was at the comming down of these for∣ces which Artaxerxes had sent: at what time Agesilaus receiued a plain message from Tissaphernes, that either he must forth-with depart out of Asia, or make good his aboade by strong hand. Agesilaus returning word, that hee was glad to heare that his enemies had by periurie vengeance from Heauen, prepared to inuade them; and sending word to all the Townes which lay betweene him, and Caria, that they should prouide victuals and other necessaries for his Armie, did easily make Tissaphernes beleeue, that his intent was to inuade that Prouince wherein Tis∣saphernes dwelt, and which was vnfit for Horse, in which part of his forces the had most confidence. Therefore Tissaphernes bestowing all his Companies of foot in Caria, entred with his horse into the plaines of Maeander, hoping thereby to stoppe the passage of a heauie foot-Armie, not suffering them to passe into that Countrie which was fittest for their seruice. But the Greekes left him waiting there in vaine, and marched directly into Phrygia, where they tooke great spoile without resistance, till such time as the Horse men of Pharnabazus met him, who in a small skirmish hauing the better of the Greekes, were the occasion that Agesilaus returned to Ephesus. Although in this last fight onely twelue men were lost, yet Agesilaus perceiuing by that triall how hard it would be to preuaile, and hold the masterie of the field, without a greater strength of Horse, tooke all possible care to encrease that part of his forces. By which meanes hauing enabled himselfe, whilest win∣ter lasted hee entred vpon the Countrie of Tissaphernes, as soone as the season of the yeere would permit, and not onely tooke a great bootie, but finding the Horse-men of Tissaphernes in the plaine of Maeander, without assistance of their infanterie, hee gaue them battaile, and had a great victorie, taking their Campe in which hee found great riches. The blame of this losse fell heauie vpon Tissaphernes, who either vpon cowardise had absented himselfe from the battaile, or following some other businesse, was then at Sardes. For which cause his Master hauing him in distrust, and thinking that peace might be the sooner had, which he much desired, if the man, so odious to the whole Nation of the Greekes, were taken out of the way, he sent into those parts Tithraustes a Persian, to cut off the head of Tissaphernes, and succeede him in the gouernment. Such was the end of this base and cowardly Politician, who little caring to offend Heauen, when by periurie he could aduance his purposes on Earth, failed at the last through too much ouer-wee∣ning of his owne wisdome, euen in that part of cunning, wherein he thought him∣selfe most perfect; for supposing, that by his great skill in subtile negotiation hee should one way or other circumuent the Greekes, and make them weary of Asia; he did not seeke to finish the warre, and according to his Masters wish, bring all things speedily to quiet, but rather to temporize, till he might finde some opportunitie of making such end as best might stand with the Kings honour and his own. Wherein it seemes that he much mistooke his Princes disposition, who though he had highly rewarded him for the aide which he did bring in his time of danger, yet would hee much more gladly haue taken it, if he could haue found such meanes whereby the danger it sefe might haue beene auoided: as not louing to haue warre, whilest by a∣ny conditions (honourable or not) he might obtaine peace. And this appeared well by the course which Tithraustes tooke at his first possession of the low-Countries. For he sent Embassadours to Agesilaus, in very friendly sort, letting him know, that the man who had beene Author of the warre, was now taken out of the way; and that it was the Kings pleasure to let the Greekes enjoy their owne lawes and libertie, vpon condition, that they should pay him the tribute accustomed, and the Armie be forthwith dismissed. The answere to this proposition, was by Agesilaus refer∣red to the Councell of Sparta; in the meane season he was content to transferre the warre into the Prouince of Pharnabazus, at the request of Tithraustes, who bought his departure with thirtie Talents. This was a strange manner of Warre, both on the offensiue and on the defen∣siue part. For Agesilaus hauing entertained great of vanquishing the great King, was contented to forbeare his seuerall Prouinces, at the entreatie of the Lieu∣tenants: and those Lieutenants being emploied by the King to maintaine his E∣states against all enemies (wherein if they failed, they knew that their heads might easily bee taken from their shoulders) were little offended at any losse that fell on their next Neighbour-Prouinces, which were subiect likewise to the same Crowne of Persia, so long as their own gouernement could be preserued free from waste and danger. The cause of this disorder on the Persian side, I can ascribe to nothing so deseruedly, as to the corrupted estate of the Court, wherein Eunuches, Concubines, and Ministers of pleasure, were able by partiall construction to countenance, or dis∣grace, the actions of such as had the managing of things abroade; and to that foo∣lish manner of the Kings (which was so vsuall that it might be called a rule) to re∣ward or punish the Prouinciall Gouernour, according to the benefit or losse, which the Countrie giuen in charge vnto each of them receiued, during the time of his rule. Whereby it came to passe, that as euery one was desirous to make his owne Territorie yeeld a large increase to the Kings treasure; so no man was carefull to assist his borderers, if losse or danger might thereby grow to himselfe and his; but sate still as an idle beholder, when perhaps by joyning their forces, it had not beene vneasie to recompence the spoile of one Countrie, by conquering another, or de∣fending a third from farre greater miseries. §. V. The Warre and Treatie betweene AGESILAVS and PHARNABAZVS. AGESILAVS hauing thus compounded with Tithraustes, entred Phry∣gia, burning and wasting the Countrie without resistance. Hee tooke the Palace of Pharnabazus, and by his Lieutenant draue him out of his Campe. These actions, together with his honourable behauiour, which added much to their lustre, were more glorious then profita∣ble. For he did not winne Cities and Places of strength, which might haue encrea∣sed his power, and giuen assurance to the rest of his proceedings: but purchased fame and high reputation, by which he drew vnto him some that were disontented and stood vpon bad termes with the great King, whom he lost againe as easily, by meanes of some slight iniurie done to them by his vnder-Captaines. Pharnabazus did not himselfe in any Towne for feare of being besieged, but kept the field, lying as neere as he could safely to the enemies, with whom it was not his pur∣pose to fight, but to make some good end by composition, which he found not to doe. For the pleasures, by him formerly done to the State of Sparta, in the times of their most necessitie, had beene so great, that when hee (obtaining ) did set before their his bountie towards them, and his loue (which had beene such, that besides many other hazards of his person, he had for the rescue of their fleet when it was driuen to runne a-shore at Abydus, aduentured to ride into the as farre as he could finde any ground, and fight on horse-backe against the ) together with his faith which had neuer beene violated in word or deede: they knew not how to excuse their ingratiude, otherwise then by telling him, That hauing warre with his Master, they were inforced, against their will, to offend him. Agesilaus did make a faire offer to him, that if he would reuolt from the King to them; they would maintaine him against the Persian, and establish him free Prince of the Countrie wherein hee was at that time onely Deputie to Artaxerxes. But Pharnabazus told him plainely, That if the King his Master did put him in trust to make warre against them, he would not faile to doe the best that he could as their enemie; if the charge were taken out of his hand, and he commanded to obey an other, he would then shift side, and betake himselfe to their alliance. The issue of this parlie was, That the should no longer abide in Pbrygia, nor againe re∣turne into it, whilest emploiment could be found elsewhere. The excuse made by , and the withdrawing of his forces out of those parts, were not sufficient to appease Pharnabazus, whom he had not inuaded for want of more necessarie bu∣sinesse elsewhere; but because his Countrie would yeeld great bootie; and for the hire of thirtie Talents. By this meanes the Lacedaemonians changed an honourable Friend into a hot Enemie, who afterwards their vnthankefulnesse with full reuenge. §. VI. The great commotions raised in Greece by the Thebans and others, that were with gold from the Persian. IN the meane while Tithraustes, perceiuing that Agesilaus meant no∣thing lesse then to returne into Greece, and let Artaxerxes rest quietly in Asia, tooke a wise course whereby the Citie of Sparta was not only driuen to looke to her owne, and giue ouer her great hopes of subuer∣ting the Empire, but was beaten out of all that had beene gotten by many late victories, and saw her Dominion restrained vnto the narrow bounds of her owne Territorie. Hee sent into Greece fiftie talents of siluer, to be imployed in raising warre against the Lacedaemonians; which treasure was, by the subtile practice of him that was put in trust with it, in such wise dispersed, among the principall men of the Thebans, Argiues, & , that all those Estates hauing formerly borne secret hate to that of Sparta, were now of nothing so much as of open war. And lest this great heate of the incensed multitude should, for want of present , begin to faint, and vanish away in idle wordes, occasion was found out to thrust the Lacedaemonians into Armes, that they themselues might seeme Authours of the quarrell. Some land there was in the tenure of the Locrians, to which the Thebans had in former time laid claime; but the Phocians either hauing the better title, or finding the greater fauour, had it adjudged vnto them, and receiued yeerly money for it. This money the Locrians were either hired or perswaded to pay now to the Thebans, who readily accepted it. The Phocians not meaning so to lose their Rent, made a distresse by strong hand, recouering a great deale more than their owne; which the Thebans (as in protection of their new Tenants) requited with an inuasion made vpon Phocis, wasting that Countrie in the manner of open warre. Such were the beginnings of professed hostilitie betweene Thebes and Sparta, and the first breaking out of their close enmitie, that had long time, though hardly, been concealed. For when the Phocian Embassadours came to Sparta, complaining of the violence done by the Thebans, and requesting succour, they had very fauourable au∣dience, and readie consent to their suite; it being the manner of the Lacedaemonians, to deferre the acknowledgement of injuries receiued, vntil occasion of reuenge were offered, and then to discouer their indignation in cold bloud. At this time they had very good opportunitie to worke their owne wills, hauing no other war to disturbe them in Greece, and hearing out of Asia no newes, that could offend or trouble them. Wherefore they Lysander to raise all the Countries about , and with such forces as he could leauie, to attend the comming of Pausanias King of Sparta (for Sparta, as hath beene shewed before, had two Kings) who should follow him with the strength of Peloponnesus. Lysander did as he was appointed, and being of great reputation in those parts, he drew the Orchomenians to reuolt from Thebes. Pausanias likewise raised all Peloponnesus, except the Corinthians, (who refused to assist him in that enterprise) meaning to joine with Lysander, and make a speedie end of the war. The consideration of so great a danger, approching so swiftly, caused the Thebans to what helpe they could abroade, forasmuch as their owne strength was farre too little to make resistance against such mightie preparations. It was not vnknown to them, that many followers of the Lacedaemonians were otherwise affected in heart than they durst vtter in countenance; but the good wishes of such people were little auaileable, considering that the most which could be expected from them, was, that they should doe as little hurt as they could: by which manner of tergiuersation, the Corinthians did at that present cast themselues into the displeasure of the Spartans, to the no great benefit of Thebes. Wherefore it was thought the safest course, to pro∣cure the assistance of some Estate that might presently declare it selfe on their side, which would cause many others to follow the example, & make their partie strong. To this end they sent Embassadours to Athens, excusing old offences, as either not committed by publike allowance, or done in time of the generall warre, and recom∣penced with friendship lately shewne in their refusall of assisting Pausanias, when he came in behalfe of the thirtie Tyrants, against the good Citizens of Athens. In re∣gard of which, and for their owne Honour sake, they requested them of aide in the present warre, offering to doe the best that they could for the restoring of Athens to her former Estate and Dignitie. Thrasybulus and his Friends, who persecuted by the thirtie, had been well entertained at Thebes, procured now the Citie to make a large requitall of the which they had receiued. For it was decreed, that the State of Athens should not only refuse to aide the Lacedaemonians in this Warre; but that it should assist the Thebans, and engage it selfe in their cause. Whilest Pausanias lay still, waiting the arriuall of his Confederates; Lysander being desirous to doe some∣what that might aduance the businesse in hand, came to Haliartus, where, though Pausanias did not meet him, as had beene appointed, yet he attempted the Towne, and was slaine in fight by the Thebans, who came hastily to the rescue. As this vi∣ctorie did encourage the Thebans, so the comming of Pausanias with his great Army did againe amaze them, with presentation of extreme danger; but their spirits were soone reuiued by the strong succour which was brought from Athens, in considera∣tion of which, and of the late battaile, Pausanias durst not hazard a new fight with them, but receiuing the bodies of those that were slaine, by composition, departed out of their Territorie, for which, either cowardise or indiscretion, he was at his re∣turne to Sparta condemned as a Traitour, and driuen to flie into Tegea, where hee ended his daies in banishment. §. VII. How AGESILAVS was called out of Asia to helpe his Countrie. A victorie of the Spartans. CONON the Athenian, assisted by PHARNABAZVS, ouercomes the Lacedaemonian fleet; recouers the of the Seas; and rebuilds the walls of Athens. THis good successe, and the confederacie made with Athens, gaue such reputation to the Thebans, that the Argiues, Corinthians, Euboeans, Lo∣crians, and Acarnanes, did forth with side with them, & raising a strong Armie, determined to giue battaile to the Lacedaemonians as as they might, to their owne dores; Considering that the force of Spar∣ta it selfe was not great, but grew more and more by the adiunction of their Confe∣derates. The Magistrates of Sparta perceiuing the danger, sent for Agesilaus, who readily obeied them, and promising his friends in Asia to returne speedily to their assistance, passed the Straights of Hellespont into Europe. In the meane time the Ci∣ties of the new league had giuen battaile to the Lacedaemonians, and the remainder of their Associates, but with il successe. For when the right-wing of each part had got∣ten the better hand, the Argiues and Thebans returning from the chase in some disor∣der were broken and defeated by the Lacedaemonians, who meeting them in good order, wonne from them the Honour which they had gotten, by forcing the left wing of the Lacedaemonians, and made the victorie of that day entirely their owne. The report of this battaile meeting Agesilaus at Amphibolis, were by him sent ouer into Asia, where it is not likely that they brought much comfort vnto his friend, who had since his departure seene the Spartan fleet beaten, and Lysander the Admi∣rall slaine. The same man, whose endeuour had brought the Athenians into order, by aduancing the Sea-forces of the Lacedaemonians with money, and all manner of supplies, was now the occasion that the power of Athens grew strong at Sea, when the Citie was despoiled of her old reputation, and scarsly able to mainetaine an Ar∣mie by Land for her owne defence. Pharnabazus considering how much it impor∣ted the King his Master, to haue the Greeks diuided into such factions, as might vt∣terly disable them from vndertaking abroad, thought it the safest way for himselfe, during these broiles, to take such order, that he should not need any more, to seeke peace by entreatie and commoration of old benefits, at their hands, who vn-pro∣uoked had sold his loue for thirtie Talents. To which purpose he furnished Conon the Athenian with eight ships, who had escaped, when the fleet of Athens was sur∣prised by Lysander at Aegos-Potamos; giuing him the command of a great Nauie, where with he requited the losse receiued at Aegos-Potamos, by repaying the Lace∣daemonians with the like destruction of their fleet at Cnidus. After this victorie Conon sailed to Athens, bringing with him, partly as the liberalitie of Pharnabazus, partly as the fruit of his victorie, so strong a Nauie, and so much gold, as encouraged the Athenians to rebuild their walls, and thinke more hopefully vpon recouering the Signiorie which they had lost. §. VIII. Of sundrie small victories gotten on each part. The Lacedaemonians lose all in Asia; The Athenians recouer some part of their old Dominion. NEuerthelesse the Lacedaemonians, by many victories at Land, maintai∣ned for some yeeres the honour of their estate, endangered very greatly by this losse at Sea. For Agesilaus obtained the better with his horse-men from the Thessalians, who were accounted the best riders in Greece: He wasted Boeotia, and fought a great battaile at Coronea a∣gainst the Thebans, and their Allies, whome he ouerthrew; and by his Marshall Gylis forraged the Countrie of Locris: which done, he returned home. The gaine of these victories was not great, & the reputation of was, by ma∣ny losses, much defaced. For the Thebans did in the battailes of Coronea vanquish the Orchomenians, who stood opposite vnto them, and retired vnbroken to Mount Helicon, opening way perforce when Agesilaus charged them in the returne from the pursuit. Likewise Gylis was slaine with a great part of his Armie by the Locrians, and some other exploits by the Lacedaemonians performed against the Corinthians, were repayed with equall damage receiued in the parts adioyning; many Townes being easily taken, and as easily recouered. The varietie of which enter-feates was such, that the Thebans themselues were drawne, by the losse of the hauen of Corinth, to sue for peace, but could not get audience, till such time as the newes came of a great victorie obtained by Iphicrates, Generall of the Athenian- forces at Lechaeum; whereupon the Theban Embassadours being sent for, and willed to doe their mes∣sage, required only in scorne, to haue a safe conduct giuen them, that they might enter into Corinth. From this time forward the Warre was made for a while only by incursions, wherin the Achaeans, confederates of Sparta, felt most losse, their whole state being endangered by the Acarnanians, who held with the contrarie side, vntill Agesilaus repaied these inuaders with equall, or greater calamities, brought vpon their owne Lands, which did so afflict the Acarnanes, that they were driuen to sue for peace. But the affaires at Sea were of most consequence, vpon which the suc∣cesse of all depended. For when the Townes of Asia , that the Lacedaemo∣nians were not only intangled in an hard war at home, but almost disabled to passe the Seas, hauing lost their fleet at Cnidus; they soone gaue eare to Pharnabazus, who promised to allow that they should vsed their own lawes, if they would expell the Spartan Gouernours. Onely the Citie of Abidus did stand firme, wherein Dercyl∣lidas lay, who did his best to containe all the Townes about Hellespont, in the alli∣ance of the Lacedaemonians; which he could not doe, because the Athenian fleet vn∣der Thrasybulus tooke in Byzantium, Chalcedon, and other places thereabout, redu∣cing the Ile of Lesbos to their ancient acknowledgement of Athens. §. IX. The base conditions offered vnto the Persian by the Lacedaemonians. Of sundrie fights and other passages in the warre. The peace of ANTALCIDAS. ABout this time the Spartans beganne to perceiue how vneasie a thing it would bee, to maintaine the warre against men as good as themselues, assisted with the treasures of Persia: wherefore they craued peace of Artaxerxes, most basely offering, not only to renounce the Greekes in∣habiting Asia, & to leaue them to the Kings disposition, but withall to set the Ilan∣ders, and Towne in Greece, as well the little as the great, at full and absolute libertic whereby they said that all the principal Estates of their Countrie would so be weakened, that no one, nor all of them should be able to stirre against the great King. And sure it was, that the power of the Countrie being so broken, and rent into many small pieces, could neither haue the Persian, by an offensiue warre, nor haue made any good defence against him, but would haue left it easie for him in continuance of time, to haue taken the Cities one after another, till he had made himselfe Master of all. The Spartans were not ignorant of this, but were so carried with enuie, that perceiuing how the dominion of the Seas was like to re∣turne to Athens, they chose rather to giue all from themselues and others, and make all a-like weake; than to permit that any of their owne Nation should grow stron∣ger than themselues, who so lately had commanded all. Yet this great offer was not at the first accepted, both in regard that the other Estates of Greece, who had in the Kings behalfe ioyned together against the , did by their seuerall Em∣bassadours oppose themselues vnto it, and for that it was thought safest for Ar∣taxerxes, rather to weaken the yet more, than by interposing himself to bring friends and foes on the suddaine to an equalitie. Especially Struthas, whom Artaxerxes did send as his Lieutenant into the low-Countries, did seeke to repay the harme done by in those parts: which his intent appearing plaine, and all hope of the peace being thereby cut off; Thimbro was sent into Asia to make war vpon Struthas; and others were appointed to other places, whereby the warre, be∣ing scattered about, all the Iles and Townes on the firme Land grew almost to the manner of piracie and robberie, affording many skirmishes, but few great actions worthie of remembrance. Thimbro was slaine by Struthas, and in his place Diphri∣das was sent who demeaned him selfe more warily. Dircyllidas was remoued from his charge at Abydus, because he had not impeached Thrasybulus in his enterprises a∣bout Hellespont; Anaxibius, who succeeded him, was surprised and slaine in a skir∣mish by Iphierates the Athenian. Thrasybulus, departing from Lesbos toward Rhodes, was slaine by the way at Aspendus. The Citie of Rhodes had long before ioined with the , who erected there (as was their manner) an Aristocratie, or the Gouernment of a few the principall Citizens, where as contrariwise the Athe∣nians were accustomed to put the Soueraignetie into the hands of the people, each of them seeking to assure themselues, by erecting in the Townes of their Confede∣rates a Gouernment like vnto their owne: which doing (where more especiall cause did not hinder) caused the Nobilitie to fauour Sparta, and the Commons to encline to Athens. The people of Aegina roued vpon the coast of Attica, which caused the Athenians to land an Armie in Aegina, and besiege their towne: but this siege be∣ing raised by the assistance of the fleet, the Ilanders beganne a-new to molest Attica, which caused the Athenians to man their ships againe, that returned beaten, hauing lost foure of thirteene. The losse of these ships was soone recom∣pensed by a victory which Chabrias the Athenian General had in Aegina, whereup∣on the Ilanders were faine to keepe home, and leaue to the Athenians the Seas free. It may well seeme strange that the Citie of Athens, hauing but newly raised her walls; hauing not by any fortunate and important battaile secured her estate from dangers by land; but onely depending vpon the assistance of such Confederates, as carried vnto different ends, had often discouered themselues irresolute in the com∣mon cause; would send a fleet and an Armie to Cyprus, in defence of Euagoras, when the mastry of the Seas, was so ill assured, that an Iland lying in the of , had abilitie to vexe the coast of Attica. But as the ouer-weaning of that Citie did cause it vsually to embrace more then it could compasse; so the insolencie and shamelesse iniustice of the people, had now bred in the chiefe Commanders, a desire to keepe themselues farre out of sight, and to seeke emploiments at such distance as might se∣cure them from the eies of the enuious, and from publike iudgements, out of which few or none escaped. For which cause Timotheus did passe away much part of his time in the Isle of Lesbos; Iphicrates in Thrace; and Chabrias now did carrie away in∣to Cyprus a greater force than his Countrie well could haue spared, with which he returned not when the businesse in Cyprus came to an end, but sought new aduen∣tures in Aegypt, whereby arose neither thankes to himselfe, nor profit to his Citie, though honour both to him and it. The Athenians being thus carelesse of things at hand, had a notable blow giuen vnto them, shortly after that Chabrias was gone to Cyprus, euen within their owne Hauen. For Teleutias, a Lacedaemonian, being made Gouernour of Aegina, conceiued a strong hope of surprising the Nauie of Athens, as it lay in Piraeus; thinking a-right that it was an harder matter to encounter with ten ships prepared for the fight, than with twentie lying in harbour, whose Mari∣ners were asleepe in their Cabbins, or drinking in Tauernes. Wherefore he failed by night vnto the mouth of the Port, which entring at the breake of day, hee found (according to his expectation) most of the men on shore, & few or none left aboord to make resistance: by which meanes hee tooke many ships laden with marchan∣dizes, many fisher-men, passengers, and other Vessels, also three or foure Gallies, hauing sunke or broken, and made vnseruiccable, as many of the rest as the time would suffer. About this time Pharnabazus, the Lieutenant of Phrygia, had one of the Kings Daughters giuen to him in marriage, with whom hee liued about the Court; and many Officers that fauoured the Lacedaemonians were placed in the lower Asia; by whose assistance, the fleet of Sparta grew victorious about Hellespont; in such wise, that perhaps they should not haue needed the peace, which they themselues procured by Antalcidas, from the great King, the conditions whereof were such as are mentioned before, giuing freedome to all the Cities of Greece, and diuiding the Countrie into as many seuerall States as there were pettie Boroughs in it. Thus Artaxerxes hauing bought his owne peace with money, did likewise by his money become arbitrator & decider of Controuersies betweene the Greekes, disposing of their businesse in such wise as stood best with his owne good. The of Artaxerxes his decree was, That all Asia and Cyprus should be his owne; the Iles of Lemnos, Imbrus, and Scirus be subject to Athens; all other Greeke Townes, as well the little as the great, be set at libertie; and that whosoeuer should refuse this peace, vpon them the approuers of it should make warre, the King assisting them by Land and Sea, with men, and ships, and treasure. The Athenians were so discoura∣ged by their losses at Sea; the Lacedaemonians by reuolt of their Confederates, and the necessitie of maintaining many Garrisons, for which they wanted money; and other States by the miseries of the warre, whereof they saw no end; that all (excep∣ting the Thebans ) did consent vnto these Articles. This was called the peace of An∣talcidas: whereof the Lacedaemonians taking vpon themselues the execution, did not only compell the Argiues to depart out of Corinth (which vnder pretence of defen∣ding they held by Garrisons, lately thrust into it, not as Patrons, but as Lords) and the Thebans to leaue Boeotia free, of which Prouince Thebes had alwaies held the go∣uernment: the Thebans themselues being also comprehended vnder the name of the Boeotians; but caused the Mantinaeans to throw downe their owne Citie, and to dwell in Villages: alleaging that they had formerly beene accustomed so to doe, though purposing indcede to chastise them, as hauing beene ill affected to Sparta in the late Warre. By these courses the Lacedaemonians did hope that all the small Townes in Greece would, when occasion should require it, willingly follow them in their warres, as Authors of their libertie; and that the great Cities hauing lost all their dependants, would be vnable to make opposition. §. X. The wrare which the Lacedaemonians made vpon Olynthus. They take Thebes by treason; and Olynthus by famine. WHilest these warres, which ended without either victorie or profit, consumed the riches and power of Greece, the Citie of Olynthus in Thrace was growne so mighty, that shee did not only command her Neighbour-Townes, but was become terrible to places farre remo∣ued, and to Sparta it selfe. Great part of Macedonia, together with Pella, the principall Citie of that Kingdome, was taken by the Olynthans, who fol∣lowing the vsuall pretence of the Lacedaemonians, to set at libertie the places ouer which King Amyntas did tyrannize, had almost now driuen him out of his Domi∣nions, and taken all to themselues. The Citizens of Acanthus and of Apollonia, be∣ing neerest vnto the danger of these incroching neighbours, acquainted the Lacedae∣monians with their feare, affirming that this Dominion of the Olynthians would bee too strong for al Greece, if some continuance of time should giue it reputation, which only it wanted, wherefore they requested assistance, but in such termes as did sound of compulsion; protesting that either they must warre vpon Olynthus, or become subject vnto her, and fight in her defence. Hecreupon was made a hastie leauie of men, two thousand being presently sent a way with promise to bee seconded by a greater Armie. Whilest these two thousand gaue such beginning to the warre, as agreed with their small number, the body of the Armie following them, surprised the Cittadell of Thebes, which was betraied into the hands of Phoebidas the Lacedoe∣monian, by some of the Magistrates, who sought to strengthen their faction by the slauerie of their Countrie. The Thebans were ill affected to Sparta, but had not in any one point violated the peace lately made betweene them; which caused the Lacedaemonians to doubt whether this act of Phoebidas were more worthy of reward or of punishment; In conclusion, profit so farre ouer weighed honestie, that the deede was approued, many principall Citizens of Thebes condemned to death, ma∣ny driuen into banishment, and the Traitors rewarded with the gouernement of the Citie: by whose authoritie, and the force of the Garrison, the Thebans were com∣pelled to serue the Lacedaemonians, in all, and more than all that they could require. This accesse of power hauing strengthned the Lacedaemonians, caused them to enter∣taine the greater forces about Olynthus, which (notwithstanding the losse of one great battaile, and some other disasters) they compelled at length by famine to ren∣der itselfe to their obedience. §. XI. How the Thebans recouered their libertie, driuing out the Lace∣daemonian Garrison. AFter this Olynthian Warre, which endured almost three yeeres, it see∣med that no Estate in Greece was able to make head against that of Sparta: but it was not long ere the Thebans found meanes to shake off their yoke, and gaue both example and meanes to others to doe the like. One of the banished men found by conference with a Scribe of the Theban Magistrates, comming to Athens, that the tyrannie wherewith his Countrie was oppressed, pleased him no better than it did those who for feare of it were fled from home. Whereupon a plot was layd betweene these two, that soone found very good successe, being managed thus. Seuen of the banished men forsooke Athens priuily, and entred by night into the fields of Thebes; where spending the next day secretly, they came late in the euening to the Gates like husband-men re∣turned from worke, and so passed vndiscouered vnto the house of Charon, whom Phyllidas the Scribe had drawne into the . The day following, a solemne feast being then held in the Citie, Phyllidas promised the Gouernours, who were in∣solent and lustfull men, that hee would conueigh vnto them that night the most beautifull Dames of the Towne, with whom they should take their pleasure. Ha∣uing cheared them with such hope, and plentie of good wine, hee told them when the time of performance (which they vrged) came, that hee could not make good his promise, vnlesse they would their followers, because the Gentlewomen, who attended withour a Chamber, would not endure, that any of the seruants should see their faces. Vpon this occasion the attendants were dismissed, and the Conspirators, attired like Ladies and their Maides, brought into the place; who ta∣king aduantage of the Gouernours loose behauiour, slew them al vpon the sodaine with Daggers, which they brought hidden vnder their garments. Then presently casting off their disguise, they went to other places, where faining themselues to come to the Gouernours vpon businesse, they got admittance, and slew those which were of the Lacedaemonian faction. By the like deuice they brake into the prison; slew the Gaoler; and set at libertie such as they thought , and being followed by these desperate men, proclaimed libertie, making the death of the Tyrants known. The Captaine of the Castle hearing the Proclamation, thought the Rebels to bee stronger than indeed they were: the Citizens contrariwise mistrusted, that it was a practice to discouer such, as would be forward vpon occasion of reuolting. But as soone as day-light reuealed the plaine truth, all the people tooke armes & besseged the Castle, sending hastily to Athens for succour. The Garrison also sent for aide vnto the Townes adioyning, whence a few broken troupes comming to the rescne, were defeated on the way by the horse-men of Thebes. On the other side the ba∣nished Thebans did not only make speede to assist their Countrimen, but procured some Athenians to joyne with them, and thereby came so strong into the Citie, that the Castle was yeelded, more through feare than any necessitie, vpon cōdition that the Souldiers might quietly depart with their Armes; for which composition the Captaine at his returne to Sparta was put to death. When the newes of the doings at Thebes, and the successe arriued at Sparta, an Armie was raised forth with, and all things prepared as earnestly for the recouering of that Citie, as if some part of their ancient inheritance had beene taken from the Lacedaemonians, and not a Towne per∣fidiously vsurped by them, restored to her owne libertie, Cleombrotus, one of the Kings, was sent on this expedition, who hauing wearied his followers, with a toile∣some Winters journey, returned home without any good or harme done; leauing Sphodrias, with part of his Armie, at Thespies, to infest the Thebans; who doing them some displeasures, made large amends by a foolish attempt vpon the Hauen of Athens, which failing to take, hee wasted the Countrie adjoyning, and draue away Cattaile, causing by this outrage the Athenians to enter with all their power into the Warre, out of which they were before very carefully seeking how to with-draw them∣selues. CHAP. XII. Of the flourishing estate of Thebes, from the battaile of Leuctra to the battaile of . §. I. How Thebes and Athenr ioyned together against Sparta. How the Athenians made peace for themselues, and others, out of which the Thebans were exclu∣ded. The battaile of Leuctra, and beginning of the Theban greatnesse. THE Lacedaemonians were men of great resolution, and of much grauitie in all their proceedings, but one dis∣honorable rule they held, That all respects with stan∣ding the commoditie of Sparta were to be neglected; the practice of which doctrine, euen by the best and wisest of them, did greatly blemish that Estate, but when it was put in execution by insufficient ouer∣weening men, it seldome failed to bring vpon them in stead of profit vnjustly expected, both shame & losse. And so it befel them in these enterprises of Phoebidas, vpon the Castle of Thebes, and Sphodrias vpon the Pi∣raeus. For howsoeuer Agesilaus did spoile the Countrie about Thebes, in which hee spent two Summers, yet the diligence of the Thebans repaired all, who by the good successe of some attempts, grew stronger than they were at the first. The Athenians likewise beganne to looke abroade, sailing to the Ile of Corcyra, where they ordered things at their pleasure, and hauing in some fights at Sea pre∣uailed, began as in the Peloponnesian warre, to surround Peloponnesus with a Nauie; afflicting so the Lacedaemonians, that had not the Thebans by their insolencie wearied their friends, and caused them to seeke for peace, it beene very likely that the end of this warre, should haue soone come to a good end, which neuerthelesse, be∣ing prosequuted by the Thebans (who opposed at once both these two great Estates) left the City of Sparta as much dejected as the beginning found it proud and tyran∣nous. But the Athenians perceiuing how Thebes encroched euery day vpon her weake Neighbours, not sparing such as had beene dependants vpon Athens, and fin∣ding themselues, whilest engaged in such a warre, vnable to their complai∣ning friends, resolued to settle the affaires of , by renewing that for me of peace which Antalcidas had brought from the Persian. Wherefore they sent Messengers to Thebes, peremptorily signifying, That it was their intent to finish the Warre; to which purpose they willed the Thebans to send Embassadours along with them to Sparta; who readily condescended, fearing otherwise that they should be left out of the of peace, which came to passe, being so wrought by the couragious wis∣dome of Epaminondas, who vnderstood farre better than his Countrimen, what was to be feared or hoped. In this Treatie the Lacedaemonians and Athenians did soone ; but when the Thebans offered to sweare to the Articles in the name of the Boeotians; Agesilaus required them to sweare in their owne name, and to leaue the Boeotians free, whom they had lately reduced vnder their obedience. Whereunto Epaminondas made answere, That the Citie of Sparta should giue example to Thebes by setting the Laconians free; for that the Signorie of Boeotia did by as good right ap∣pertaine to the Thebans, as that of Laconia to the Spartans. This was well and truly spoken; but was heard with no patience: For Agesilaus bearing a vehement hatred vnto those of Thebes, by whom he was drawne back out of Asia into Greece, & disap∣pointed of all the glory which he had hoped to atchieue by the Persian Warre, did now very passionately vrge that point of setting the Boeotians at libertie, and finding it as obstinately refused, he dasht the name of the Thebans out of the league. At the time Cleombrotus the other King of Sparta lay in Phocis, who receiued com∣mand from the Gouernours of Sparta forthwith to enter vpon the Land of the The∣bans with all his power, which he did, and was there slaine at Leuctra, and with him the flowre of his Armie. This battaile of Leuctra being one of the most famous that euer were fought betweene the Greekes, was not so notable for any circumstance foregoing it, or for the managing of the fight it selfe, as for the death of the King, and many Citizens of Sparta, but especially, for that after this battaile (betweene which and the conclusion of the generall peace there passed but twentie daies) the Lacedaemonians were neuer able to recouer the strength and reputation which had formerly made them redoubted farre and neere; whereas contrariwise the Thebans, whose greatest ambition had in former times confined it selfe vnto the little Regi∣on of Boeotia, did now begin to vndertake the leading and command of many Peo∣ple and Estates, in such wise, that soone after they brought an Armie of threescore and ten thousand strong vnto the Gates of Sparta. So much doe the afflictions of an hard warre, valiantly indured, aduance the affaires of the distressed, and guide them into the way of Conquest, by stiffening that resolution with a manly temper, which wealth and ease had through luxurie, rechlessenesse, and many other vices or vani∣ties, made and effeminate. §. II. How the Athenians tooke vpon them to maintaine the peace of Greece. New troubles hence arising. EPAMINONDAS inuadeth and wasteth the Territorie of Lacedaemon. THe Athenians, refusing to take aduantage of this ouerthrow fallen vp∣on their old Enemies, and new Confederates the Lacedaemonians; did neuerthelesse finely giue them to vnderstand, that their Dominion was expired, and therefore their pride might well be laid away. For taking vpon themselues the maintenance of the peace lately concluded, which Agesilaus (perhaps of purpose to make benefit of quarels that mightarise) had left vnperfect, they assembled the Deputies of al the Estates confederated at ; where the generall libertie of all Townes, as well small as great, was ratified, vnder the stile Of the Athenians, and their Associates. Hereupon began fresh garboiles. The Mantinaeans, claiming power by this decree to order their affaires at their owne pleasure, did (as it were) in despight of the Spartans, who had enforced them to raze their towne, reedifie it, & allie themselues with such of the Arcadians as stood worst affected to Sparta. The Arcadians, a strong Nation, consisting of many Cities, were distracted with factions; some desiring to hold good correspondencie with the La∣cedaemonians; some to weaken & keep them low; yet all pretending other ends. The Lacedaemonians durst not giue impeachment to the Mantinaeans; nor take vpon them to correct their ill-willers among the Arcadians, till such time as the factions brake out into violence, and each part called in forraine helpe. Then was an Armie sent from Sparta, as it were in defence of the people of Tegea, against the Mantinaeans, but indeed against them both. Agesilaus had the leading of it, but effected nothing. The Thebans had by this time subdued the Phocians, & were become head of the Locrians, Acarnanians, Euboeans, & many others; with the power of which Countries they en∣tred Feloponnesus in fauor of the , who had, vpon expectatiō of their com∣ming abstained from giuing battaile to Agesilaus. The Armie of the Spartans being dismissed, and Epaminondas joyned with the Arcadians; the Region of vvas inuaded and spoiled: a thing so strange, that no Oracle could haue found beliefe if any had foretold it. Almost sixe hundred yeeres were spent, since the Dorians, vnder the posteritie of Hercules, had seized vpon Laconia, in all which time the sound of an enemies trumpet was not heard in that Countrie: Ten yeeres were not fully past, since all Greece was at the deuotion of the Spartans: but now the Region which nei∣ther Xerxes with his huge Armie could once looke vpon, nor the mightie forces of Athens, and other Enemie-States had dared to set foot on, sauing by stealth, was all on a light fire, the very smoke whereof the women of Sparta were ashamed to be∣hold. All which indignitie notwithstanding, the Lacedaemonians did not issue out of Sparta to fight, but sought how to preserue the Towne, setting at libertie as many of their Heilotes or Slaues as were willing to beare Armes in defence of the State, and somwhat pittifully entreated the Athenians to giue them succour. From Corinth and some Townes of Peloponnesus they receiued speedie assistance; the Athenians came forward more slowly, so that returned without battaile, hauing rebuil∣ded the Citie of Messene, and peopled it a-new by calling home the ancient Inha∣bitants, whom the Lacedaemonians many Ages before had chased away into other Countries, possessing their Territories themselues. §. III. The composition betweene Athens and Sparta for command in warre against the Thebans; who againe inuade and Pelopennesus. The vnfortunate presumption of the Arcadians. THis journie therefore vtterly defaced the reputation of the Spartans, in such wise, that they did no longer demand the conduct of the Ar∣my, which was to be raised, nor any maner of precedence: but sending Embassadors from Sparta, and from all the Cities which held league with it, vnto Athens, they offered to yeeld the Admiraltie to the Athenians, requesting that they themselues might be Generalls by Land. This had beene a composition well agreeing with the situation and qualitie of those two Ci∣ties; but it was rejected, because the Mariners and others that were to be imploied at Sea, were men of no marke or estimation, in regard of those companies of horse and foot whereof the Land-Armie was compounded, who being all Gentlemen or Citizens of Athens, were to haue serued vnder the Lacedaemonians. Wherefore it was agreed that the authority should be diuided by time, the Athenians ruling fiue daies, the Lacedaemonians other fiue, & so successiuely that each of them should haue com∣mand of all, both by Land and by Sea. It is manifest, that in this conclusion vaine ambition was more regarded than the common profit, which must of necessitie be very slowly aduanced, where consultation, resolution, and performance are so often to change hands. This appeared by a second inuasion of Pelopennesus, wherein the Thebans found their enemies so vnable to impeach them, that hauing fortified Isth∣mus from Sea to Sea, as in former times they had done against Xerxes, they were dri∣uen out of their strength by Epaminondas, who forraged the Countrie without resi∣stance. But as the Articles of this league betweene Athens and Sparta did, by diui∣ding the conduct in such manner, disable the societie, and make it insufficient to those ends for which it was concluded; so the example of it wrought their good, by filling the enemies heads with the like vanitie. For the Arcadians considering their owne numbers which they brought into the field, and hauing found by many trials that their people were not inferiour to others in strength of body, in courage, or in good Souldiership, thought it good reason that they should in like maner share the gouernement, with their friends the Thebans; and not alwaies continue followers of others, by encreasing whose greatnes they should strengthen their own yoke. Here∣vpon they began to demeane themselues very insolently, whereby they grew hate∣full to their Neighbours, and suspected of the Thebans in an ill time. For a motion of generall peace hauing been made (which tooke not effect, because the City of Mes∣sene was not abandoned to the Lacedaemonians ) the next enterprise of the Spartans and their friends was vpon these Arcadians, who relying too much vpon their owne worth, were ouerthrowne in a great battaile, their calamitie being as pleasing to their Confederates, as to their Enemies. §. IIII. The great growth of the Theban Estate. Embassages of the Greekes to the Per∣sian; with the reasons why he most fauoured the Thebans. Troubles in the Persian Empire, The fruitlesse issue of the Embassages. THe Thebans especially at the Arcadians misfortune, conside∣ring, that, without aide, the successe of all enterprises proued so ill; whereas they themselues had by their owne power accomplished very well whatsoeuer they tooke in hand, and were become not only victorious ouer the Lacedaemonians, but ouer the Thessalians, and Moderators of the great quarrels that had risen in , where compoun∣ding the differences about that Kingdome, as pleased them best, they carried Philip the Sonne of Amyntas, and Father of Alexander the Great, as an Hostage vnto Thebes. Hauing therefore obtained such reputation, that little wanting to make them absolute Commanders of al Greece, they sought meanes of alliance with the Persian King, to whom they sent Embassadour the great and Captaine , whose reputation drew Artaxerxes to grant vnto the Thebans all that they desired; whereof two especiall points were, That should remaine free from the Lacedaemenians, and that the Athenians should forbeare to send their ships of Warre to Sea; only the later of these two was what qualified with to aduice. The other States of Greece did also send their Embassadours at the same time, of whom few or none receiued much contentment. For the King hauing found by long experience, how farre it concerned him to maintaine a sure partie in Greece, did vpon many waightie considerations resolue, to binde the The∣bans firmely vnto him; iustly expecting, that their greatnesse should bee on that side his owne securitie. The Athenians had beene ancient enemies to his Crowne, and, hauing turned the profit of their victories vpon the Persian to the purchase of a great Estate in Greece, maintained their in such puissant manner, that (sun∣drie grieuous misfortunes notwithstanding) they had endured a terrible warre, wherein the Lacedaemonians being followed by most of the Greeks, and supplied with treasure, and all sorts of aide by Darius Nothus, were not able to vanquish , till their owne indiscretion brought them on their knees. The Lacedaemonians being victorious ouer Athens, had no sooner established their Dominion at home, than they vndertooke the conquest of Asia, from which though, by the commotion rai∣sed in Greece with Persian gold, they were called backe, hauing renewed their power, and settled things in Greece, it was not vnlikely, that they should vpon the next aduantage haue pursued the same enterprise, had not they been empeached by this Theban Warre. But the Thebans contrariwise had alwaies discouered a good affection to the Crowne of Persia. They had sided with Xerxes in his inuasion of Greece; with Darius and the Lacedaemonians against Athens: And finally, hauing offe∣red much contumely to Agesilaus when he put to Sea, they drew him home by ma∣king warre on the Confederates of Sparta. Besides all these their good , they were no Sea-men, and therefore vnlikely to looke abroade; whereunto if per∣chance they should haue any desire, yet were they disabled by the want of good hauen townes, which they could not seize vpon without open breach of that peace, whereof they intended to become the Executors, giuing libertie to all Cities that had at any time been free. Wherefore Artaxerxes did wholly condescend vnto the requests of Pelopidas, as farre forth as he might without giuing open defiance to the rest of Greece; and by that meane he purchased his owne quiet, being neuer after∣ward molested by that Nation in the lower Asia. The ill meanes which the Greeks had to disturbe Artaxerxes, was very beneficiall to the Estate of Persia shortly after these times, in that great rebellion of all the Maritime Prouinces. For had then the affaires of Greece beene so composed, that any one Citie might without empeach∣ment of the rest haue transported an Armie, to the reuolting , or Vice∣roies of Caria, Phrygia, Lydia, Mysia, Lycia, Pisidia, Pamphilia, Cilicia, Syria, and , humane reason can hardly find the meanes, by which the Empire could haue been preserued from that ruine, which the diuine Coūcel had deferred vnto the daies of Alexander. But this great conspiracie of so many large and wealthy Prouinces, wan∣ting a firme bodie of good and hardy Souldiers, was in short space discussed and va∣nished like a mist, without effect: these esfeminate Asiatiques with the trauailes and dangers to warre, forsaking the common cause, and each man striuing to bee the first, that by treason to his company should both redeeme the former treason to his Prince, & purchase withal his own promotion with encrease of riches. Of this commotion, which in course of time followed someactions not as yet related, I haue rather chosen to make short mention in this place, than here∣after to interrupt the Narration of things more important; both for that it was like a suddaine storme, rashly commenced, idlely followed, and foolishly laied downe, hauing made a great noise without effect, and hauing small reference to any other a∣ction regardable; as also because in the whole raigne of Artaxerxes, from the warre of Cyrus, to the of Aegypt, I finde nothing (this insurrection, and a fruitlesse journey against the Cadusians excepted) worthy of any mētion; much lesse of digres∣sion from the course of the businesse in Greece. All, or the most of his time, passed a∣way so quietly, that he enjoied the pleasures which an Empire so great and wealthy could affoord vnto so absolute a Lord, with little disturbance. The troubles which he found were only or chiefly Domesticall; growing out of the hatred which Pary∣satis the Queen-Mother bare vnto his wife Statira, and to such as had bin the grea∣test enemies to her sonne , or gloried in his death: vpon whom, when by poi∣son and mischieuous practices shee had satisfied her feminine appetite of reuenge, thenceforth she wholly applied her selfe to the Kings disposition, cherishing in him the lewd desire of marrying his own Daughter, & filling him with the perswasion, which Princes, not endued with an especiall grace, doe readily entertaine, That his owne will was the supreme law of his subject, and the rule by which all things were to be measured, and adjudged to be good or . In this happinesse Pe∣lopidas, and the other Embassadours of Greece, both found and him, but him by so much more assured than they found him, by how much the cōclusion of his Treatie with them, being altogether to his owne aduantage did seeme to promise, if not the perpetuitie, a long endurance of the same felicity to him and his, or (at the least) a ful security of danger from Greece, whence only could any danger be feared. But such foundations of laied by mortall men in this world, like the Tower of Babel, are either shaken from heauen, or made vaine and vnprofitable, ere the frame can be raised to full heighth, by of tongues among the buil∣ders. Hereof was found a good example in the Thebans, and other Estates of Greece that had sent Embassadours to the Persian. For whereas it had been concluded, that all Townes, as well the little as the great, should be set at libertie, and the Thebans made Protectors of this common peace, who thereby should become the Iudges of all controuersies that might arise, and Leaders in warre of all that would enter into this Confederacy; the Kings letters being solemnely published at Thebes, in the pre∣sence of Embassadours, drawne thither from all parts of Greece; when an oath was required for obseruation of the forme of peace therein set downe, a dilatorie an∣swere was made by the Embassadors, who said, that they were sent to heare the ar∣ticles; not to sweare vnto them. Hereby the Thebans were driuen to send vnto each of the Cities to require the Oath; But in vaine. For when the had bold∣ly refused it, saying, That they did not neede it; others tooke courage by their ex∣ample to doe the like, disappointing the Thebans of their glorious hopes, to whom this negotiation with Artaxerxes gaue neither addition nor confirmation of great∣nesse, but left them as it found them to relie vpon their owne swords. §. V. How all Greece was diuided, betweene the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, on the one side, and Thebans on the other. Of the great tumults ri∣sing in Arcadia. THe condition of things in Greece at that time did stand thus. and Sparta, which in former times had commanded all that Nation, and each vpon enuie of the others greatnesse drawne all her followers into a cruell intestine warre, by which the whole Countrie, and espe∣cially the Estate of these two Cities, was brought very low, did now conjoyne their forces against the Thebans, who sought to make themselues Lords of all. The Eleans, Corinthians, and , followed the partie of these ancient go∣uerning Cities; either for the old reputation of them, and benefits receiued, or in dislike of those, who by strong hand were readie to become Rulers, to which autho∣ritie they could not suddenly aspire without some injurie and enuie. The Ci∣tie of Thebes abounding with men, whom necessitie had made , and many vi∣ctories in few yeeres had filled with great spirits, & being so in dependants, that shee had reduced all the continent of Greece without (the Region of Attica, and very part beside excepted) vnder such acknowledgement, as wan∣ted not much of meere , did hope to bring all Peloponnesus to the like o∣bedience, wherein alreadie shee had set good footing by her conjunction with the States of Argos, and of Arcadia. The Argiues had beene alwaies bad Neighbours to the Spartans, to whom they thought in ancient Nobilitie Superiours, but were farre vnder them in valour, hauing beene often beaten out of the field by them, and put in danger of loosing all: which caused them to suspect and enuie no∣thing more than the greatnesse and honor of Sparta, taking truce with her when shee was at rest, and had leisure to bend her whole force against them, but firmely ioy∣ning with her enemies whensoeuer they found her entangled in a difficult Warre. As the Argiues were, in hatred of Sparta, sure friends of Thebes, so the Arcadians, trans∣ported with a great opinion of their owne worthines, had formerly renounced and prouoked against them their old Confederates and Leaders, the Lacedaemonians, and were now become very doubtfull adherents to the Thebans. In which regard it was thought conuenient by Epaminondas, and the State of Thebes, to an Armie into Peloponnesus, before such time as these wauering friends should fall further off, and become either Neutrall, or, which was to be feared, open enemies. And surely great cause there was to suspect the worst of them, considering that without consent of the Thebans, they had made peace with Athens; which was very strange, and seemed no lesse to the Athenians themselues, who holding a firme league with Sparta at the same time when the Arcadians treated with them, did neuerthelesse accept this new Confederacie, not relinquishing the old, because they found that, howsoeuer these Arcadians were enemies to the Lacedaemonians, they should hereby be drawne some∣what further from their alliance with Thebes, which without them was vnlikely to inuade Peloponnesus with a strong Armie. But this did rather hasten, than by any meanes stay, the comming of Epaminondis; who finding the way somewhat more cleare for him (because the Citie of Corinth, which lay vpon the Isthmus, and had beene aduerse to Thebes, was now, by miseries of this gricuous warre, driuen to be∣come Neutrall) tooke occasion hereby, and by some disorders among the Arcadians, to visit Peloponnesus with an Armie, consisting of all the power of Thebes. A great tumult had risen in Arcadia about consecrated money, which many principall men among them had laied hands on, vnder pretence of imploying it to publique vses. In compounding the differences growne vpon this occasion, such, as had least will to render account of the money which had come into their handes, procured the Cap∣taine of some Theban Souldiers, lying in Tegea, to take prisoners many of their Countrimen, as people desirous of innouation. This was done: but the vp roare thereby caused was so great, that the prisoners were forth-with enlarged, and the , who had in great numbers taken Armes, with much a doe scarse pacified. When complaint of the proceedings came to Thebes, Epaminondas turned all the blame vpon them, who had made the peace with Athens, letting them know, that he would be shortly among them, to iudge of their fidelitie, by the assistance which they should giue him, in that warre, which he intended to make in Peloponne∣sus. These Lordly wordes did greatly amaze the Arcadians; who needing not the aide of so mightie a power as he drew a-long with him, did vehemently suspect that great preparation to bee made against themselues. Hereupon such of them as had before sought meanes to settle the affaires of their Countrie, by drawing things to some good conclusion of peace, did now forth-with send to Athens for helpe, and withall dispatched some of the principall among them as Embassadours to Sparta, by whom they offered themselues to the common defence of Peloponnesus, now readie to be inuaded. This Embassage brought much comfort to the Lacedaemonians, who feared nothing more than the comming of Epaminondas, against whom they well knew, that all their forces, and best prouisions, would bee no more than very hardly sufficient. Forbearing therefore to dispute about prerogatiues, they (who had been accustomed vnto such a supremacie, as they would in no wise communi. cate with the powerfull Citie of Athens, till other hope of securing their owne E∣state could not be thought vpon) did now verie gently yeeld to the Arcadians, that the command of the Armie in chiefe, should be giuen, for the time, to that Citie, in whose Territorie it lay. §. VI. A terrible inuasion of Peloponnesus by EPAMINONDAS. CErtaine it is, that the condition of things did at that time require a ve∣rie firme consent, and vniforme care of the common safetie. For be∣side the great forces raised out of the other parts of Greece, the Ar∣giues, and Messenians, prepared with all their strength to ioyne with ; who hauing lien a while at Nemea, to intercept the A∣thenians, receiued there intelligence, that the Armie comming from Athens would passe by Sea, whereupon he dislodged, and came to Tegea, which Citie, and the most of all Arcadia besides, forth with declared themselues his. The common opinion was, that the first attēpt of the Thebans, would be vpon such of the Arcadians as had reuolted; which caused the Lacedaemonian Captaines to fortifie Mantinaea with all diligence, and to send for Agesilaus to Sparta, that he bringing with him all that small force of able men, which remained in the Towne, they might be strong enough to abide Epaminondis there. But Epaminondas held so good espiall vpon his Enemies, that had not an vnknowne fellow brought hastie aduertisement of his purpose to Agesilaus, who was then well onward in the way to Mantinaea, the Citie of Sparta had suddenly been taken. For thither with all speede and secrecie did the Thebans march, who had surely carried the Citie, notwithstanding any defence that could haue beene made by that handfull of men remaining within it; but that Agesilaus in all flying haste got into it with his Companies, whom the Army of his Confede∣rates followed thither to the rescue as fast as it was able. The arriuall of the Lace∣daemonians and their friends, as it cut off all hope from Epaminondas of taking Sparta, so it presented him with a faire aduantage vpon Mantinaea. It was the time of Har∣uest, which made it very likely, that the Mantinaeans, finding the warre to be carried from their walls into another quarter, would vse the commoditie of that vacation, by fetching in their corne, and turning out their cattell into their fields, whilest no enemie was neere that might empeach them. Wherefore hee turned away from Sparta to Mantinaea, sending his horse-men before him, to seize vpon all that might be found without the Citie. The Mantinaeans (according to the expectation of Epaminondas ) were scattered abroad in the Countrie; farre more intent vpon their haruest-businesse, than vpon the warre, whereof they were secure, as thinking them∣selues out of distance. By which presumption it fell out, that great numbers of them, and all their Cattell, being vnable to recouer the Towne, were in a desperate case; and the Towne it selfe in no great likelihood of holding out, when the enemy should haue taken all their prouision of victuals with so many of the people, as had not ouer-dearely beene redeemed, by that Cities returning to societie with Thebes. But at the same time, the Athenians comming to the succour of their Confederates, whom they thought to haue found at Mantinaea, were very earnestly entreated by the Citizens to rescue their goods, and people, from the danger whereinto they were fallen, if it were possible by any couragious aduenture to deliuer those who otherwise were giuen as lost. The Thebans were knowne at that time to bee the best Souldiers of all the Greekes, and the commendation of good horsemanship had al∣waies beene giuen to the Thessalians, as excelling in that qualitie all other Nations; yet the regard of honour so wrought vpon the Athenians, that for the reputation of their Citie, which had entred into this warre, vpon no necessitie of her owne, but onely in desire of relieuing her distressed friends, they issued forth of Mantinaea, not abiding so long as to refresh themselues, or their horses with meat, and giuing a lu∣stie charge vpon the enemie, who as brauely receiued them, after a long and hote fight, they remained masters of the field, giuing by this victorie a safe and easie re∣trait to all that were without the walls. The whole power of the Boeotians arriued in the place soone after this battaile, whom the Lacedaemonians and their Assistants were not farre behinde. §. VII. The great battaile of Mantinaea. The honourable death of EPAMI∣NONDAS, with his commendation. EPAMINONDAS, considering that his Commission was almost now expired, and that his attempts of surprising Sparta and Mantinaea, ha∣uing failed, the impression of terrour which his name had wrought in the Peloponnesians, would soone vanish, vnlesse by some notable act he should abate their courage in their first grouth, and leaue some memorable character of his expedition; resolued to giue them battaile, whereby he reasonably hoped both to settle the doubtfull affections of his own Associates, and to leaue the Spartans as weake in spirit and abilitie, as he found them, if not wholly to bring them into subjection. Hauing therefore warned his men to prepare for that battaile, wherein victorie should be rewarded with Lordship of all Greece; and finding the alacritie of his Souldiers to be such as promised the accomplishment of his owne desire; he made shew of declining the enemie, and intrenching himselfe in a place of more aduantage, that so by taking from them all expectation of figh∣ting that day, hee might allay the heate of their valour, and afterward strike their senses with amazement, when hee should come vpon them vnexpected. This opi∣nion deceiued him not. For with very much tumult, as in so great and sodaine a danger, the enemie ranne to Armes, necessitie enforcing their resolution, and the consequence of that daies seruice vrging them to doe as well as they might. The Theban Armie consisted of thirtie thousand foot, and three thousand horse; the La∣cedaemonians and their friends were short of this number, both in horse and in foot, by a third part. The Mantinaeans (because the warre was in their Countrie) stood in the right wing, and with them the Lacedaemonians: the Athenians had the left wing, the Achaeans, Eleans, and others of lesse account, filled the bodie of the Ar∣mie. The Thebans stood in the left wing of their owne battaile, opposite to the La∣cedaemonians, hauing by them the Arcadians; the Eubeans, Locrians, Sicyonians, Messe∣nians, and Thessalians with others, compounding the maine battaile; the Argiues held the right wing; the horse-men on each part were placed in the flancks, only a troupe of the Eleans were in reare. Before the footmen could joyne, the encounter of the horse on both sides was very rough, wherein finally the Thebans preuailed, notwithstanding the valiant resistance of the Athenians: who not yeelding to the enemie either in courage or skil, were ouer-laied with numbers, and so beaten vpon by slings, that they were driuen to forsake the place, and leaue their in∣fanterie naked. But this retrait was the lesse disgracefull, because they kept them∣selues together, and did not fall backe vpon their owne foot-men; but finding the Theban horse to haue giuen them ouer, and withall discouering some Companies of foot, which had beene sent about by Epaminondas, to charge their battaile in the reare, they brake vpon them, routed them, and hewed them all in peeces. In the meane season the battaile of the Athenians had not onely to doe with the Argiues, but was hardly pressed by the Theban Horse-men, in such wise that it beganne to open, and was readie to turne backe, when the Elean squadron of Horse came vp to the reliefe of it, and restored all on that part. With farre greater violence did the Lacedaemonians and Thebans meete, these contending for Dominion, the other for the maintenance of their ancient honour, so that equall courage and equal losse on both sides made the hope and appearance of victorie to either equally doubtfull: vnlesse perhaps the Lacedaemonians being very firme abiders, might seeme the more likely to preuaile, as hauing borne the first brunt, and furie of the on-set, which was not hitherto remitted, and being framed by Discipline, as it were by Nature, to excell in , whereof the Thebans, by practice of a few yeeres, cannot be thought to haue gotten a habite so sure and generall. But Epaminondas perceiuing the obstinate stiffenesse of the Enemies to bee such, as neither the badde successe of their owne horse, nor all the force of the Boeotian Armie, could abate so farre, as to make them giue one foote of ground; taking a choise Companie of the most able men, whom hee cast into the forme of a Wedge, or Diamond, by the aduantage of that figure against a squadron, and by his owne exceeding vertue, accompanied with the great strength and resolution of them which followed him, did open their rancks, and cleaue the whole battaile in despight of all resistance. Thus was the honour of that day wonne by the Thebans, who may justly bee said to haue carried the victorie, seeing that they remained Masters of the ground whereon the battaile was fought, hauing driuen the Enemie to lodge farther off. For that which was alleaged by the Athenians, as a token that the victorie was partly theirs, the slaughter of those Mercenaries vpon whom they lighted by chance in their owne flight, finding them behinde their Armie, and the retaining of their dead bodies; it was a Ceremonie regardable onely among the Greekes, and serued meerely for ostentation, shewing that by the fight they had obtained somewhat, which the Enemie could not get from them otherwise than by request. But the Thebans ar∣riued at the generall immediate end of battaile; none daring to abide them in the field: whereof a manifest confession is expressed from them, who forsake the place which they had chosen or accepted, as indifferent for triall of their and prowesse. This was the last worke of the incomparable vertue of Epaminondas, who being in the head of that Warlike troupe of men, which broke the Lacedaemo∣nian esquadron, and forced it to giue back in disaray, was furiously charged on the sodaine, by a desperate Company of the Spartans, who all at once threw their Darts at him alone; whereby receiuing many wounds, hee neuerthelesse with a singular courage maintained the fight, vsing against the Enemies many of their Darts, which hee drew out of his owne bodie; till at length by a Spartan, called Anticrates, hee receiued so violent a stroke with a Dart, that the wood of it brake, leauing the yron and a peece of the tronchion in his brest. Hereupon hee sunke downe, and was soone conueighed out of the fight by his friends, hauing by his fall somewhat animated the Spartans (who faine would haue got his bodie) but much more inflamed with indignation, the Thebans, who raging at this heauie mischance did with great slaughter compell their disordered enemies to leaue the field; though long they followed not the , being wearied more with the sadnesse of this , than with all the trauaile of the day. Epaminondas be∣ing brought into his Tent, was told by the Phisicians, That when the head of the Dart should be drawne out of his bodie, hee must die. Hearing this, hee called for his shield, which to haue lost, was held a great dishonour: was brought vnto him. He bade them tell him which part the victorie; answere was made, that the Boeotians had wonne the field. Then said he, it is time for mee to die, and withall sent for Iolidas, and Diophantes, two principall of Warre, that were both slaine; which being told him, He aduised the Thebans to make Peace, with aduantage they might, for that they had none left that was able to discharge the office of a Generall. Herewithall he willed, that the head of the weapon should be drawne out of his bodie; comforting his friends that lamented his death, and want of issue, by telling them, that the victories of Leuctra and were two faire Daughters, in whom his memorie should . So died , the worthiest man that euer was bred in that Nation of Grecce, and hardly to bee matched in any Age or Countrie: for hee all o∣thers in the seuerall vertues, which in each of them were singular. His , and Sinceritie, his Temperance, Wisedome, and high Magnanimitie, were no way inferiour to his Militarie vertue; in euery part whereof hee so excelled, That hee could not properly bee called a Warie, a Valiant, a , a Bountifull, or an In∣dustrious, and a Prouident Captaine; all these Titles, and many other, being due vnto him, which with his Discipline, and good Conduct, made a perfect composition of an Heroique Generall. Neither was his priuate sation vn∣answerable to those high parts, which gaue him praise abroade. For he was Graue, and yet very Affable and Curteous; resolute in publique businesse, but in his owne particular easie, and of much mildnesse: a louer of his People, with mens infirmities, wittie and pleasant in speech, farre from insolence, Master of his owne affections, and furnished with all qualities that might winne and keepe loue. To these Graces were added great abilitie of bodie, much Eloquence, and very deepe knowledge in all parts of Philosophie and Learning, wherewith his minde being enlightened, rested not in the sweetnesse of Contemplation, but brake forth into such as gaue vnto Thebes, which had euer-more beene an vnder∣ling, a dreadfull reputation among all adjoyning, and the highest com∣mand in . §. VIII. Of the peace concluded in after the of . The voiage of AGESILAVS into Aegypt. His death, and qualities; with an exa∣mination of the comparison made betweene him and POMPEY the Roman. THis battaile of Mantinaea was the greatest that had euer beene fought in that Countrie betweene the Naturals; and the last. For at Mara∣thon, and Plataea, the populous Armies of the barbarous Nations gaue rather a great fame, than a hard triall to the valour, neither were the practice of Armes and Art Militarie so perfect in the begin∣nings of the Peloponnesian Warre, as long continuance and daily exercise had now made them. The times following produced no actions of worth or moment, those excepted which were vndertaken against fortaine enemies, prouing for the most part vnfortunate. But in this last fight all Greece was interessed, which neuer had more able Souldiers, and braue Commanders, nor euer contended for victory with greater care of the successe, or more obssinate resolution. All which notwithstan∣ding, the issue being such as hath beene related, it was best for euery particu∣lar Estate, that a generall peace should be established, euery one retaining what hee had, and none being forced to depend vpon another. The Messenians were by name comprised in this new league; which caused the Lacedaemonians not to enter into it. Their out not the rest from proceeding to con∣clusion; considering that Sparta was now too weake to offend her Neighbours, and therefore might well bee allowed to shew that anger in ceremonies, which had no power to declare it selfe in execution. This peace, as it gaue some breath and re∣freshing to all the Country, so to the Cities of Athens and Sparta it affoorded leisure to after wealth by forraine emploiment in Aegypt, whither Agesilaus was sent with some smal forces to assist, or indeed, as a Mercenarie, to serue vnder Tachos King of Aegypt in his warre vpon Syria. Chabrias the Athenian, who had before commanded vnder Acoris King of Aegypt, went now as a voluntary, with such as he could raise, by , and offer of good pay, to the same seruice. These Kings descended from Amyrlaeus of Sais, who rebelled against Darius , retained the Country, notwithstanding all intestine dissensions, and , during three Generations of their owne race, were so well with the valour of the Grcekes, that by their helpe (easily procured with ) they conceiued great , not onely to themselues, but to become Lords of the Prouinces adioyning, which were held by the Persian. What the issue of this great enterprise might haue been, had it not fallen by Domesticall rebellion, it is vncertaine. But very likely it is, that the rebellion it selfe had soone come to nothing, if Agesilaus had not proued a false Traitor, ioyning with Nectanebus, who rose against his Prince, and helping the Rebell with that which the money of Tachos had waged. This falshood Agesilaus excused, as tending to the good of his owne Countrie; though it seeme rather, that hee grudged because the King tooke vpon himselfe the Conduct of the Armie, vsing his seruice onely as Lieute∣nant, who had made full accompt of being appointed the Generall. Howsoeuer it came to passe, Tachos being shamefully betraied by them, in whom he had reposed his chiefe confidence, fled vnto the Persian, who vpon his submission gaue him gen∣tle entertainement; and Nectanebus (who seemes to haue beene the Nephew of Tachos ) raigned in his stead. At the same time the Citizens of Mendes had set vp an∣other King, to whom all, or most of the Aegyptians yeelded their obedience. But Agesilaus fighting with him in places of aduantage, preuailed so , that hee left in quiet possession of the Kingdome; who in recompence of his treason to the former King Tachos, and good seruice done to himselfe, rewarded him with two hundred and thirtie Talents of siluer, with which bootie sailing homewards, he died by the way. He was a Prince very temperate, and valiant, and a good Lea∣der in warre, free from couetousnesse, and not reproched with any blemish of lust; which praises are the lesse admirable in him, for that the discipline of Sparta was such as did endue euerie one of the Citizens (not caried away by the violent streame of an ill nature) with all, or the chiefe, of these good qualities. Hee was neuerthe∣lesse very arrogant, , vniust and vaine glorious, measuring all things by his owne will, and obstinately prosecuting those courses, whose ends were beyond hope. The expedition of Xenophon had filled him with an opinion, that by his hand the Empire of Persia should be ouerthrowne; with which conceipt being transpor∣ted, and finding his proceedings interrupted by the Thebans, and their Allies, hee did euer after beare such hatred vnto Thebes, as compelled that Estate by meere ne∣cessitie to grow warlike, and able, to the vtter dishonour of Sparta, and the irrepa∣rable losse of all her former greatnesse. The commendations giuen to him by Xenophon his good friend, haue caused Plutarch to lay his name in the ballance against Pompey the Great; whose actions (the solemne grauitie of carriage excepted) are very disproportionable. Yet we may truely say, That as Pompey made great warres vnder sundrie Climates, and in all the Prouinces of the Roman Empire, exceeding in the multitude of imploiments all that were before him; so Agesilans had at one time or other, some quarrell with euery Towne in Greece, had made a Warre in Asia, and meddled in the businesse of the Aegyptians, in which variety he went be∣yond all his Predecessours: yet not winning any Countries, as Pompey did many, but obtaining large wages, which Pompey neuer tooke. Herein also they are very like; Each of them was the last great Captaine which his Nation brought forth in time of libertie, and each of them ruined the libertie of his Countrie by his owne Lordly wilfulnesse. We may therefore well say, Similia magis omnia paria; The resem∣blance was neerer than the equalitie. Indeede the freedome of Rome was lost with Pompey, falling into the hands of Caesar, whom he had enforced to take Armes; yet the Roman Empire stood, the forme of Gouernement only being chan∣ged: But the libertie of Greece, or of Sparta it selfe, was not for∣faited vnto the Thebans, whom Agesilaus had compel∣led to enter into a victorious warre; yet the Signiorie, and ancient renowne of Sparta was presently lost: and the freedome of all Greece being wounded in this Theban warre, and after much bloud lost, ill healed by the peace ensuing, did very soone, vpon the death of Agesilaus, giue vp the Ghost, and the Lordship of the whole Countrie was seized by Philip King of Macedon, whose actions are now on foote, and more to be regarded than the Contemporarie passages of things, in any other Nation. Finis Libri Tertij. THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORIE OF THE WORLD: INTREATING OF THE TIMES FROM the raigne of PHILIP of MACEDON, to the establishing of that Kingdome, in the race of ANTIGONVS. THE FOVRTH BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of PHILIP, the Father of ALEXANDER the Great, King of Macedon. §. I. What Kings raigned in Macedon before PHILIP. THE Greekes, of whom wee haue alreadie made large discourse, not as as yet wearied with in∣testinc warre, nor made wise by their vaine con∣tention for superioritie, doe still, as in former times, continue the inuasion and vastation of each other. Against , the greatest Monarch of that part of the World, they defended their liber∣tie, with as happie successe, as euer Nation had, and with no lesse honour, than hath euer beene acquired by deeds of Armes. And hauing had a triall and experience, more than fortunate, a∣gainst those Nations, they so little regarded what might come from them, who had so often forfeited the reputation of their forces, as whatsoeuer could be spared from their owne distraction at home, they transported ouer the Hellespont, as sufficient, to entertaine and busie them withall. But, as it commonly falleth out with euery man of marke in the world, that they vnder-fall, and perish, by the hands and harmes which they least feare; so fared it at this time with the Greeks. For of Philip of Macedon (of whom we are now to speake) they had little regard, as they grew then more violent in o∣ther, when the -growing greatnesse of such a Neighbour King, should, in regard of their owne , serued them for a strong argument of vnion and accord. But the glorie of their Persian victories, wherewith they were pampred and made proud, taught them to neglect all Nations but themselues, and the rather to value at little power and purposes of the , because those Kings and States, which them than they did, had in the time of , the Father of Philip, so much weakned them, and wonne vpon them, thatthey were not (as the perswaded themselues) in any one age, likely to recouer their owne, much lesse to worke any wonders against their borderers. And, indeed, it was not in their Philosophie to consider, That all great alterations are storme-like, suddaine, and violent; and that it is then ouer-late to repaire the decaied and broken banks, when great Riuers are once swollen, fast-running, and inraged. No, the Greeks did rather imploy themselues, in breaking downe those defences, which stood betweene them and this inundation: than seeke to rampare and re-enforce their owne fields, which by the Leuell of reason they might haue found to haue lien vnder it. It was there∣fore well concluded by OROSIVS: Graeciae Ciuitates imper are singulae cupiunt, im∣perium l. 3. c. 12. perdiderunt; The Cities of Greece lost their command, by striuing each of them to command all. The Kingdome of Macedon, so called of Macedon, the Sonne of Osiris, or, as o∣ther Authors affirme, of Iupiter and Aethra, is the next Region towards the North which bordereth Greece; It hath to the East, the Aegean Sea; it is bounded on the North and North-west, by the Thracians and Illyrians; and on the South and South∣west, by and Epirus. Their Kings were of the family of Temenus, of the race of Hercules, and by nation Argiues; who are lifted as followeth. About some sixe yeeres after the translation of the Assyrian Empire, Arbaces then gouerning Media; Caranus of Argos, comman∣ded by an Oracle, to lead a Colonie into Macedon, departed thence with many people, and as hee was marching through that Countrie, the weather being and tempestuous, hee espied a great heard of Goats, which fled the storme as fast as they could, hasting them to their knowne place of couert. Whereupon Caranus, cal∣ling to minde, that he had also by another Oracle beene directed, to follow the first troupe of those beasts, that should either lead him, or flye before him; He pursued . . these Goats to the Gates of Edessa, and being vndiscouered by the Inhabitants, by . . Antios. . reason of the darknesse of the aire, he entred their without resistance, and pos∣sest it. Soone after this, by the ouerthrow of Cisseus, Caranus became Lord of the Euseb. in Chron. rest of Macedon, and held it eight and twentie yeeres. Coenus succeeded Caranus, and raigned twelue yeeres. Tyrimas followed Coenus, and ruled eight and twentie yeeres. Perdiccas the first, the sonne of Tyrimas, gouerned one and yeeres: a Prince, for his great valour, and many other vertues, much renowned. Solinus, Plinie, Iustine, Sol. c. 14. Eusebius, , Antiochenus, and others affirme, that he appointed a place of bu∣riall . l. 4. c. 10. for himselfe, and for all the Kings of Macedon his Successours, at Aegae: assuring them, that the Kingdome should so long continue in his line and race, as they con∣tinued to lay vp their bodies in that Sepulchre; wherein it is said, that because A∣lexander the Great failed, therefore the posteritie of the Temenidae failed in him: a thing rather deuised after the effect, as I conceiue, then foretold by Perdiccas. Argoeus succeeded vnto Perdiccas, and ruled eight and twentie yeeres. . Chron. Philip the first, his successour, raigned eight and twentie yeeres. Europus followed Philip, and gouerned sixe and twentie yeeres: in whoseinfancie the Illyrians inuaded Macedon, and hauing obtained a great victorie, they pursued the same to the great danger of that State. Whereupon the Maccdonians, gathering new forces, and resoluing either to recouer their former losse, or to loose at once both their Kingdome and their King, they carried him with them in his Cradle into the field, and returned victorious; for they were either confident that their Nation could not bee beaten (their King present;) or rather they perswaded themselues that there was no man so void of honour and compassion, as to abandon their natu∣rall . Iustin. Lord, being and Infant, and no way (but by the hands of his seruants) able An. mian. The. to defend himselfé from destruction The like is reported by Aimoinus, of Clotarius Ant. &c. . l. 3 c. 82. the sonne of . succeeded Aeropus, and ruled nine and twentie yeeres. Amyntas the succeeded , and raigned fiftie yeeres; liued at such time as Darius Hystaspes, after his returne out of , sent with an Armie into Europe, who in name required to acknowledge him for his Supreme Lord, by yeelding vnto him Earth and Water. But his Em∣bassadours, as you haue heard before, were, for their behauiour towards the Macedonian Ladies, slaine by the direction of Alexander, who was the sonne of Her. Eus. . &c. Amyntas, and his Successour. Alexander, surnamed the rich, the of Amyntas, gouerned Macedon three and yeeres. He did not only appease the wrath of , for the slaugh∣ter of the Persian Embassadours, by giuing his Sister, to of the bloud of Persia, but by that match he grew so great in grace, as obtained all that Region betweene the Mountaines of Olympus and Hemus, to be vnited to the King∣dome of Macedon. Yet could not these benefits buy his affection from the . For being returned into Asia, and made Generall of the Persian Armie; the Greekes with all his intents and purposes against Her. l. 8. them. He had three sonnes, , as, and Philip. Euseb. . &c. the second, the sonne of Alexander, liued in the time of the Peloponnesian Warre, and raigned in all eight and twentie yeeres. The Warres which hee made were not much remarkeable: the Storie of them is found here and there by peices, in , his first sixe bookes. Hee left behind him two sonnes; Perdiccas, who was very yong, and Archelaus who was base borne. Perdiccas the third, being deliuered to the custodie and care of Archelaus, was at seuen of age cast into a Well and drowned by his false Guardian: who excu∣sing this fact to Cleopatra the Mother of the young King, said, That the child in fol∣lowing Plat. in Gorg. Arist. Pol. 5. a Goose hastily, fell thereinto by misaduenture. But staied not here: for hauing thus dispatched his brother, hee slew both his Alcetas the sonne of Alexander the Rich, and Alexander the sonne of this Alcetas, his Cosen Ger∣maine, and enioyed the Kingdome of Macedon himselfe foure and twentie yeeres. This Archelaus, of whom both Plato and Aristotle make mention, though hee made himselfe King by wicked murder, yet hee performed many things greatly to the profit of his Nation. It is said, That he sought by all meanes to draw Socrates vnto him, and that he greatly loued and honoured Eurypides the Tragoedian. He had two sonnes, Archelaus and Orestes. the second succeeded his Father, and hauing raigned seuen yeeres, hee was staine in hunting, either by chance or of purpose, by . his yonger sonne was committed to the education of Aeropus, of the roial of , and had the same measure which Archelaus had measured to his ; for murdered him and vsurped the Kingdome, which he held some sixe yeeres: the same who denied passage to King of , who desired after his returne from the Asian expedition, to passe by the way of Macedon into . This V surper left three sonnes, , Argaeus, and Alexander. Pausanias suc∣ceeded Diod . . in . his father Aeropus, and hauing raigned one yeere, hee was driuen out by the sonne of Philip, the sonne of the first Perdiccas, the sonne of Alexander the Rich; which Philip was then preserued, when Archelaus the Bastard slew his bro∣ther Perdiccas, his Vncle , and his sonne Alexander. This Amyntas raigned (though very vnquietly) foure and twentie ; for he was not only by Pausanias, assisted by the Thracians, and by his brother Argaeus; incoura∣ged by the Illyrians; and by the said Argaeus, for two yeeres dispossest of Macedon: but on the other side, the Olynthians, his Neighbours neere the Aegaean Sea, made them selues for a while Masters of , the chiefe Citie of Macedon. Amyntas the second had by his Wife Eurydice, the Illyrian, three Sonnes; Alex∣ander the second, Perdiccas the third, and Philip the second, Father of Alexander the Great; and one Daughter called Euryone or Exione: He had also by his second Wife Gygea, three Sonnes; Archelaus, Argaeus, and , afterward slaine by their brother Philip: He had more by a Concubine, Ptolomie, Alorites, of the Citie Alorus, wherein he was borne. Alexander the second raigned not much aboue one yeere, in which time hee was inuaded by , the sonne of Aeropus, but defended by Iphicrates the Athenian, while he was at that time about Amphipolis. Hee was also constrained (for the pay∣ment of a great summe of money) to leaue his yongest brother Philip in Hostage with the Illyrians, who had subiected his Father Amyntas to the payment of tribute. After this, Alexander, being inuited by the Aleuadae against Alexander the Tyrant of Pheres in Thessalie, hauing redeemed his brother Philip; to draw the Thebans to his assistance, entred into confederacie with Pelopidas, being at that time in the same Countrie, with whom he also left Philip with diuers other principall persons for the gage of his promises to Pelopidas. But his Mother falling in loue with her Sonne-in-law, who had married her Daughter Euryone or Exione, practized the death of Alexander her sonne, with a purpose to conferre the Kingdome on her Pa∣ramour, which Ptolomie Alorites did put in execution: by meanes whereof hee held Macedon for three yeeres, but was soone after slaine by Perdiccas the brother of Alexander. Diodor hath it otherwise of Philips being made pledge; and sayth, That Diod. l 15. & 16. Amyntas his Father deliuered him for hostage to the Illyrians, by whom he was to Thebes, there to be kept: others report that Philip (while his Father was yet liuing) was first ingaged to the Thebans, and deliuered for hostage a second time by Alexander his brother. Perdiccas the third, after he had slaine Alorites his base-brother, gouerned Mace∣don fiue yeeres, and was then slaine in a battaile against the Illyrians, according to Diodorus; but Iustine affirmeth, that he perished by the practice of Eurydice his Mo∣ther, Iust. l. 7. as Alexander did. §. II. The beginning of PHILIPS raigne; and how he deliuered Macedon from the troubles wherein he found it entangled. PHILIP the second, the yongest sonne of Amyntas by Eurydice, hauing beene instructed in all knowledge requisite vnto the gouernment of a Kingdome, in that excellent education which hee had vnder Epami∣nondas, Diod. l. 16. making an escape from Thebes, returned into Macedon, in the first yeere of the hundred and fifth Olympiad, which was after the building of Rome three hundred fourscore and thirteene yeeres: and finding the many enemies and dangers wherewith the Kingdome was inuironed, hee tooke on him, not as King (for left asonne, though but an infant) but as the Prote∣ctor of his Nephew, and Commander of the men of . Yet his fruitfull am∣bition soone ouergrew his modestie, and hee was easily perswaded by the people to accept both the Title of King, and withall the absolute Rule of the Kingdome. And to say the truth, The necessitie of the State of Macedon at that time required a King both prudent and actiue. For, besides the incursions of the and Pan∣nonians, the King of Thrace did set vp in opposition Pausanias, the Athenians, Argoeus; sonnes of the late Vsurper Aeropus: each of these labouring to place in a King of their owne Election. These heauie burdens when Philip could not well beare, he bought off the weightiest by money, and by faire promises vnloded him∣selfe of so many of the rest, as he ranne vnder the remainder happily enough. For, not withstanding that his brother Perdiccas had his death accompanied with thousand Macedonians, beside these that were wounded and taken prisoners; and that the Pannonians were destroying all before them in Macedon, and that the Athe∣nians with a fleet by Sea, and three thousand Souldiers by Land vnder , did beat vpon him on all sides and quarters of his Countrie: Yet after he had practised the men of warre of Pannonia; and corrupted them with gifts; and had also bought the King of Thrace from , he forth with made head against the Athenians his stiffest enemies; and, for the first, he preuented their recouerie of , a Citie on the frontier of Macedon: and did then pursue Argoeus the sonne of Aeropus, set a∣gainst him by the Athenians, and followed him so hard at the heeles, in his retrait from Aeges, that he forced him to abide the battaile: which Argoeus lost, hauing the greatest part of his Armie slaine in the place. Those of the Athenians, and others which remained vnbroken, tooke the aduantage of a strong peece of ground at hand, which though they could not long defend, yet auoiding thereby the present of the Souldiers, they obtained of the vanquishers life and libertie to returne into Attica. Whereupon a peace was concluded betweene him and the for that present, and for this clemencie he was greatly renowned and honoured by all the Greekes. §. III. The good successe which PHILIP had in many enterprises. NOw had Philip leisure to looke Northward, and to attend the Illyrians and Poeonians, his irreconciliable enemies and borderers: both which he inuaded with so prosperous successe, as hee slew Bardillis, King of the Illyrians, with seuen thousand of his Nation, and thereby recoue∣red all those places which the Illyrians held in Macedon: and withall, vpon the death of the King of Pannonia, he pierst that Countrie, and after a victorie obtained, hee enforst them to pay him tribute. This was no sooner done, than (without staying to take longer breath) he hasted speedily towards , vp∣on the Riuer Peneus in Thessalie, of which Towne hee soone made himselfe master; and thereby he got good footing in that Countrie, whereof he made vse in time fol∣lowing. Now although hee resolued either to subdue the Thessalians, or to make them his owne against all others, because the horse-men of that Countrie were the best, and most feared in that part of Europe; yet he thought it most for his to close vp the entrances out of Thrace, least while hee inuaded Thessalie and Grecce to∣wards the South, those ample Nations, lying towards the North, should either with∣draw him, or ouer-runne Macedon as in former times. He therefore attempted Am∣phipolis, seated on the famous Riuer of Strimon, which parteth Thrace from Macedon, and wonne it. He also Pydna; and (to the North of Amphipolis ) the Citie of Crenides (sometime Datus ) and called it after his owne name : to the people whereof S t . Paul afterward directed one of his Epistles. This place, wherein Philippi stood, is very rich in Mines of gold, out of which, greatly to the aduance∣ment of Philips affaires, he drew yeerely a thousand talents, which make sixe hun∣dred thousand French Crownes. And that hee might with the more case disburden the Thracian- shores of the A∣thenian Garrisons, to which he had giuen a great blow by the taking in of Amphipolis, he entred into league with his Fathers malicious enemies the Olynthians; whom the better to fasten vnto him, he gaue them the Citie of Pydna with the Territorie, mea∣ning nothing lesse than that they should enjoy it, or their owne Estate, many yeeres. Now that he might by degrees winne ground vpon the Greeks, he tooke the faire occasion to deliuer the Citie of Pheres in Thessalie, from the tyrannie Lycophron and Tisiphonus. Who, after they had conspired with Thebe the wife of Alexander, who vsurped vpon the libertie of that State, they themselues ( Alexander being murde∣red) held it also by the same strong hand and oppression that Alexander did, till by the assistance of Philip they were beaten out, and Pheres restored to her former li∣bertie. Which act of Philip did for-euer after fasten the Thessalians vnto him, and, to his exceeding great aduantage, bind them to his seruice. §. IIII. Of the Phocian Warre which first drew PHILIP into Greece. ABout this time, to wit, in the second yeere of the hundred and sixth Olympiad, eight yeeres after the battaile of Mantinoea, and about the yeere of Artaxerxes Ochus, beganne that Warre, called Sacred. Now, as all occasions concurre towards the execution of eternall pro∣uidence, and of euery great alteration in the World there is some preparation, though not at the first easily discerned; so did this reuenge∣full hatred by the Thebans, Thessalians, and Locrians, conceiued against the Phocians, not only teach Philip how he might with halfe a hand wrest the sword out of their fingers; but the Greekes themselues beating downe their owne defences, to giue him an passage, and beating themselues, to giue him victorie without perill, left no∣thing vnperformed towards their owne slauerie, sauing the title and imposition. Of this Warre the Thebans (made ouer-proude by their at Leuctres ) were the inflamers. For at the Councell of the Amphyctiones, or of the general Estates of Greece, in which, at that time, they swaied most, they caused both the Lacedoemo∣nians and Phocians to be condemned in greater summes of money than they could well beare; the one for the Castle of Cadmea in the time of peace, the o∣ther for ploughing vp a peece of ground belonging to the Temple of Delphos. The Phocians being resolued not to obey this Edict, were secretly set on and incouraged by the : and for refusall were exposed as Sacrilegers, and accursed to all their Neighbour-Nations, for whom it was then lawfull to inuade, and destroy them at their pleasures. The Phocians perswaded thereunto by Philomelus, a Captaine of their owne, cast the same dice of hazard that Coesar after many Ages following did; but had not the same chance. Yet they dealt well enough with all the enemies of their owne Na∣tion. And the better to beare out an vngracious quarrell, of which there was left no hope of composition, they resolued to sacke the Temple it selfe. For seeing that for the ploughing of a peece of Apollo's ground, they had so much offended their neigh∣bour God, and their Neighbour-Nations, as worse could not befall them than al∣readie was intended; they resolued to take the gold with the ground, and either to perish for all, or to preuaile against all that had commission to call them to account. The treasure which they tooke out of the Temple in the beginning of the Warre, was tenne thousand talents, which in those daies serued them to wage a great many men, and such was their successe in the beginning of the warre, as they wonne three great battailes against the Thebans, Thessalians, and Locrians, but being beaten in the fourth, their Leader Philomelus cast himselfe head-long ouer the Rockes. In the meane while the Cities of Chersonesus, both to defend them selues against their bad-Neighbour Philip, who encroched vpon them, and to draw others into their quarrell, rendred themselues to the Athenians. Philip prepareth to get them into his hands, and at the siege of Methone lost one of his eyes. It is said, That hee that shot him, did purposely direct his arrow towards him, and that it was written on the shaft thereof: Aster PHILIPPO; Aster to PHILIP; for so hee was called . . that gaue him the wound. This he with the soile. . l 8. The Tyrant Lycophron before mentioned, while Philip was busied on the border of Thrace, and the ingaged in the holy warre, Thessalie with new forces, being assisted by , Commander of the Phocian Armie, in place of Philomelus. For hereby the Phocians hoped so to entertaine the at home, as they should not find leisure to inuade them. Hereupon was Philip the second time called into Thessalie, but both the , and Macedonians, ( being present) were vtterly ouerthrowne by ; and great numbers of both Na∣tions lost. From Thessalie, drew speedily towards , and with the same victorious Armie brake the forces of the , and tooke from them their Citie of Coronea. But impatient of his late misaduenture, after he had re-en∣forced his Armie, returned with all speed into Thessalie, there to find againe the ho∣nour which he lately lost: and was the second time incountred by , who brought into the field twentie thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse. All this great preparation sufficed not; for Onomarchus was by Philip surmounted, both in numbers and in good fortune, his Armie ouerturned, six thousand slaine, and three thousand taken: of which number himselfe being one, was among others hanged by Philip. Those that fled, were in part by the Gallies, which alongst the coast, commanded by Chares, but the greatest number of those that tooke the Sea, were therein they them. Lycophron was now againe driuen out of , and Pheres made free as before. §. V. Of the Olynthian Warre. The ambitious practices of PHILIP. FRom hence Philip resolued to inuade Phocis it selfe, but the Athenians did not fauour his entrance into those parts, and therefore with the helpe of the Lacedoemonians they retrencht his passage at the Straits of Thermopylts. Whereupon hee returned into Macedon, and after the of , Torone, and other Townes, hee quarrelled with the , whom not long before he had wooed to his alliance, and bought his peace of them. For the Olynthians were very strong, and had both braued and beaten the . It is said, that Philip hauing put to death his halfe brother (for three sonnes by the Mother of Philip, and three other sonnes by : but Philips elder brothers by the same Mother being dead, he determined to rid himselfe also of the rest) the two yonger held themselues within Olynthus; and that the receiuing of them by the Olynthtans was the cause of the warre, affirmeth. But just quarrels are ballanced by just Princes, for to . this King all hings were lawfull that might any way serue his turne; all his affections, and passions, how diuers soeuer in other men, were in his ambition swallowed vp, and thereinto conuerted. For hee neither forbare the murder of his owne bro∣thers, the breach of faith, the buying of other mens fidelitie; he esteemed no place strong where his Asse loaden with gold might enter, Nor any Citie or State vncon∣querable, where a few of the greatest, to be made greater, could loose the sense of o∣ther mens sorrow and subjection. And because hee thought it vaine to practise the winning of Olynthus, till he had inclosed all the power they had within their owne walls, he entred their , and by the aduantage of a well compounded and trained Armie, he gaue them two ouerthrowes sate downe before the Citie it selfe: which done, he bought Euthicrate s and Lasthenes from their people, and from the seruice of their Countrie and Common weale, by whose treason he entred the Towne, slew his brothers therein, sackt it, and sold the Inhabitants for slaues by the drum. By the spoile of this place he greatly inriched himselfe, and had treasure sufficient to buy in other Cities withall, which he daily did. For so was hee aduised by the Oracle in the beginning of his vndertaking, That hee should make his assaults with siluer speares: Whereupon Horace well and truly said. — Vrbium . . Od. 16. vir , & , Reges muneribus. — By gifts the Macedon Gates a-sunder, And Kings enuying his estate brought vnder. And it is true that he wonne more by corruption and , than he did by force. For as he had in all the principall Cities of Greece his secret workers (which way of Conquest was well followed by Philip the second of Spaine: ) So when in the con∣tention betweene the Competitors for the Kingdome of Thrace, he was chosen the Arbitrator, he came not to the Councell accompanied with Pietie and Iustice, but with a powerful Armie and hauing beaten and slaine both Kings, gaue sentence for himselfe, and made the Kingdome his owne. §. VI. How PHILIP ended the Phocian Warre. THE warre still continuing betweene the Phocians, and the Associates of the holy warre, the Boeotians, finding themselues vnable to without some present aide, sent vnto Philip for succour, who willingly yeelded to their necessities, and sent them such a proportion of men, as were neither sufficient to master enemies, nor to assure them∣selues; but yet to inable them to continue the warre, and to the of Greece. They also sent to Ochus for supply of treasure, who lent them thirtie talents, which makes a hundred & fourescore thousand Crownes: but when with these supplies they had still the in all their attempts against the Phocians, who held from them three of their strongest Cities within Boeotia it selfe, They then besought Philip of Macedon that he would assist them in person, to whom they would giue an entrance into their Territorie, and in all things obey his Commandements in that Warre. Now had Philip what he longed for; for he knew himselfe in to giue the to both, and so quitting all his other purposes towards the North, he marched with a speedie pace towards , where being arriued, Phallecus who commanded the Phocian Armie, fearing to shock with this victorious King, made his owne peace, and withdrew himselfe with a Regiment of eight thousand Souldiers into Peloponnesus, leauing the Phocians to the mercie of the Conquerour, and for conclusion he had the glorie of that warre called Sacred, which the Graecians with so many mutuall slaugh∣ters had for ten yeeres, and, besides the glorie, hee possest himselfe of Or∣chomene, Coronea and Corsia, in the Countrie of the Boeotians, who inuited him to bee victorious ouer themselues. Hee brought the Phocians into seruitude, and wasted their Cities, and gaue them but their Villages to inhabite, reseruing to himselfe the yeerely tribute of threescore talents, which make sixe and thirtie thousand French Crownes. He also hereby (besides the fame of pietie for seruice of the Gods) obtai∣ned the same double voice in the Councell of the Amphyctiones, which the Phocians had, with the superintendencie of the Pythian games, forfeited by the Corinthians, by being partakers in the Phocian sacriledge. §. VII. How PHILIP with ill successe attempted vpon Perinthus, Byzantium, and the Scythians. PHILIP, after his triumphant returne into Macedon, by the Lieute∣nant of his Armie Parmenio, slaughtered many thousands of the Illy∣rians, and Dardanians, and brought the Thracians to pay him the tenth part of all their reuennues. But his next enterprise against the Perin∣thians staied his furie. Perinthus was a Citie of Thrace, seated vpon Propontis, in the mid-way betweene Sestos and Brzantium, a place of great strength, and a people resolued to defend their libertie against Philip, where the Athenians incouraged and assisted them. Philip sate downe before it with a puis∣sant Armie, made many faire breaches, gaue many furious assaults, built many o∣uer-topping and commanding Towers about it. But hee was repel'd with equall violence. For whereas Philip thought by his continuall assaults to them, and waste both their men and munition, they were supplied, not only from the Persian with men and money, and succoured from Byzantium which stood vpon the same Sea-coast, but they were relieued from Athens, Chio, and Rhodes, by the conduction of Phocion, with whatsoeuer was wanting to their necessitie. But because those of , by reason of their neighbour-hood, and the easie passage by water, gaue them often and readie helpe; Philip remoued with the one halfe of his Armie and besieg'd it, leauing fifteene thousand foot before Perinthus, to force it if they could; but to be short, he failed in both attempts, (as all Princes commonly doe that vn∣der-take diuers enterprises at one time) and returned into Macedon with no lesse dishonour than losse: whereupon he made an Ouerture of peace with the Athenians, and greatly desired it, to which though Phocion perswaded them in all he could, and that by the occasion offered they might greatly aduantage their conditions; Yet Demosthenes with his eloquence preuailed in the refusall. In the meane while, Philip hauing digested his late affront, and supplied his expence, by the taking of an hun∣dred and threescore and ten Marchants ships, he gathered new forces, and being ac∣companied with his sonne Alexander, led them into Scythya; but hee was also vn∣prosperous in this enterprise: For the Triballi, a people of Moesia set on him in his returne, wounded him, and tooke from him the greatest part of the spoiles, which he had gathered. §. VIII. How PHILIP ouerthrowing the Greekes in the battaile of Chaeronaea, was chosen Captaine-Generall of Greece. The death of PHILIP. AMong these Northren Nations (part of which hee supprest, and part quieted) hee spent some eight yeeres; and in the ninth yeere, after the end of the holy warre, he was to his great aduantage inuited againe by the Graecians to their assistance. For the Citizens of Amphissa hauing disobeyed the decree of the Amphyctiones, in which Philip had a double voice, and who by reason that the Thebans and Locrians gaue countenance and aide to the Am∣phissensians, the rest were not of themselues able to constraine them, they besought Philip to come in person to their assistance. Now you must thinke that Philip was not long in resoluing vpon this enterprise; hee needed no drawing on, whom no∣thing could keepe backe; nor other disswasion than a mastring power could hold thence. He therefore commanded his Armie forth with to march; the same being compounded of thirtie thousand foot, and two thousand horse; and with as much expedition as could be made, he entred Phocis, wanne Plataea, and brought into sub∣jection all that Region. The rest, and especially the Athenians, although they had good cause to feare that a great part of this storme would fall on themselues, yet were they disswaded by Demoslhenes from accepting such reasonable conditions of peace as Philip offered, and rather made choise (hauing drawne the Thebans to joyne with them) to leaue the injoying of their estates and their freedome to the chance of one battaile, than to hold it either by composition, or by the grace of Philip. But this their Oratours eloquence cost them deare. It is true that he could farre more easily minde them of the vertue of their Ancestors, then make them to be such as they were. Hee might repeate vnto them (with wordes mouing passion) the wonders they wrought at Marathon, but hee could not transforme the Macedonians into Persians, nor draw from the dead, a Miltiades, an Aristides, a Themistocles, or a Cimon, or any of those Commanders, whose great vertues they had payed with the greatest ingra∣titude that euer Nation did. A Phocion they had, but by the strength of a contrarie faction hee was at this time in disgrace, and not imployed: in so much as when the Armies of Philip and the Confederates incountred, although some thousand of the Athenians abid the killing, and the like number well-neere of the Thebans died with them; yet the want of worthie men on that side to hold vp the rest, and to draw them on, and the many choise Captains of the Macedonians, incouraged by a King of a growing fortune, as it gaue to Philip so shining a victorie that Alexander by the light thereof found his way (in despight of all the Nations interjacent) into Persia, India, and Aegypt; so it cut to the ground, and gaue end and date to all the Graecian glorie: Yea their libertie (saith Curtius ) with their large Dominion wonne with so many difficulties, continued for so many Ages, and so often defended against the greatest Kings, was now lost in a moment, and for euer lost. Now this aduised King (neuer passionate to his disaduantage) to the end hee might obtaine the Soueraignetie ouer all Greece, and be acknowledged for their Cap∣taine-Generall against the Persians, without any further hazard or trouble, was con∣tent to let goe those Athenians that were taken at this battaile of Cheronaea, as he also forbare to attempt any thing against their Citie: but in Thebes (which lately by the vertue of Epaminondas triumphed ouer the rest) hee lodged a Garrison of Macedo∣nians. And being soone after (according vnto the long desire which he had nourished of this Soueraignetie) by the generall) States at Corinth, stiled the first Commander of all the Graecians, and contribution of men and money granted him, he compoun∣ded an Armie of great strength, and vnder the commandement of Attalus and Par∣menio, transported the same ouer the Hellespont into Asia, to begin the Warre. Of his enterprise against Persia hee sought the successe from the Oracle at Delphos, from whence he receiued such another conuertible riddle, as Croesus did when he attemp∣ted Cyrus, and was in like sort mistaken in the exposition. But as it is hard to discerne and withstand the flatteries of our owne appetites, so did Philips ambitious desire to inuade Persia abuse his judgement, so farre, that the death, wherewith himselfe was threatned, he vnderstood to be deliuered of his enemie, whom he intended presently to inuade. Before his purposed departure in∣to Asia, hee prepared for the marriage of his Daughter Cleopatra with Alexander King of Epirus, to which feast and pastimes thereat appointed, hee inuited all his , and Allies, with the principall persons of the Graecian Cities, from whom he receiued much honour and many rich presents; but this was indeed the feast of his Funerall. For hauing refused to doe justice to one Pausanias a Gentleman of his Guard, whom (greatly fauoured by Philip ) had first made drunke, and then left to be carnally abused by diuers base persons, This Pausanias grew into so great detestation of the Kings partialitie in so foule a fact, as when Philip was passing to∣wards the Theater, he drew a sword from vnder his long garment and wounded him to death, when hee had liued sixe and fortie yeeres, and raigned fiue and twentie. Iustine reports it that Olympias incouraged Pausanias to murder the King her hus∣band, . l. 9. which after his death shee boldly auowed, by the honour shee did vnto Pau∣sanias in crowning his dead bodie, in consecrating his sword vnto Apollo, by building for him a Monument, and other like Graces. §. IX. What good foundations of ALEXANDERS greatnesse were laied by PHILIP. Of his qualities, and . NOw although he were then taken from the World, when he had ma∣stred all opposition on that side the Sea, and had seene the fruits of his hopes and labours, changing colour towards ripenesse and perfecti∣on, yet he was herein happy that hee liued to see his sonne Alexander at mans estate, and had himselfe been an eie-witnesse of his resolution, and singular valour in this last battaile. The foundation of whose future greatnesse he had laied so soundly for him, with so plaine a patterne of the buildings which himselfe meant to erect, as the perfor∣mance and finishing was farre more easie to Alexander, though more glorious than the beginnings were vnto Philip, though lesse famous. For besides the recouerie of Macedon it selfe, in competition betweene him and the sonnes of Aeropus, the one assisted by the Thracians, the other by the Athenians, and besides the regayning of many places possest by the Illyrians, the crushing of all those Northren Kings his Neighbours, the ouerthrow of Olynthus, a State that despised the power of his Fa∣ther, the many Maritimate Cities taken, of great strength and ancient freedome, and the subjection of that famous Nation of Greece, which for so many Ages had de∣fended it selfe against the greatest Kings of the World, and wonne vpon them; Hee left vnto his sonne, and had bred vp for him, so many choise Commanders, as the most of them, both for their valour and judgement in the warre, were no lesse wor∣thie of Crownes, than himselfe was that ware a Crowne: For it was said of Parmenio (whom Alexander, vngratefull to so great vertue, impiously murdered) That Par∣menio had performed many things challenging eternall fame, without the King, but the King, without Parmenio neuer did any thing worthie of renowne; as for the rest of his Captaines, though content to obay the Sonne of such a Father, yet did they not after Alexanders death endure to acknowledge any man Superiour to themselues. Of this Prince it is hard to judge, whether his ambition had taught him the exercise of more vices, than Nature, and his excellent Education had inriched him with vertues. For besides that he was Valiant, Wise, Learned, and Master of his Affections, he had this sauour of Pietie, that he rather laboured to satisfie those that were grieued, than to suppresse them, Whereof (among many other) wee finde a good example in his dealing with Arcadion, and Nicanor; whom, when for their euill speech of Philip, his familiars perswaded him to put to death; Hee answered them, That first it ought to bee considered, whether the fault were in them that gaue him ill language, or in himselfe: Secondly, that it was in euery mans owne power to bee well spoken off; and this was shortly proued, for after Philip had re∣lieued their necessities, there were none within his Kingdome that did him more honour than they did. Whereupon hee told those that had perswaded him to vse violence, that he was a better Phisition for euill speech than they were. His Epistles to Alexander his sonne are remembred by Cicero, and Gellius; and Cic. . 2. by Dion: and Chrysostome exceedingly commended. His Stratagems are gathered Gell. l. 9. c. 3. . 2. de by Polyaenus and Frontinus, his wise sayings by Plutarch, And albeit hee held Mace∣don as in his owne right, all the time of his raigne, yet was he not the true and next Heire thereof: for Amyntas the sonne of his Brother Perdiccas (of whom he had the protection during his infancie) had the right. This Amyntas hee married to his Daughter Cyna, who by him a Daughter called Eurydice, who was married to Philips base sonne Aridaeus, her Vncle by the mothers-side: both which Olympias, Philips first Wife, and Mother to Alexander the Great, put to death; Aridaeus by torments: Eurydice shee Philip had by this Olympias, the Daughter of Neoptolemus, King of the Molossians, (of the race of Achilles ) Alexander the Great, and Cleopatra. Cleopatra was married to her Vncle Alexander, King of Epirus, and was after her Brother Alexanders death slaine at Sardis, by the commandement of Antigonus. By , an Illyrtan, his second wife, hee had Cyna, married as is shewed before. By Nicasipolis, the Sister of Iason, Tyrant of Pheres, hee had Thessalonica, whom Cassander, after he had taken Pidna, married, but shee was afterward by her Father∣in-law Antipater put to death. By Cleopatra, the of Attalus, he had Caranus, whom others call Philip: him, Olympias, the Mother of Alexander the Great, caused to be rosted to death in a cop∣per . l. 13. c. 2. Iust. l. 3. Pan. Others lay this murder on Alexander himselfe. By the same Cleopatra hee had likewise a Daughter, called Europa, whom Olympias also murdered at the Mo∣thers brest. By Phila and Meda he had no issue. Hee had also two Concubines, , whom, after hee had gotten with child, hee married to an obscure man, called Lagus, who bare Ptolomie, King of Aegypt, called the sonne of Lagus, but esteemed the sonne of Philip: by Philinna, his second Concubine, a publike Dancer, had Aridaeus, of whom wee shall haue much oc∣casion to speake hereafter. CHAP. II. Of ALEXANDER the Great. §. I. A briefe rehearsall of ALEXANDERS doings, before inuaded Asia. ALEXANDER, afterward called the Great, succeeded vnto Philip his Father; being a Prince no lesse Valiant by Nature, than by Education, well instructed, and inriched in all sorts of Learning and good Arts. Hee began his raigne ouer the Macedonians foure hundred and seuenteene yeeres after Rome built, and after his owne birth twentie yeeres. The strange dreames of Philip his Father, and that one of the gods, in the shape of a Snake, begat him on Olympias his Mother, I omit as foolish tales; but that the Temple of Diana (a worke the most magnificent of the World) was burnt vpon the day of his birth, and that so strange an accident was accompanied with the newes of three seuerall victories, obtayned by the Macedonians, it was very remarkeable, and might with the reason of those times be for ominous, and foreshewing the great things by Alexander afterward performed. Vpon the change of the King, the Neighbour-Nations, whom Philip had opprest, beganne to consult about the recouerie of their former libertie, and to aduenture it by force of Armes. Alexanders yong-yeeres gaue them hope of preuailing, and his suspected seuerity increased courage in those, who could better resolue to die, to liue sla∣uishly. But Alexander gaue no time to those swelling humours, which might spee∣dily haue endangered the health of his estate. For after reuenge taken vpon the Conspirators against his Father, whom he vpon his Tombe; and the celebra∣tion of his Funeralls, hee first fastened vnto him his owne Nation, by freeing them from all exactions, and bodily slauerie, other than their seruice in his warres; and v∣sed such Kingly towards those that contemned his yong yeeres, and such clemencie to the rest that perswaded themselues of the crueltie of his disposition, as all affections being pacified at home, He made a present journey into Peloponnesus, and so well exercised his spirits among them, as by the Counsell of the States of Greece, he was according to the great desire of his heart, elected Captaine-Generall against the Persians, vpon which war Philip his Father had not only resolued, (who had obtained the same title of Generall Commander) but had transported vnder the leading of , and Attalus, a part of his Armie, to recouer some places on Asia- side, for the safe descent of the rest. This enterprise against the Persian occupied all Alexanders affections; those faire markes of riches, Honour, and large Dominion, hee now shot at both sleeping and waking: all other thoughts and imaginations were either grieuous or hatefull. But a contrary winde ariseth; for hee receiueth aduertisement that the Athenians, The∣bans, and , had vnited themselues against him, and, by assistance from the Persian, hoped for the recouerie of their former freedome. Hereto they were perswaded by Demosthenes, himselfe being thereto perswaded by the gold of Persia; the deuice he vsed was more subtile than profitable, for hee caused it to be bruted that Alexander was slaine in a battaile against the Triballes, & brought into the assem∣bly a Companion whom hee had corrupted to affirme, That himselfe was present and wounded in the battaile. There is indeede a certaine Doctrine of Policie (as Policie is now a-daies defined by falshood and knauerie) that deuised rumours and lies, if they serue the turne, but for a day or two, are greatly auaileable. It is true that common people are sometime mockt by them, as Souldiers are by false alarums in the Warres; but in all that I haue obserued, I haue found the successe as ridiculous as the inuention. For as those that finde themselues at one time abused by such like brutes, at other times neglect their duties, when they are vpon true reports, and in occasions perilous, summoned to assemble; so all men in generall condemne the Venters of such trumperie, and for them feare vpon necessarie occasions to en∣tertaine the truth it selfe. This labour vnlooked for, and losse of time, was not only very grieuous to Alexander, but by turning his sword from the ignoble and effemi∣nate Persians, against which he had directed it, towards the manly and famous Grae∣cians, of whose assistance he thought himselfe assured, his present vndertaking was greatly disordered. But he that cannot indure to striue against the winde, shall hard∣ly attaine the Port which hee purposeth to : and it no lesse becommeth the worthiest men to oppose misfortunes, than it doth the weakest children to bewaile them. Hee therefore made such expedition towards these Reuolters, as that himselfe, with the Armie that followed him, brought them the first news of his preparation. Hereupon all stagger, and the Athenians, as they were the first that moued, so were they the first that fainted, seeking by their Embassadours to the King, and to be receiued againe into his grace. Alexander was not long in resoluing; for the Persi∣ans perswaded him to pardon the Graecians. Wise men are not easily drawne from great purposes by such occasions as may easily be taken off, neither hath any King brought to any great affaire, who hath intangled himselfe in many enter∣prises at once, not tending to one and the same certaine . And hauing now his borderers towards the South, he resolued to assure those Nations which lay on the North-side of Macedon, to wit, the Tracians, Tri∣balles, Peones, Getes, Agrians, and other saluage people, which had greatly vexed with incursions, not only other of his Predecessours, but euen Philip his Father: with all which, after diuers ouerthrowes giuen them, hee made peace, or else brought them into subjection. Notwithstanding this good successe, he could not yet find the way out of Europe. There is nothing more naturall to man than libertie; the Greekes had enjoyed it ouer-long, and lost it too late to forget it; they therefore shake off the yoke once againe. The Thebans, who had in their Citadell a Garrison of a thousand Macedons, attempt to force it; Alexander hasteth to their succour, and presents him∣selfe with thirty thousand foot, all old Souldiers, and three thousand horse, before the Citie, and gaue the Inhabitants some daies to resolue, being euen heart-sicke with the desire of passing into Asia. So vnwilling, indeede, he was to draw bloud of the Graecians, by whom hee hoped to serue himselfe elsewhere, that hee offered the Thebans remission, if they would only deliuer into his hands Phoenix and Prothytes, the stirrers vp of the Rebellion. But they, opposing the mounting fortune of Alex∣ander, (which bare all resistance before it, like the breaking-in of the Ocean-Sea) in stead of such an answer, as men besieged and abandoned should haue made, deman∣ded Philotas and Antipater to bee deliuered vnto them; as if Thebes alone, then layed in the ballance of Fortune with the Kingdome of Macedon, and many other Prouin∣ces, could either haue the scale or swaied it. Therefore in the end they pe∣rished in their obstinacie. For while the Thebans oppose the Armie assailant, they are charged at the back by the Macedonian Garrison, their Citie taken and razed to the ground, sixe thousand slaine, and thirty thousand sold for slaues, at the price of foure hundred and fortie talents. This the King did to the terrour of the other Grae∣cian Cities. Many Arguments were vsed by one of the prisoners, to perswade Alex∣ander to forbeare the destruction of Thebes. He prayed the King to belieue that they were rather misse-led by giuing hasty credit to false reports, than any way malici∣ous; for being perswaded of Alexanders death, they rebelled but against his Suc∣cessour. He also besought the King to remember, that his father Philip had his edu∣cation in that Citie, yea that his Ancestor Hercules was borne therein: but all per∣swasions were fruitlesse; the times wherein offences are committed, doe greatly ag∣grauate them. Yet for the honour he bare to learning, he pardoned all of the race of Pindarus the Poet, and spared, and set at libertie Timoclea, the sister of Theagenes, who died in defence of the libertie of Greece against his Father Philip. This Noble∣woman being taken by a Thracian, and by him rauished, hee threatned to take her life vnlesse she would confesse her treasure: she led the Thracian to a Well, and told him that she had therein cast it: and when the Thracian stooped to looke into the Well, she suddainly thrust him into the mouth thereof, and stoned him to death. Now because the Athenians had receiued into their Citie so many of the Thebans, as had escaped and fled vnto them for succour, Alexander would not grant them peace, but vpon condition to deliuer into his hands both their Orators which per∣swaded this second reuolt, and their Captaines; yet in the end it being a torment vn∣to him to retard the enterprise of Persia, he was content that the Orators should re∣maine, and accepted of the banishment of the Captaines, wherein he was exceeding ill aduised, had not his fortune, or rather the prouidence of God, made all the resi∣stance against him vnprofitable: for these good Leaders of the Graecians betooke themselues to the seruice of the Persian, whom after a few daies he inuadeth. §. II. How ALEXANDER passing into Asia, fought with the Persians vpon the Riuer of Granicus. WHen all was now quieted at home, Alexander, committing to the trust of Antipater both Greece and Macedon, in the first of the Spring did passe the Hellespont, and being readie to dis-imbarke, he threw a Dart towards the Asian shore, as a token of defiance, commanding his Souldiers not to make any waste in their owne Territorie, or to burne, or deface those buildings which themselues were presently, and in the future to possesse. He landed his Armie, consisting of two and thousand foot, and fiue thousand horse, all old Souldiers, neere vnto Troy, where he offered a solemne sacrifice vpon Tombe, his maternall Ancestor. But before he left his own coast, he put to death, without any offence giuen him, all his Mother-in-lawes Kinsmen, whom Philip his Father had greatly aduanced, not sparing such of his owne as he suspected. Hee also tooke with him many of his tributarie Princes, of whose fidelitie he doubted; thinking by vniust crueltie to as∣sure all things, both in the present and future. Yet the end of all out contrary to the policy which his Ambition had commended vnto him, though agreeing very well with the iustice of God; for all that he had planted, who soone withered, and rooted vp; those, whom he most trusted, were the most traiterous; his mother, friends, and children, fell by such another mercilesse sword as his own, and all man∣ner of confusion followed his dead bodie to the graue, and left him there. When the knowledge of Alexanders landing on Asia side was brought to Darius, hee so much scorned the Armie of Macedon, and had so contemptible an opinion of Alexander himselfe, as hauing stiled him his seruant on a letter which hee wrote vnto him, reprehending his disloyaltie and audacitie (for Darius intitled himselfe King of Kings, and the Kinsman of the gods) hee gaue order withall to his Lieute∣nants of the lesser Asia, that they should take Alexander aliue, whip him with rods, and then conuay him to his presence: that they should sinke his ships, and send the Macedons taken prisoners beyond the Red-Sea, belike into Aethiopia, or some o∣ther vnhealthfull part of Affrica. In this sort did this glorious King, confident in the glittering, but heartlesse, mul∣titude which he commanded, dispose of the alreadie-vanquished ; But the il destinies of men beare them to the ground, by what strong confidence soeuer armed. The great numbers which he gathered together, and brought in one into the field, gaue rather an exceeding aduantage to his enemies, then any discou∣ragement at all. For besides that they were men vtterly vnacquainted with dan∣gers, men who by the name and countenance of their King were wont to preuaile against those of lesse courage than themselues, men that tooke more care how to embroder with gold and siluer their vpper garments, as if they attended the inuasi∣on but of the Sunne-beames, than they did to arme themselues with yron and steele against the sharpe pikes, swords and darts of the Macedonians; I say, be∣sides all these, euen the opinion they had of their owne numbers, of which euery one in particular hoped that it would not fall to his turne to , filled euery of them with the care of their owne safetie, without any intent at all to hazard any thing but their owne breath, and that of their horses, in running away. The Ma∣cedonians as they came to fight, and therby to enrich themselues with the gold and iewels of Persia, both which they needed, so the Persians, who expected nothing in that Warre but blowes and wounds, which they needed not, obeyed the King, who had power to constraine them in assembling themselues for his seruice; but their owne feares and cowardice, which in time of danger had most power ouer them, they only then obeied, when their rebellion against so seruile a passion did iustly and violently require it. For saith VEGETIVS: modum bene exercitatus miles prae∣lium cupit, ita formidat indoctus; nam sciendum est in pugnâ vsum amplius prodesse quàm vires; As the well practised Souldier desires to come to battaile, so the raw one feares it: for we must vnderstand, that in fight it more auailes to haue beene accustomed vnto the like, than only to haue rude strength. What maner of men the Persians were, Alexander discoue∣red in the first encounter, before which time it is said, by those that writ his Storie, That it was hard to iudge, whether his daring to vndertake the Conquest of an Em∣pire so wel peopled, with a handfull of men, or the successe he had, were more to be wondred at. For at the Riuer of Granick, which seuereth the Territorie of Troy from Propontis, the Persians sought to stop his passage, taking the higher ground and of the riuer to defend, which Alexander was forced (as it were) to clime vp vn∣to, and scale from the Leuel of the water; Great resistance (saith Curtius ) was made by the Persians, yet in the end Alexander preuailed. But it seemes to mee, that the victorie then gotten was exceeding easie, and that the twentie thousand Persian foot-men, said to be slaine, were rather kil'd in the back, in running away, than hurt in the bosomes by resisting. For had those twentie thousand foot, and two hundred and fiftie horse-men, or after Plutarch, two thousand and fiue hundred horse-men, died with their faces towards the Macedonians, Alexander could not haue bought their liues at so small a rate, as with the losse of foure and thirtie of all sorts of his owne. And if it were also true, that Plutarch doth report, how Alexander encoun∣tred two of the Persian Commanders, Spithridates and , and that the Persi∣an horse-men fought with great furie, though in the end scattered; and lastly, how those Graecians in Darius his pay, holding themselues in one bodie vpon a piece of ground of aduantage, did (after mercy was refused them) fight it out to the last; how doth it then resemble truth, that such resistance hauing beene made, yet of Alexanders Armie there fell but twelue Foote-men, two and twentie Horse∣men? §. III. A digression concerning the defence of hard passages. Of things following the battaile of Granick. THe winning of this passage did greatly encourage the Macedonians, and brought such terror vpon all those of the Asia, as hee obtained all the Kingdomes thereof without a blow, some one or two Townes excepted. For in all inuasions, where the Nations inuaded haue once beene beaten vpon a great aduantage of the place, as in defence of Ri∣uers, Streights, and Mountaines, they will soone haue perswaded themselues, that such an enemie vpon equall termes and euen ground, can hardly be resisted. It was therefore Machiauels counsell, that he which resolueth to defend a passage, should with his ablest force oppose the Assailant. And to say truth, few Regions of any great circuit are so well fenced, that Armies of such force as may be thought suffi∣cient to conquer them, can be debarred all entrance, by the natural difficultie of the waies. One passage or other is commonly left vnguarded: if all be defended, then must the forces of the Countrie be distracted, and yet lightly, some one place will be found that is defended very weakely. How often haue the Alpes giuen way to Ar∣mies, breaking into Italie? Yea, where shall we finde that euer they kept out an in∣uadour? Yet are they such, as (to speake briefly) afflict with all difficulties those that ouer them; but they giue no securitie to those that lie behinde them: for they are of too large extent. The Townes of Lumbardie perswaded themselues that they might enioy their quiet, when the Warlike Nation of the Switzers had vndertaken to hinder Francis the French King from descending into the Duchie of Milan: but whilest these Patrons of Milan, whom their owne dwelling in those Mountaines had made fittest of all other for such a seruice, were busied in custodie of the Alpes; Francis appeared in Lumbardie, to so much the greater terrour of the Inhabitants, by how much the lesse they had expected his arriuall. What shall we say of those Mountaines, which locke vp whole Regions in such sort, as they leaue but one gate open? The Straights, or (as they were called) the gates of Taurus in Cilicia, and those of Thermopylae, haue seldome beene attempted, perhaps because they were thought impregnable: but how seldome (if euer) haue they been attemp∣ted in vaine? Xerxes and long after him, the Romans, forced the entrance of ; Cyrus the yonger, and after him Alexander, found the Gates of Cilicia wide open; how strongly soeuer they had beene locked & barred, yet were those coun∣tries open enough to a fleet that should enter on the backe-side. The defence of Ri∣uers how hard a thing it is, we finde examples in all histories that beare good wit∣nesse. The deepest haue many Foords; the swiftest and broadest may bee passed by Boates, in case it be found a matter of difficultie to make a bridge. He that hath enow to defend all the length of his owne banke, hath also enow to beat his enemie; and may therefore doe better to let him come ouer, to his losse, than by striuing in vaine to hinder the passage, as a matter tending to his owne disaduan∣tage, fill the heads of his Souldiers with an opinion, that they are in ill case, hauing their meanes of safeguard taken from them, by the skill or valour of such as are too good for them. Certainely, if a Riuer were sufficient defence against an Armie, the Isle of Mona, now called Anglesey, which is diuided from North-Wales by an arme of the Sea; had beene safe enough against the Romans, inuading it vnder conduct of Iulius Agricola. But he wanting, and not meaning to spend the time in making ves∣sels to transport his forces, did assay the foords. Whereby hee so amazed the ene∣mies attending for ships and such like prouision by Sea, that surely beleeuing no∣thing could bee hard or inuincible to men, which came so minded to Warre, they humbly intreated for peace, and yeelded the . Yet the Britaines were men stout enough; the Persians very dastards. It was therefore wisely done of Alexander, to passe the Riuer of Granick in face of the enemie; not marching higher to seeke an easier way, nor labouring to con∣uey his men ouer it by some safer meanes. For hauing beaten them vpon their own ground, he did thereby cut off no lesse of their reputation, than of their strength, leauing no hope of succour to the partakers and followers of such vnable Pro∣tectors. Soone after this victorie he recouered Sardis, Ephesus, the Cities of the Trallians and Magnesia, which were rendred vnto him. The Inhabitants of which, with the people of the Countrie, he receyued with great grace, suffring them to be gouerned by their owne lawes. For he obserued it well; Nouum Impertum inchoantibus vtilis clementiae fama; It is commodious vnto such as lay the foundations of a new Soueraignety, to haue the fame of being mercifull. He then by Parmenio wanne Miletus, and by force mastred Halicarnassus, which because it resisted obstinatly, he razed to the ground. From whence he entred into Caria, where Ada the Queene, who had beene cast out of all that shee held (except the Citie of Alinda ) by Darius his Lieutenants, presen∣ted her selfe vnto him, and adopted him her sonne and successor; which Alexander accepted in so gracious part, as he left the whole Kingdome to her disposing. Hee then entred into Lycia, and Pamphilia, and obtained al the Sea-coasts, and subiecting vnto him Pisidia, he directed himselfe towards Darius (who was said to be aduanced towards him with a maruellous Armie) by the way of Phrygia: For all the Prouince of Asia the lesse, bordering vpon the Sea, his first victorie layed vnder his feet. While he gaue order for the gouernment and setling of Lycia, and Pamphilia, the sent Cleander to raise some new Companies in Peloponnesus, and marching towards the North, he entred Celenas seated on the Riuer Meander, which was abandoned vnto him, the Castle onely holding out, which also after fortie daies was giuen vp: for so long time he gaue them to attend succour from . From Celenas he past on through Phrygia towards the Euxine Sea, till hee came to a City called Gordium, the Regall seate, in former times, of King Midas. In this City it was that he found the Gordian- knot, which when he knew not how to vndoe, hee cut it a sunder with his sword. For there was an ancient prophecie did promise to him that could vntie it, the Lordship of all Asia; whereupon Alexander, not respecting the maner how, so it were done, assumed to himselfe the fulfilling of the prophesie, by he wing it in pieces. But before he turned from this part of Asia the lesse towards the East, hee tooke care to cleare the Sea-coast on his backe, and to thrust the Persians out of the Ilands of Lesbos, Scio, and Coos, the charge whereof hee committed vnto two of his Cap∣taines, giuing them such order as he thought to be most cōuenient for that seruice; and deliuering vnto them fiftie Talents to defray the charge; and with all out of his first spoile gotten, hee sent threescore talents more to Antipater his Lieutenant in and Macedon. From Celenas he remoued to Ancira, now called Anguori, stan∣ding on the same Riuer of Sangarius, which runneth through Gordium: there hee mustred his Armie, and then entred Paphlagonia, whose people submitted them∣selues vnto him, and obtained freedome of tribute: where he left Catus Gouernour with one Regiment of Macedonians lately arriued. Heere he vnderstood of the death of , Darius Lieutenant, which hartned him greatly to passe on towards him, for of this only Captaine hee had more re∣spect than of all the multitude by Darius assembled, and of all the Commanders he had besides. For so much hath the spirit of some one man excelled, as it hath vn∣dertaken and effected the alteration of the greatest States and Common-weales, the erection of Monarchies, the conquest of Kingdomes and Empires, guided hand∣fuls of men against multitudes of equal bodily strength, contriued victories beyond all hope and discourse of reason, conuerted the fearefull passions of his owne fol∣lowers into magnanimitie, and the valour of his enemies into cowardize; such spirits haue beene stirred vp in sundry Ages of the world, and in diuers parts thereof, to e∣rect and cast downe againe, to establish and to destroy, and to bring all things, Per∣sons and States, to the same certaine ends, which the infinit Spirit of the Vniuersall, piercing, mouing, and gouerning all things, hath ordained. Certainly the things that this King did were maruellous, and would hardly haue beene vndertaken by any man else: and though his Father had determined to haue inuaded the lesser A∣sia, it is like enough that he would haue contented himselfe with some part thereof, and not haue discouered the Riuer of Indus, as this man did. The swift course of victory, wherwith he ranne ouer so large a portion of the World, in so short a space, may iustly be imputed vnto this, that he was neuer encountred by an equall spirit, concurring with equall power against him. Hereby it came to passe that his actions being limited by no greater opposition, then Desart places, and the meere length of tedious iournies could make, were like the Colossus of Rhodes, not so much to bee ad∣mired for the workemanship, though therein also praise-worthy, as for the huge bulke. For certainely the things performed by Xenophon, discouer as braue a spirit as Alexanders, and working no lesse exquisitely, though the effects were lesse mate∣riall, as were also the forces and power of command, by which it wrought. But hee that would finde the exact patterne of a noble Commander, must looke vpon such as Epaminondas, that encountring worthy Captains, and those better followed than themselues, haue by their singular vertue ouer-topped their valiant enemies, and still preuailed ouer those, that would not haue yeelded one foot to any other. Such as these are, doe seldome liue to obtaine great Empires. For it is a worke of more la∣bour and longer time, to master the equall forces of one hardie and well-ordered State, than to tread downe and vtterly subdue a multitude of seruile Nations, com∣pounding the body of a grosse vnweildie Empire. Wherefore these Paruo Potentes, men that with little haue done much vpō enemies of like ability, are to be regarded as choise examples of worth, but great Conquerours, to be rather admired for the substance of their actions, than the exquisite managing: exactnesse and greatnesse concurring so seldome, that I can finde no instance of both in one, saue onely that braue Roman Caesar. Hauing thus sarre digressed, it is now time that wee returne vnto our Easterne Conqueror; who is trauailing hastily towards Cilicia, with a desire to recouer the Streights thereof before Darius should arriue there. But first making a dispatch in∣to Greece, he sent to those Cities, in which he reposed most trust, some of the Persian Targets which he had recouered in his first battaile; vpon which, by certaine inscri∣ptions, he made them partakers of his victorie. Herein he well aduised himselfe; for he that doth not as well impart of the honour which he gaineth in the Warres, as hee doth of the spoiles, shall neuer be long followed by those of the better sort. For men which are either well borne or well bred, and haue more of wealth than of reputation, doe as often satisfie themselues with the purchase of glorie; as the weake in fortune, and strong in courage, doe with the gaine of gold and siluer. The Gouernour of Cilicia hearing of Alexander comming on, left some Compa∣nies to keepe the Streights, which were indeede very defencible; and withall, as Curtius noteth, hee beganne ouer-late to prise and put in execution the Counsell of Memnon: who in the beginning of the Warres aduised him to waste all the proui∣sions for Men and Horse, that could not be lodged in strong places, and alwaies to giue ground to the Inuader, till hee found some such notable aduantage as might assuredly promise him the obtaining of victory. For the fury of an inuading Army is best broken, by delaies, change of diet, and want, eating sometimes too little, and sometimes too much, sometimes reposing themselues in beds, and more oftner on the cold ground. These and the like suddaine alterations bring many diseases vpon all Nations out of their owne Countries. Therefore if Darius had kept the Mace∣donians but a from meat and sleepe, and refusing to giue or take battaile, had wearied them with his light horse, as the Parthians afterward did the Romans, hee might perchance haue saued his owne life, and his estate. For it was one of the grea∣test incouragements giuen by Alexander to the Macedonians, in the third and last fa∣tall battaile, that they were to fight with all the strength of Persia at once. Xerxes, when inuaded Greece and fought abroad, in being beaten, lost onely his men; but Darius being inuaded by the Greekes, and fighting at home, by beeing beaten, lost his Kingdome; , though the burnt all in Attica to the Gates of Athens, yet could not be drawne to hazard a : for the inuaded ought euermore to fight vpon the aduantage of time and place. Because wee reade Histories to informe our vnderstanding by the examples found, wee will giue some instances of those that haue perished by aduenturing in their own coun∣tries, to charge an inuading Armie. The Romans, by fighting with Hannibal, were brought to the brinke of their destruction. Pompey was well aduised for a while, when hee gaue Caesar ground, but when by the importunitie of his Captaines he aduentured to fight at Pharsalia, hee lost the battaile, lost the freedome of Rome, and his owne life. Ferdinand, in the Conquest of Naples, would needs fight a battaile with the French to his confusion, though it was told him by a man of sound judgement, that those Counsels which promise in all things, are honourable enough. The Constable of France made frustrate the mighty preparation of Charles the Fift, when he inuaded Prouence, by wasting the Countrie, and for bearing to fight; so did the Duke of the French in Naples, and dissolue the boisterous Ar∣mie of the Prince of Orenge in the low-Countries. The Leigers, contrarie to the aduice of their Generall, would needs fight a bat∣taile with the Bourgonians, their Countrie, and could not be perswaded to linger the time, and stay their aduantage; but they lost eight and twenty thousand vpon the place. Philip of Valois set vpon King Edward at Cressie, and King Iohn (when the English were tired out, and would in short time by an orderly pursuit haue beene wasted to nothing) the black Prince with great fury, neere Poitiers, to joyne battaile with him: But all men know what lamentable successe these two French Kings found. Charles the of France made another kinde of Fabian Warfare; and though the English burnt and many places, yet this King held his resolution to forbeare blowes, and followed his aduice which told him, I bat the English could neuer get his inheritance by smoke; and it is reported by Bellay and Herrault, King Edward was wont to say of this Charles, that hee wanne from him the Duchie of Guien without euer putting on his Armour. But where God hath a purpose to destroy, wise men grow short-liued, and the charge of things is committed vnto such as either cannot see what is for their good, or know not how to put in execution any sound aduice: The course which had propounded, must in all appearance of reason haue brought the Macedonian to a great perplexitie, and made him stand still a while at the Streights of Cilicia, doub∣ting whether it were more shamefull to returne; or dangerous to proceede. For had Cappadocia and Paphlagonia beene wasted whilest Alexander was farre off; and the Streights of Cilicia beene defended by Arsenes, Gouernor of that Prouince, with the best of his forces: hunger would not haue suffered the , to stay the triall of all meanes that might be thought vpon, of forcing that passage; or if the place could not haue beene maintained, yet might Cilicia, at better leisure haue beene so throughly spoiled, that the heart of his Armie should haue beene broken, by see∣king out miseries with painefull trauaile. But Arsenes leauing a small number to defend the Streights, took the best of his Armie with him, to waste, & spoile the Countrie; or rather, as may seeme, to finde himselfe some worke, by pretence of which he might honestly runne further away from Alexander. Hee should rather haue aduentured his person in custodie of the Streights, whereby hee might haue saued the Prouince; and in the meane time, all that was in the fields, would haue beene conueighed into strong Townes. So should his Armie, if it were driuen from the place of aduantage, haue found good entertainement within walled Cities, and himselfe with his horse-men haue had the lesse worke in destroying that little which was left abroad. Handling the matter as he did, hee gaue the Cilicians cause to wish for Alexanders comming, and as great cause to the Keepers of the passage not to hinder it. For cowards are wise in apprehending all formes of danger. These Guardians of the Streights, hearing that Arsenes made all haste to joyne himselfe with Darius, burning down all as he went, like one despairing of the defence, beganne to grow circumspect, and to thinke that surely their Generall, who gaue as lost the Countrie behinde their backs, had ex∣posed themselues vnto certaine death, as men that were good for nothing else, but to dull the Macedonian swords. Wherefore, not affecting to die for their Prince and Countrie (which honour they saw that Arsenes himselfe could well forbeare) they speedily followed the foote-steps of their Generall, gleaning after his Haruest. Thus Alexander without labour got both the entrance of Cilicia, abandoned by the cowardise of his Enemies, and the whole Prouince that had beene alienated from the Persian side by their indiscretion. §. IIII. Of the vnwarlike Armie leuied by DARIVS against ALEXANDER. The courses which DARIVS tooke in this expedition. He is vanquished at Issus; where his Mother, Wife, and Children are made prisoners. Of some things following the battaile of Issus. IN the meane season Darius approched; who (as Curtius reports) had compounded an Armie of more than two hundred & ninetie thou∣sand Souldiers, out of diuers Nations; Iustine musters them at three hundred thousand Foot, and a hundred thousand Horse; Plutarch at sixe hundred thousand. The manner of his comming on, as Curtius describes it, was rather like a masker than a man of Warre, and like one that tooke more care to set out his glorie and riches, than to prouide for his owne safety, perswading himselfe, as it seemed, to beat Alexander with pompe and sumptuous Pageants. For, before the Armie there was carried the holy fire which the Persians worshipped, attended by their Priests, and after them three hundred and threescore and fiue yong-men, answering the num∣ber of the daies of the yeere, couered with Scarlet; then the Chariot of Iupiter drawne with white Horses, with their Riders cloathed in the same colour; with rods of gold in their hands; And after it, the Horse of the Sunne: Next after these followed ten sumptuous Chariots, inlaied and garnisht with siluer and gold, and then the Vantguard of their horse, compounded of twelue seuerall Nations, which the better to auoide confusion, did hardly vnderstand each others language, and these marshalled in the head of the rest, being beaten, might serue very fitly to dis∣order all that followed them; in the taile of these Horses the Regiment of foote marched, with the Persians called immortall, because if any died, the number was presently supplied: and these were armed with chaines of gold, and their coates with the same metall imbrodered, whereof the sleeues were garnished with pearle, baites, either to catch the hungrie Macedonians withall, or to perswade them that it were great inciuilitie to cut and to deface such glorious garments. But it was well said: Sumptuosè inductus miles, se virtute superiorem alijs non existimet, cum in o∣porteat fortitudine animi, & non vestimentis muniri, quoniam hostes vestibus non debel∣lantur; Let no man thinke that hee exceedeth those in valour, whom hee exceedeth in gay garments, for it is by men armed with fortitude of mind, and not by the apparell they put on, that enemies are beaten. And it was perchance from the Roman Papyrius that this ad∣uice was borrowed, who when he fought against the Samnites in that fatall battaile, wherein they all sware either to preuaile or die, thirtie thousand of them hauing ap∣parelled themselues in white garments, with high crests and great plumes of fea∣thers, bade the Roman Souldiers to lay aside all feare: Non enim cristas facere, & per picta atque aurata scuta transire Romanum pilum; For these plumed crests would no bodie, and the Roman pile would bore holes in painted and gilded shields. To second this Court-like company, fifteene thousand were appointed more rich and glittering than the former, but apparelled like Women (belike to breede the more terrour) and these were honoured with the Title of the Kings Kinsmen. Then came Darius himselfe, the Gentle-men of his Guard-robe, riding before his Chariot, which was supported with the gods of his Nation, cast and cut in pure gold; these the Macedonians did not serue, but they serued their turnes of these, by changing their -bodies into thinne portable and currant coine. The head of this Chariot was set with precious stones, with two little golden Idols, couered with an open-winged-Eagle of the same metall: The hinder part being raised high wher∣on Darius sate, had a couering of inestimable value. This Chariot of the King was followed with ten thousand Horse-men, their Lances plated with siluer, and their heads guilt; which they meant not to imbrew in the Macedonian bloud, for feare of marring their beautie. He had for the proper Guard of his person two hundred of the bloud Royall, bloud too Royall & precious to be spilt by any valorous aduen∣ture, (I am of opinion that two hundred sturdie fellowes, like the Switzers, would haue done him more seruice) and these were backt with thirtie thousand foot-men, after whom againe were led foure hundred spare horses for the King, which if hee had meant to haue vsed, he would haue marshalled somewhat neerer him. Now followed the Reareward, the same being led by Sisygambis the Kings Mo∣ther, and by his , drawne in glorious Chariots, followed by a great traine of Ladies their attendants on -back, with fifteen Wagons of the Kings children, and the wiues of the Nobilitie, waited on by two hundred and fiftie Concubines, and a world of Nurses, and Eunuchs, most sumptuously apparelled. By which it should seeme that Darius thought that the Macedonians had beene Comedians or ; for this troupe was far fitter to behold those sports than to be present at battailes. Betweene these and a company of slight-armed slaues, with a world of Vallets, was the Kings treasure, charged on sixe hundred Mules, and three hundred Camels, brought, as it proued, to pay the Macedonians. In this sort came this May∣game-King into the field, incombred with a most vnnecessarie traine of Strumpets, attended with troupes of diuers Nations, speaking diuers languages, and for their numbers impossible to be marshalled, and for the most part so , & so rich in gold and in garments, as the same could not but haue incouraged the nakedest Nation of the world against them. We finde it in daily experience that all discourse of magnanimitie, of Nationall Vertue, of Religion, of Libertie, and whatsoeuer else hath been wont to moue and vertuous men, hath no force at all with the common Souldier, in comparison of spoile and riches. The rich ships are boorded vpon all disaduantages, the rich Townes are furiously assaulted, and the plentifull Countries willingly inuaded. Our English Nations haue attempted many places in the Indies, and runne vpon the head-long, in hope of their Royals of plate, and Pistolcts, which had they been put to it vpon the like disaduantages in Ireland, or in any poore Countrie, they would haue turned their Peeces and Pikes against their Commanders, contesting that they had beene brought without reason to the Butcherie and slaughter. It is true that the warre is made willingly, and for the most part with good successe, that is ordained against the richest Nations; for as the nee∣die are alwaies , so plentie is wont to shunne perill, and men that haue well to liue, doe rather studie how to liue well. I meane wealthily, than care to die (as they call it) honourably. Car ou il ny' arien a gaigner, que des coups volontiersil ny' vapas; No man makes hasle to the market, where there is nothing to be bought but blowes. Now if Alexander had beheld this preparation before his consultation with his South-saiers, hee would haue satisfied himselfe by the out-sides of the Persians, and neuer haue looked into the of Beasts for successe. For leauing the descrip∣tion of this second battaile (which is indeede no-where well described, neither for the confusion and hastie running away of the Asians could it be) we haue enough by the slaughter that was made of them, and by the few that fell of the Macedonians, to informe vs what manner of resistance was made. For if it be true that threescore thousand Persian footmen were slaine in this battaile, with ten thousand of their horsemen: Or (as Curtius saith) an hundred thousand footmen, with the same num∣ber of horse-men, and besides this slaughter, fortie thousand taken prisoners, while of Alexanders Armie there miscarried but two hundred and fourescore of all sorts, of which numbers Arianus and other Historians cut off almost the one halfe: I doe verily beleeue, that this smal number rather died with the ouer-trauaile and paines∣taking in killing their enemies, than by any strokes receiued from them. And surely if the Persian Nation (at this time degenerate and the basest of the World) had had any sauour remaining of the ancient valour of their forefathers; they would neuer haue sold so good cheape, and at so vile a price, the Mother, the Wife, the Daugh∣ters, and other the Kings children; had their owne honor beene valued by them at nothing, and the Kings safetie and his estate at lesse. Darius by this time found it true, that Charidemus a banished Graecian of Athens had told him, when hee made a view of his Armie about Babylon, to wit, That the multitude which hee had assem∣bled of diuers Nations, attired, but poorely armed, would bee found more terrible to the Inhabitants of the country, whom in passing by they would deuour, than to the Macedonians, whom they meant to assaile; who being all old and obe∣dient Souldiers, imbattailed in grosse squadrons, which they call their Phallanx, well couered with Armour for defence, and furnished with weapons for offence of great aduantage, would make so little accompt of his delicate Persians, louing their ease and their palat, being withall ill armed and worse disciplined, as except it would please him to entertaine (hauing so great aboundance of treasure to doe it withall) a sufficient number of the same Graecians, and so to encounter the Macedonians with men of equall courage, hee would repent him ouer-late, as taught by the miserable successe like to follow. But this discourse was so vnpleasing to Darius (who had beene accustomed to no∣thing so much as to his owne praises, and to nothing so little as to heare truth;) as he commanded that this poore Graecian should be presently slaine: who while hee was a sundring in the Tormentors hand, vsed this speech to the King, That Alexan∣der, against whom hee had giuen this good counsell, should assuredly reuenge his death, and lay deserued punishment vpon Darius for despising his aduice. It was the saying of a Wise man: Desperata eius Principis salus est, cuius aures ita sor∣matae sunt, vt aspera quae vtilia, nec nisi iucundum accipiat; That Princes safetie is in a desperate case, whose eares iudge all that is profitable to bee too sharpe, and will enter∣taine nothing that is vnpleasant. For libertie in counsell is the life and essence of counsell; Libert as est eius vita, & essentia, quaerepta consilium euanescit. Darius did likewise value at nothing the Aduice giuen him by the Graecian Soul∣diers that serued him, who intreated him not to fight in the Streights: but had they beene Counsellers and directors in that Warre, as they were vnderlings and com∣manded by others, they had with the helpe of a good troupe of horse-men beene able to haue opposed the furie of Alexander, without any assistance of the Persian foot-men. For when Darius was ouerthrowne with all his cowardly and confused rabble, those Graecians, vnder their Captaine Amyntas, held firme, and marched away in order in despight of the vanquishers. Old Souldiers are not easily dismayed: we reade in Histories ancient and moderne, what braue retraits haue beene made by them, though the rest of the Armie in which they haue serued, hath beene bro∣ken. At the battaile of Rauenne, where the Imperialls were beaten by the French, a squadron of Spaniards, old Souldiers, came off vnbroken and vndismayed; whom when Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemures, and Nephew to Lewis the twelfth, charged, as holding the victorie not intire by their escape, hee was ouer-turned and slaine in the place. For it is truely said of those men, who, by being acquainted with dan∣gers feare them not, That, Neglecto periculo imminentis mali opus ipsum quantumuis difficile aggrediuntur; They goe about the businesse itselfe, how hard soeuer it be, not stan∣ding to consider of the danger, which the mischiefe hanging ouer their heads may bring: and as truely of those that know the warres but by heare-say. Quod valentes sunt & prae∣ualentes ante pericula, in ipsis tamen periculis discedunt; They haue abilitie enough, and to spare, till dangers appeare; but when perill indeede comes, they get them gone. These Graecians also that made the retract, aduised Darius to retire his Armie in∣to the plaine of Mesopotamia, to the end that Alexander being entred into those large fields and great Champions, he might haue inuironed the Macedonians on all sides with his multitude; and withall they counselled him to diuide that his huge Armie into parts, not committing the whole to one stroke of Fortune, whereby he might haue fought many battailes, and haue brought no greater numbers at once then might haue beene well marshalled and conducted. But this counsell was so to the cowardly affections of the Persians, as they perswaded Darius to in∣uirone the Graecians which gaue the aduice, and to cut them in pieces as Traitors. The infinite wisedome of God doth not worke alwaies by one and the same way, but very often in the alteration of Kingdomes and Estates, by taking vnderstanding from the Gouernours, so as they can neither giue nor discerne of Counsels. For Da∣rius that would needs fight with Alexander vpon a straightned piece of ground, neere vnto the Citie of Issus, where he could bring no more hands to fight than A∣lexander could, (who by the aduice of Parmenio staied there, as in a place of best ad∣uantage) was vtterly ouerthrowne, his Treasure lost, his Wife, Mother, and Chil∣dren (whom the Graecians his followers had perswaded him to leaue in Babylon, or elsewhere) taken prisoners, and all their traine of Ladies spoiled of their rich Gar∣ments, Iewels, and Honour: It is true, that both the Queene, with her Daughters, who had the good hap to be brought to Alexanders presence, were entertained with all respect due vnto their birth, their Honours preserued, and their Iewels and rich Garments restored vnto them; and though Darius Wife was a most beautifull La∣die, and his Daughters of excellent forme, yet Alexander mastred his affections to∣wards them all: onely it is reported out of Aristobulus the Historian, that he imbra∣ced the Wife of the valiant Memnon, her Husband lately dead, who was taken fly∣ing from by , at which time the Daughters of Ochus, who raigned before Darius, and the Wiues and Children of all the Nobilitie of Persia in effect, fell into captiuitie; at which time also Darius Treasure (not lost at Issus ) was seized, amounting to sixe thousand and two hundred talents of coine, and of Bullion fiue hundred talents, with a world of riches besides. Darius himselfe leauing his brother dead, with diuers other of his chiefe Cap∣taines (casting the Crowne from his head) hardly escaped. After this ouerthrow giuen vnto Darius, all Phoenicia (the Citie of Tyre excepted) was yeelded to Alexander, of which Parmenio was made Gouernour. Aradus, Zidon, and Biblos, Cities of great importance, of which one Strato was King (but hated of the people) acknowledged Alexander. Good fortune followed him so fast that it troade on his heeles; for Antigonus, Alexanders Lieute∣nant in Asia the lesse, ouerthrew the Cappadocians, Paphlagonians, and others lately reuolted; Aristodemus, Darius Admirall, had his Fleet partly taken, and in part drowned by the Macedonians newly leauied; the Lacedaemonians that warred against Antipater were beaten; foure thousand of those Greeks which made the retrait the last battaile, forsaking both the partie of Darius and of Alexander, and led by A∣myntas into Aegypt, to hold it for themselues, were buried there; for the time was not yet come to diuide Kingdomes. Alexander, to honour Ephestion, whom he loued most, gaue him power to dispose of the Kingdome of Zidon. A man of a most poore estate, that laboured to sustaine his life, being of the Royall bloud, was commended by the people vnto him, who changed his Spade into a Scepter, so as he was beheld both a Begger and a King in one and the same houre. It was a good desire of this new King, when speaking to Alexander, he wisht that he could beare his prosperitie with the same moderation, and quietnesse of heart, that he had done his aduersitic; but ill done of Alexander, in that he would not per∣forme in himselfe that which he commended in another mans desire: for it was a signe that he did but accompanie, and could not gouerne his felicitie. While he made some stay in those parts, he receiued a letter from Darius, impor∣ting the ransome of his Wife, his Mother, and his Children, with some other condi∣tions of peace, but such as rather became a Conqueror, than one that had now been twice shamefully beaten, not vouch safing, in his direction, to stile Alexander King. It is true, that the Romans, after that they had receiued an ouerthrow by Pyrrhus, returned him a more answere vpon the offer of peace, than they did be∣fore the triall of his force. But as their fortunes were then in the Spring, so that of Darius had already cast leafe, the one a resolued well armed and disciplined Nation, the other cowardly and effeminate. Alexander disdained the offers of Darius, and sent him word that he not only directed his letter to a King, but to the King of Da∣rius himselfe. §. V. How ALEXANDER and wanne the Citie of Tyre. ALEXANDER comming neere to the Citie of Tyre, receiued from them the present of a golden Crowne with great store of victuals, and other presents, which he tooke very thankefully, returning them answere, That he desired to offer a sacrifice to Hercules, the Protector of their Citie, from whom he was descended. But the Tyrians like not his companie within their Walls, but him that the Temple of Hercules was seated in the old City ad∣ioyning, now abandoned and desolate. To be short, Alexander resolued to enter it by force, and though it were a place in all mens opinion impregnable, because the Iland whereon it was built, was eight hundred furlongs from the Maine, yet with the labour of many hands, hauing great store of stone from the old Tyre, and timber sufficient from Lybanus, he filled the passage of the Sea betweene the Iland and the Maine, which being more then once carried away by the strength of the Sea vpon a storme of winde, sometime by the Tyrians fired, and sometime torne asunder, yet with the helpe of his Nauie which arriued (during the siege) from Cyprus, he ouer∣came al difficulties and preuailed, after he had spent seuen months in that attempt. The Tyrians in the beginning of the siege had drowned the messengers sent by Alexander, perswading them to render the Citie, in respect whereof, and of the great losse of time and men, hee put eight thousand to the sword, and caused two thousand of those, that escaped the first furie, to be hanged on Crosses on the Sea-shore, and reserued for slaues (faith Diodore ) thirteene thousand; rec∣kons . l. them at thirtie thousand. Many more had died, had not the Zidonians, that ser∣ued Alexander, conueied great numbers away by shipping vnto their owne Citie. . l. 18. Happy it was for Apollo that the Towne was taken, for one of the Tyrians hauing dreamt, that this god meant to forsake the Citie, they bound him fast with a gol∣den chaine to the Idoll of Hercules; but Alexander like a gracious Prince loosened him againe. It is true, that it was a notable and a difficult but great things are made greater. For Nabuchodonosor had taken it before, and filled vp the channell, that lay betweene the Iland and the Maine. The gouernement of this Territorie he gaue to Philotas, the Sonne of Parmenio; , he committed to Socrates, and Andromachus vnder Parmenio, E∣phestion had the charge of the Fleet, and was directed to finde Alexander at Gaza to∣wards Aegypt. §. VI. How DARIVS offered conditions of peace to ALEXANDER. ALEXANDER winnes Gaza; and deales graciously with the Iewes. IN the meane while Darius sends againe to Alexander, sets before him all the difficulties of passing on towards the East, and laieth the losse of the last battaile to the straightnesse of the place: he hoped to him, by theatning to encompasse him in the plaine Countries, he bids him consider, how impossible it was to passe the Riuers of Euphrates, Tigris, Araxes, and the rest, with all such other fearefull things: for he that was now filled with nothing but feare, had arguments enough of that nature to present vn∣to another. All the Kingdomes betweene the Riuer of Alys, and the Hellespont, hee him in Dower with hi: beloued daughter. But Alexander answered, That he offred him nothing but his own, and that which victorie and his own vertue had possest him of; That he was to giue conditions, and not to receiue any, and that he hauing passed the Sea it selfe, disdained to thinke of resistance in transporting him∣selfe ouer Riuers. It is said, that Parmenio, who was now old and full of honour and riches, told the King, that were he Alexander, he would accept of Darius his offers; to which Alexander answered, That so would he, if he were Parmenio. But he goes on towards Aegypt, and comming before Gaza, Betis a faithfull ser∣uant to Darius, shuts the Gate against him, and defends the Towne with an obsti∣nate resolution, at the siege whereof Alexander receiued a wound in the shoulder, which was dangerous, and a blow on his legge with a stone; Hee found better men in this place than he did at the former battailes, for he left so many of his Macedoni∣ans buried in the sands of Gaza, that hee was forst to send for a new supply into Greece. Here it was that Alexander first began to change condition, and to exercise crueltie. For after that he had entred Gaza by assault, and taken Betis, (whom . Ant. l. 11. . 8. calleth Babemesis ) that was weakened with many wounds, and who neuer gaue ground to the Assailants; he bored holes through his feete, and caused him to bee drawne about the streets, whilest was as yet aliue; who being as valiant a man as himselfe, disdained to aske him either life or remission of his torments. And what had he to countenance this his tyrannie, but the imitation of his Ancestor Achilles, who did the like to Hector? It is true, that crueltie hath alwaies somewhat to couer her deformitie. From Gaza (saith Iosephus ) he led his Army towards Ierusalem, a Citie, for the an∣tiquitie . 1. c. . and great fame thereof, well known vnto him while he lay before Tyre; He had sent for some supply thither, which Iaddus the high Priest, being subiect and sworne to Darius, had refused him. The Iewes therefore fearing his reuenge, and vn∣able to resist, the care of their estates and fafetie to Iaddus, who, being taught by God, issued out of the Citie couered with his Pontificall Robes, to wit, an vpper garment of purple, embrodered with gold, with his Miter, and the plate of gold wherein the name of God was written, the Priests and Leuits in their rich or∣naments, and the people in white , in a maner so vnusual, stately and graue, as Alexander greatly admired it. Iosephus reports it, that he fell to the ground before the high Priest, as reuerencing the of God, and that Parmenio him for it; Howsoeuer it was, I am of opinion, That he became so confident in his enterprise, and so assured of the successe after the prophesie of Daniel had been read vnto him, wherein he saw himselfe, and the conquest of Persia so directly pointed at, as nothing thence-forth could discourage him or feare him. He confessed to Par∣menio (saith Iosephus ) That in Dio a Citie of Macedon, when his minde laboured the conquest of Asia, he saw in his sleepe such a person as Iaddus, and so apparelled, pro∣fessing one and the same God, by whom he was incouraged to pursue the purpose he had in hand with assurance of victorie. This apparition, formerly apprehended only by the light of his fantasie, he now beheld with his bodily eies; wherewith he was so exceedingly pleased and imboldened, as contrarie to the practice of the Phoe∣nicians, (who hoped to haue sackt and destroyed Ierusalem ) he gaue the Iewes all, and more than they desired, both of libertie and immunitie, with permission to liue vn∣der their owne lawes, and to exercise and enioy their owne Religion. §. VII. ALEXANDER winnes Aegypt: and makes a iournie to the Temple of HAMMON. FRom Ierusalem Alexander turned againe towards Aegypt, and it, where Darius his Lieutenant, Astaces, receiued him and deliuered into his hand the Citie of Memphis, with eight hundred talents of treasure, and all other the Kings riches. By this wee that the Kings of Persia, who had more of affection than of , gaue to the man hee had but the command of one Citie, and to the co∣ward the gouernement of all Aegypt. When he had set things in order in Aegypt, he beganne to trauaile after God-head, towards Iupiter Hammon, so foolish had pro∣speritie made him. He was to passe ouer the dangerous and drie sands, where, when the water which he brought on his Camels backe was spent, he could not but haue perished, had not a maruailous showre of raine fallen vpon him, when his Armie was in extreme despaire. All men that know Aegypt, and haue written thereof, , That it neuer raines there; but the purposes of the Almightie God are se∣cret, and he bringeth to passe what it pleaseth him; it is also said, That when hee had lost his way in those vast desarts, that a flight of Crowes before the Armie; who making faster wing when they were followed, and fluttering slowly when the Army was cast backe, guided them ouer those pathlesse sands to Temple. Arrianus from the report of Ptolomie, the sonne of Lagus, saies, That he was led . l. 3. by two Dragons, both which reports may be a-like true; But many of these and things prodigious, are fained by those that haue written the Storie of A∣lexander, as that an Eagle lay houering directly ouer his head at the battaile of Issus; That a Swallow flew about his head when he slept, and could not be feared from him, till it had wakened him at Halicarnasseus, fore-shewing the treason of Aeropus, by Darius to haue slaine him; That from the yron barres of which the Ty∣rians made their defensiue engines, when Alexander besieged them, there fel drops of bloud; and that the like drops were found in a loafe of bread, broken by a Mace∣donian Souldier, at the same time; That a Turfe of earth fell on his shoulder, when he lay before Gaza, out of which there flew a Bird into the aire. The Spaniards in the conquest of the West- Indies haue many such pretie tales; telling how they haue been assisted in battaile, by the presence of our Ladie, and by Angels riding on white horses, with the like Romish miracles, which I thinke themselues do hardly beleeue. The strangest things that I haue read of in this kind being certainly , was, That the night before the battaile at Nouarra, all the Dogges which followed the French Armie, from them to the Switzers, leaping and fawning vpon them, as if they had beene bred and fed by them all their liues, and in the morning following, Tri∣uulzi and Tremouille, Generals for Lewis the twelfth, were by Imperial Switzers vtterly broken and put to ruine. The place of this Idol of Iupiter Hammon is ill described by Curtius, for he bounds it by the Arabian Troglodites on the South, betweene whom and the Territorie of Hammon, the Region Thebais, or the superiour Aegypt, with the Mountaine of Lybia, and the Riuer of Nilus, are interiacent, and on the North he ioynes it to a Nation, called Nassamones, who bordering the Sea-shore, liue (saith hee) vpon the spoiles of shipwracke, whereas the Temple or groue of this Idoll hath no Sea neere it by two hundred miles and more, being found on the South part of Lybia; these . Af. Tab. 3. being due West from it, in the South part of Marmarica. When Alexander came neere the place, hee sent some of his Parasites before him to practise the Priests attending the Oracle, That their answer might bee giuen in all things, agreeable to his madde ambition, who affected the title of Iupiters sonne. And so he was saluted, Sonne of Iupiter, by the Deuils prophet, whether prepared before to flatter him, or rather (as some thinke) defectiue in the Greeke tongue; For whereas he meant to say Opaidion, he said Opaidios, that is; O sonne of Iupiter, in stead of, O dearesonne: for which Grammaticall error he was richly rewarded, & a rumor presently spted, that the great Iupiter had acknowledged Alexander for his owne. He had heard that Perseus and Hercules had formerly consulted with this Oracle, The one, when he was imploied against Gorgon, The other, against Anteus & ; and seeing these men had deriued themselues from the , why might not hee? By this it seemes, that he hoped to make his followers and the world fooles, though indeede he made himselfe one, by thinking to couer from the Worlds knowledge his vanities and vices; and the better to confirme his followers in the beliefe of his , hee had practized the Priests to giue answere to such as consulted with the Oracle, that it should be pleasing to Iupiter to honour Alexander as his Sonne. Curt. li. 4. Who this Ammon was, and how represented, either by a bosse carried in a Boate, or by a Ramme, or a Rammes- head; I see that many wise-men haue troubled them∣selues to findeout; but, as Arrianus speakes of Dionysius, or Liber Pater (who liued saith St. Augustine in Moses ) Ea quae de dijs veteres fabulis suis conscripsere, non sunt nimium curiosè peruestiganda; We must not ouer-curiously search into the fables, which the Ancients haue written of their gods. But this is certaine and notable, that after the Gospel beganne to be preached in the world, the Deuill in this and in all other Idols became speechlesse. For that this Hammon was neglected in the time of Tiberius Caesar, and in the time of Traian altogether forgotten, Strabo and witnesse. There is found neere his Temple a called Fons solis (though Ptolomie in his third African Table sets it ) that at mid-night is as hot as boyling water, and at Noone as cold as any , which I cannot but giue credit, because I haue heard of some other Wells of , and because it is reported by Saint Augustine, by Didore, Herodotns, , Solinus, Arrianus, , and others, and indeed our Bathes in England are much warmer in the night, than in the day. §. VIII. How ALEXANDER marching DARIVS, was opposed very by the Enemie. FRom the Temple of Hammon he returned to Memphis, where among many other learned men, he heard the Philosopher Psammones, who, belike vnderstanding that he affected the title of Iupiters Sonne, told him that God was the Father-King of all men in generall; and refi∣ning the pride of this haughtie King, brought him to say, That God was the Father of all mortall men, but that he acknowledged none for his children saue good men. He gaue the charge of the seuerall Prouinces of Aegypt to seuerall Gouernours, following the rule of his Master , That a great Dominion should not bee conti∣nued Arist. Pol. l. 5. in the hands of any one: whom therein the Roman Emperours also followed, not daring to commit the gouernment of Aegypt to any of their Senators, but to men of meaner ranck and degree. He then gaue order for founding of Alexandria vpon the Wester-most branch of Nilus. And hauing setled (as hee could) the estate of Aegypt, with the Kingdomes of the lesser , , and Syria, (which being but the pawnes of Darius his ill , victorie would readily haue re∣deemed,) he led his Army towards Euphrates, which passage though the same was committed to Mazeus to defend, yet it , and Alexander without re∣sistance past it. From thence marched Tigris, a Riuer for the swiftnesse Curt. l. 4. thereof called by the Persians, The Arrow. Here, as Curtius, and Reason it selfe tels vs, might Darius easily haue repelled inuading Macedonian: for the violent course of the streame was such, as it draue it many waightie stones, and those that moued not but lay in the , were so and well polished by continuall rolling, that no man was able to fight on so slipperie a footing; nor the Macedonian foot-men to wade the Riuer, otherwise than by ioyning their hands and enterla∣cing their Armes together, making one waightie and entire body to resist the swift passage and furious race of the streame. Besides this notable helpe, the Channell was so deepe towards the Easterne shore, where Darius should haue made head, as the footmen were inforst to lift their Bowes, and Arrowes, and Darts ouer their heads to keepe them from being moistned, and made vnseruiceable by the Waters. But it was truely and vnderstandingly said of Homer. Talis est hominum terrestrium mens, Qualem quotidie ducit pater virorum{que} Deorum{que}. The mindes of men are euer so affected, As by Gods will they daily are directed. And it cannot be denied, that as all Estates of the World, by the surfeit of misgo∣uernement haue beene subiect to many grieuous, and sometimes mortall diseases: So had the Empire of Persia at this time brought it selfe into a burning and consu∣ming Feauer, and therby become frantick and without vnderstanding, foreshewing manifestly the dissolution and death thereof. But Alexander hath now recouered the Easterne shores of Tygris, without any other difficultie, thā that of the nature of the place; where Mazeus (who had charge to defend the passage both of Euphrates and it) presented himselfe to the , followed with certaine companies of Horse-men, as if with vneuen forces hee durst haue charged them on euen ground, when as with a multitude farre excee∣ding them, he forsooke the aduantage which no valour of his enemies could easily haue ouercome. But it is commonly seene, that fearefull and cowardly men doe euer follow those waies and counsels, whereof the opportunitie is already . It is true that he set all prouisions a fire wherewith the Macedonians might serue themselues ouer Tygris, thinking thereby greatly to haue distressed them; but the execution of good counsell is fruitlesse when vnseasonable. For now was Alexander so well furnished with carriages, as nothing was wanting to the competencie of the Armie which he conducted. Those things also which he to waste, Alexan∣der being now in sight, were by his Horse-men saued and recouered. This, Mazeus might haue done some daies before at good leisure; or at this time with great a strength of horse-men, as the Macedonians durst not haue pursued them, the strength of their foote out of sight, and farre behinde. §. IX. The new prouisions of DARIVS. Accidents foregoing the battaile of Arbela. DARIVS, vpon Alexanders first returne out of Aegypt, had assembled all the forces, which those Regions next him could furnish, and now also were the Arians, Scythians, Indians, and other Nations arriued; Nations (saith Curtius ) that rather serued to make vp the names of men, than to make . Arrianus hath numbred them with their Leaders; and finds of foot-men of all sorts ten hundred thousand, and of horse foure hundred thousand, besides armed Chariots, and some few Elephants. Curtius who musters the Armie of Darius at two hundred thousand foote, and neere fiftie thousand horse, comes (I thinke) neerer to the true number; and yet seeing he had more confidence in the multitude than in the valour of his Vafsals, it is like enough hee had gathered together of all sorts some three or foure hundred thousand, with in those faire plaines of Assyria to haue ouer- the few of the inuading Armie. But it is a Rule in Philosophie of the . In omni praelio non tam multitudo, & virtus indocta, quam ars & solent victoriam; In battaile skill and practice doe more towards the victory, than multitude and rude . While Alexander rest to his after their passage Tygris, there happened an of the Moone, of which the Macedonians, not knowing the cause and reason, were greatly affrighted. All that were ignorant (as the multitude are) it for a certaine presage of their ouerthrow and destruction, in so much as they began not only to murmur, but to speake it boldly, That for the am∣bition of one man, a man that disdained Philip for his Father, and would needs called the Sonne of Iupiter, they should all perish; For he not only inforst them to make warre against Worlds of enemies, but against Riuers, Mountaines, and the themselues. Hereupon Alexander being readie to march forward made a halt, and to quiet the mindes of the multitude, he called before him the Astrologers, which followed him thence, that by them the Souldiers be assured that this defe∣ction of the Moone was a certaine presage of good successe; for that it was natural they neuer imparted to the common people, reserued the knowledge to them∣selues, so as a sorrie Almanack-maker had no small folle in those daies. Of this kind of superstitious obseruation Caesar made good , when fought against Ariouistus and the Germans: for they being perswaded by the casting of lots, that if they fought before the change of the Moone, they should certainely lose the battaile, Caesar them to abide it, though they durst not giue , wherein their mindes already beaten by their owne superstition, and being resolutely by the Romans, the whole armie in effect perished. These Aegyptians gaue no other reason than this, That the Grecians were vnder the aspect of the Sunne, the Persians, of the Moone; and therefore the Moone failing and being darkened, the state of was now in danger offalling, and their glorie of being obscured. This iudgement of the Aegyptian Priests being noised through all the Armie, all were satisfied, and their courage redoubled. It is a principle in the Warre, which, though deuised since, was well obserued then. Exercitum ad pugnam non ducat; Let not a Captaine his Armie to the fight, when it is possessed with matter of terrour. It is obserued by , that the people are led by nothing so much as by superstition; yea, we finde it in all Stories, and often in our owne, that by such in∣uentions, deuised , dreames, and prophesies, the people of this Land haue been carried -long into many dangerous tumults and insurrections, and still to their owne losse and ruine. As Alexander drew neere the Persian Armie, were surprized writ∣ten by Darius to the , perswading them for great of money, either to kill or Alexander. But these by the aduice of Parmenio he suppressed. At this time also Darius his faire Wife, opprest with sorrow, and wearied with trauell, died. Which accident Alexander seemed no lesse to bewaile than Darius, who vpon the first bruit suspected that some dishonourable violence had of∣fered her, but being satisfied by an Eunuch of owne that attended her, of Alexan∣ders Kingly respect towards her, from the day of her being taken, he desired the im∣mortal Gods, That if they had decreed to make a new Master of the Persian Empire, then it would please them to conferre on so iust and continent an enemie as Alex∣ander, to whom he once againe before the last triall by battaile offered these con∣ditions of peace. That with his Daughter in marriage he would deliuer vp and resigne all Asia the lesse, and with Aegypt, all those Kingdomes between the Phoenician Sea, and the Riuer of Euphrates; That he would pay him for the ransome of his Mother, and his other Daughter thirtie thousand talents, and that for the performance thereof, hee would his Sonne Occhus in hostage: To this they sought to perswade Alexan∣der by such arguments as they had. Alexander causing the Embassadours to be re∣moued, aduised with Counsell, but heard no man speake but Parmenio, the very hand of his good fortune; who perswaded him to accept of these faire condi∣tions. told him, that the Empire betweene Euphrates and Hellespont was a faire addition to Macedon; that the retaining of the Persian prisoners was a great cumber, and the treasure offered for them of farre better vse than their persons, with diuers other arguments; all which Alexander rejected. And yet it is probable that if he had his aduice, and bounded his ambition within those limits, he might haue liued as famous for vertue as for fortune, and left himself a Successor of able age to haue enjoyed his estate, afterward, indeed, hee much inlarged, ra∣ther to the greatning of others than himselfe: who to assure themselues of what they had vsurped vpon his issues, left not one of them to draw breath in the world within a few yeares after. The truth is, That Alexander in going so far into theEast, left behinde him the reputation which he brought out of Macedon; the reputation of a just and prudent Prince, a Prince temperate, aduised and gratefull: and taught new lessons by aboundance of prosperitie, became a of wine, of his flatterie, and of extreme crueltie. , as Seneca hath obserued, the taint of one vnjust slaughter, amongst many, defaced and the flourishing of all his great acts and glorious victories obtained. But the Persian Embassadours stay his answere, which was to this effect, That hee had on the Wife and children of Darius, proceeded from his owne naturall clemencie and magnanimitie, without all respect to their Master, that thanks to an was im∣proper; that he made no warres against aduersitie, but against those that resisted him; not against Women and Children, but against armed enemies: and although by the practice of Darius, to corrupt his Souldiers, and by great summes of money to perswade his friends to attempt vpon his person, hee had reason to doubt that the peace offered was rather pretended meant, yet hee could not (were it and faithfull) in haste to accept the same, Darius had made the against him, not as a King with Royall and ouert-force, but as a Traitor by secret and base practice; That for the Territorie offered him, it was alreadie his owne, and if Darius could beate him back againe ouer Euphrates, which he had alreadie past, he would then beleeue that hee offered him somewhat in his owne power: Otherwise he propounded to himselfe for the reward of the Warre, which hee had made, all those Kingdomes as yet in Darius possession, wherein, whether he were abused by his owne hopes or no, the battaile which hee meant to fight in the day following should determine. For conclusion, he told them, that he came into Asia to giue, and not to ; That the Heauens could not hold two Sunnes: and therefore if Darius could be content to acknowledge Alexander for his Superiour, he might perchance perswaded to giue him conditions fit for a se∣cond Person, and his Inferiour. §. X. The battaile of Arbela: and that it could not be so strongly fought as report hath made it. WIth this answer the Embassadors ; Darius prepares to fight, and sends to defend a , which he yet dared so much as to hazard. Alexander consults with his Captaines, Parmenio per∣swades him to force Darius his Camp by night; so that multitude of enemies might not moue terrour in the , being but few. Alexander disdaines to steale the victorie, and resolues to bring with him the day-light, to witnesse his . But it was the successe that made good Alexanders resolution, though the counsell giuen by Parmenio was more sound: For it is a ground in Warre, Si pauci necessario cum multitudine pugnare cogantur, consilium est no∣ctis tempore belli fortunam tentare. Notwithstanding vpon the view of the multitude at hand, hee staggers and intrenches himselfe vpon a ground of aduantage, which the Persian had abandoned: And wheras Darius for feare of surprise had stood with his Armie in armour all the day, and forborne sleepe all the night; Alexander gaue his men rest and store of foode, for reason had taught him this Rule in the Warre, In pugna Milites validius resistunt, sicibo refecti fuerint, nam fames intrinsecus ma∣gis pugnat, quàm ferrum exterius; Souldiers doe the better stand to it in fight; if they their bellies full of and drinke; for hunger within, fights more eagerly than steele without. The numbers which Alexander had, saith Arrianus, were fortie thousand foot, and seuen thousand horse; these belike were of the Europaean Armie; for hee besides both Syrians, Indians, Aegyptians, and Arabians, that followed him out of those Regions. He vsed but a short speech to his Souldiers to incourage them; and I that he needed little Rhetorick; for by the two former battailes vpon the Riuer of Granick and in Cilicia, the Macedonians were best taught with what men they to encounter. And it is a true saying, Victoria Victoriam parat, victoribus auget, & aduer sarijs aufert; One victorie begets another, and puts courage in∣to those that alreadie had the better, taking spirit away from such as haue beene beaten. Arrianus and make large descriptions of this battaile, at Gaugamela; They tell vs of many charges and re-charges; That the victory inclined to the Persians, sometime to the Macedonians; That Parmenio was in danger be∣ing ouerthrowne, who led the left wing; That Alexanders Reare-guard was broken and his carriages lost; That for the fierce and valorous encounters on both sides, Fortune her selfe was long on whom to bestow the Garland: And lastly, That Alexander in person wrought wonders, being charged in his retrait. But, in conclusion, Curtius deliuers vs in but three hundred dead Macedonians, in all this terrible , , That , Perdiccas and others of name wounded. Arriannus findes not a third part of this number slaine; of the Per∣sians there fell fortie thousand (saith Curtius, ) thirtie thousand according to Arria∣nus: Ninetie thousand, if we Diodor. But what can wee judge of this encounter, other than that, as in the two former battailes, the Persians vpon the first charge away, and that the Macedonians pursued? For if of these foure or hundred thousand Asians brought into the field by Darius, man had but cast a Dart, or a Stone, the Macedonians could not bought the Empire of the East at so easie a rate, as sixe or hundred men in notorious battailes. Certain∣ly, if Darius had fought with Alexander vpon the bankes of Euphrates, and had ar∣med but fiftie or threescore thousand of this great multitude, onely with Spades (for the most of all he had were fit no other weapon) it had been impossible for Alexander to haue past that Riuer so easily, much lesse the Riuer of Tygris. But as a man whose Empire God in his prouidence had determined, He abandoned all pla∣ces of aduantage, and suffered Alexander to enter so farre into the bowels of his Kingdome, as al hope and possibilitie of escape by retrait being taken from the Ma∣cedonians, they had vnto them the choise, either of death or victorie; to which Darius could no way constraine his owne, they had many Regions to into from those that inuaded them. §. XI. Of things following the battaile of Arbela. The yeelding of Babylon and . DARIVS after the rout of his Armie recouered Arbela the same night, better followed in his flight, than in the fight. He propounded vnto them that ranne after him his purpose of making a retrait into Me∣dia, perswading them that the Macedonians, greedie of spoile and ri∣ches, would rather attempt Bibylon, Susa, and other Cities, filled with treasure, than pursue the vanquished. This miserable resolution his Nobilitie rather obeied than approued. Alexander soone after Darius his departure arriues at Arbela, which with a great oftreasure, and Princely ornaments, was vnto him: for the feare which conducted Darius, tooke nothing with it but shame and dishonour. Hee that had beene twice beaten, should rather haue sent his treasure into Media, than brought it to Arbela, so the where he abid the comming of his enemies; if he had beene victorious, he might brought it after him at leisure, but ouer-come, knew vnpossible to Mules and Camels laden with gold from the pursuing Enemie, seeing , at the ouerthrow had in Cilicia, cast the Crowne from his head, to runne away with the more . But errors are then best discerned when most incurable. Et praeterita magis possunt quam ; It is easier to reprehend than amend what is past. From Arbela Alexander took his way towards Babylon, where Mazeus in whom Darius had most confidence rendred himselfe, his children and the Citie. Also Captaine of the Castle, who was keeper of the , the with flowres, burnt frankinsence vpon Altars of siluer as Alexander passed by, and de∣liuered vnto him whatsoeuer was to his trust. The Magi (the Chaldean Astrologers) followed this Captaine in great solemnitie to entertaine their new King: after these came the horsemen, rich in attire, but poore in warlike furniture. these (though not greatly to be feared) and himselfe, Alexander caused his -men to march. he entred the Castle, he admired the , and the aboundance of treasure therein found amounting to fiftie thousand talents of vncoyned. The Citie it selfe I haue described with the , the Towers, the Gates and the Cir∣cuite, with the wonderful place of about two miles in Circuite, surrounded with a Wall of fourescore foote high, and on top thereof (being vnder- with Pillars) a of beautifull and fruitfull trees, which it is said that one of the Kings of Babylon caused to be built, that the and other Princesses might walke priuately therein. In this Citie, rich in all things, but most of all in Voluptu∣ous pleasures, the King himselfe and the whole Armie foure and thirty daies, An. b. . consuming that time in banquetting and in all sorts of exercise, which so much softned the mindes of the Macedonians, not acquainted till now with the like delicacies, as the discipline of warre which taught them the sufferances of hunger and thirst, of trauaile, and hard lodging, began to be forgot∣ten, than neglected. it was that those bands of a thousand Soldiers were erected, and Comman∣ders appointed them, who stiled Chiliarchi. This new order Alexander brought in, was to honor those Captaines which were found by selected Iudges to haue best in the late warre. For before this time the Ma∣cedonian companies consisted but of fiue hundred. Certainely the drawing downe of the foote-bands in this latter hath the cause (saith the Marshal Monluct ) that the title and charge of a Captaine hath bestowed on euery Picque Boeuf or Spurn-Cow, for when the Captaines of had a thousand Souldiers vnder one Ensigne, and after that fiue hundred, as in the time of Francis the first, the title was honorable, and the Kings were lessecharged, and farre better . K. Henry the eighth of England neuer gaue the commandement of any of his good ships, but to men of knowne valour, and of great , nay sometime he made two Gentle∣men of commanders in one ship: but all orders and degrees are fallen from the reputation they had. While Alexander was yet in Babylon, there came to him a great supply out of Eu∣rope, for sent him sixe thousand foote and fiue hundred horse, out of , of Thracians three thousand foot, and the like number of horse, and out of foure thousand foote and foure hundred horse, by which his Armie was greatly strengthned: for those that were infected with the pleasures of Babylon, could hard∣ly be brought againe, De quitter la plume pur dormir sur la dure; To change from soft beds to hard boords. Hee left the Castle and Citie of Babylon with the Territories about it in charge with three of his owne Captaines, to wit, Agathon, Minetus, and Appolidorus; to sup∣ply all wants a thousand talents: but to grace Mazeus, who rendred the citie vnto him, he gaue him the title of his Lieutenant ouer all, and tooke with him that gaue vp the Castle, and hauing distributed to euery Souldier a part of the Trea∣sure, he left Babylon and entred into the Prouince Satrapene: from thence hee went on towards Susa in Persia, the same with , Herodotus, and Elianus call , situate on the riuer Euleus, a Citie sometime gouerned by the Prophet. Abulites also, gouernour of this famous Citie gaue it vp to the Conqueror, with fifty thousand talents of siluer in , and twelue Elephants for the warre, with all o∣ther Dioder spea∣keth of more than fortie thousand ta∣lents in bulli∣on, and of nine Millions of gold, dorri. casorma excusi. the treasures of Darius. In this sort did those Vassals of fortune, louers of the Kings prosperitie, not of his person (for so all ambitious men are) purchase their owne peace and safetie with the Kings treasures. And herein was Alexander well aduised, that whatsoeuer titles he gaue to the Persians, yet hee left all places of im∣portance in trust with his owne Captaines, to wit, Babylon, Susa, and Persepolis, with other Cities and Prouinces by him conquered; for if Darius (as yet liuing) had bea∣ten the Macedonians but in one battell, all the Nobilitie of Persia would haue re∣turned to their naturall Lord. Those that are Traitors to their owne Kings, are neuer to bee vsed alone in great enterprises by those Princes that entertaine them, nor to bee trusted with the defences of any frontier-Towne, or of waight, by the whereof they may redeeme their libertie and estates lost. Hereof the French had experience, when Don Pedro de Nauarra, being banished out of Spaine, was trusted with Fonterabe, in the yeere 1523. While Alexander spoiled Arbela, Mazeus might haue furnisht the King from Ba∣bylon, and while he staied foure and daies at Babylon, Abulites might haue hol∣pen him from Susa: and while he feasted there, Tiridates from Persepolis might haue relieued him, for the great masse of treasure was laied vp in that Citie. But who hath sought out and friended fearefull aduersitie? It is certaine, that benefits binde not the ambitious, but the honest: for those that are but greedy of themselues, doe in all changes of fortune onely consult the conseruation of their owne greatnesse. The gouernement of Susa, with the Castle and Treasure, hee committed to his owne , making Abulites who rendred it vnto him his Lieutenant, as he had done Mazeus and others, in giuing them Titles, but neither trust nor power; for he left three thousand old Souldiers in Garrison to assure the place; and Darius Mother and her children to repose themselues. It is said, that Charles the fifth hauing promised Charles of Bourbon the gouerne∣ment of Marseilles, if he could haue forst it, and whereof he made sure accompt, told some of his neerest Counsellers, that he meant nothing lesse than the performance of that promise, because hee should thereby haue left the Duke ( from his Master) very well wherewithall to haue recouered his fauour. §. XII. How ALEXANDER came to Persepolis, and burnt it. FRom Susa Alexander leadeth his Armie toward Persepolis, and when hee sought to passe those Mountaines which sunder Susiana and Per∣sia, hee was foundly beaten by Ariobarzines, who against him those Straights, called Pyloe Persidis, or Susoeidoe; and after the losse of many Companies of his Macedonians, he was forst to saue himselfe by retrait, causing his foote to march close together, and to couer themselues with their Targets from the stones tumbled on them from the Mountaine-top. Yet in the end he found out another path, which a Lycian, liuing in that Countrie, disco∣uered vnto him, and came thereby suddenly in view of Ariobarzanes, who being in∣forst to fight vpon euen ground, was by Alexander broken, whereupon he fled to Persepolis, but (after that they of Persepolis had refused to receiue him) hee returned and gaue a second charge vpon the Macedonians, wherein he was slaine. In like man∣ner did King Francis the first, in the yeere 1515. finde a way ouer the Alpes; the Switzers vndertaking to defend all the passages, who, if their footmanship had not saued them vpon the Kings descent on the other side, they had paied for their hard lodging on those Hils. Foure thousand Greekes, saith Curtius, (Iustine numbers them but at eight hun∣dred) hauing been taken prisoners by the Persians, presented themselues to Alexan∣der now in sight of Persepolis. These had the barbarous Persians so and de∣faced, by cutting off their Hands, Noses, Eares, and other Members, as they could no way haue beene knowne to their Country-men, but by their voices; to of these Alexander gaue three hundred Crownes, with new garments, and such Lands as they liked to liue vpon. Tiridates, one of Darius his false-heatted Grandes, hearing of Alexanders approch, made him know that Persepólis was ready to receiue him, and him to double his pace, because there was a determination in the people to spoile the Kings trea∣sure. This Citie was abandoned by many of her Inhabitants vpon Alexanders arri∣uall, and they that staied followed the worst counsell, for all was to the libertie of the Souldiers, to spoile and kill at their pleasure. There was no place in the world at that time, which, if it had beene laied in ballance with , would haue waighed it downe. Babylon, indeede, and Susa, were very rich; but in Persepolis lay the bulke and maine store of the Persians. For after the spoile that had beene made of money, curious plate, bullion, Images of gold and siluer, and other jewels; there remained to Alexander himselfe one hundred and twentie thousand talents. He left the same number of three thousand Macedonians in Persepolis, which he had done in Susa, and gaue the same formall honor to the Traitor Tiridates, that he had done to Abulites; but he that had the trust of the place was Nicarides, a creature of his owne. The bodie of his Armie he left here for thirtie daies, of which the Commanders were Parmenio and Craterus, and with a thousand horse and certaine troupes of cho∣sen foote, hee would needs view in the Winter-time those parts of Persia, which the Snow had couered, fruitlesse and foolish enterprise, but as saies: Non ille ire vult, sed non potest stare; He hath not a will to goe, but he is vnable to stand still. It is said and spoken in his praise: That when his Souldiers cried out against him, because they could not indure the extreme frost, and make way, but with extreme difficul∣tie, through the snow, that Alexander forsooke his horse, and led them the way. But what can bee more ridiculous than to bring other men into extremitie, thereby to shew how well himselfe can indure it? His walking on foote did no otherwise take off their wearinesse that followed him, than his sometime forbearing to drinke did quench their thirst, that could lesse indure it. For mine owne little judgement I shall rather commend that Captaine, that makes carefull prouision for those that follow him, & that wisely to preuent extreme necessitie, than those witlesse arrogant fooles, that make the vaunt of hauing indured equally with the common Souldier, as if that were a matter of great glorie and importance. We finde in all the Warres that Casar made, or the best of the Roman Comman∣ders, that the prouision of victuals was their first care. For it was a true saying of Coligni, Admirall of France; That whoso will shape that beast (meaning Warre) must begin with his belly. But Alexander is now returned to Persepolis, where those Historians, that were most amorous of his vertues, complaine, that the opinion of his valour, of his libera∣litie, of his clemencie, towards the vanquished, and all other his Kingly conditions, were drowned in drinke; That he smothered in carrowsing cups all the reputation . l. 5. of his actions past, and that by descending, as it were, from the reuerend Throne of the greatest King, into the companie and familiaritie of base Harlots, he beganne to be despised both of his owne and all other Nations. For being perswaded, when he was inflamed with wine, by the infamous Strumpet Thais, hee caused the most and goodly Castle and Citie of Persepolis, to bee consumed with fire, not∣withstanding all the arguments of Parmenio to the contrarie, who told him that it was a dishonour to destroy those things by the perswasions of others, which by his proper vertue and force he had obtained; and that it would be a most strong per∣swasion to the Asians, to thinke hardly of him, and thereby aliene their hearts: For they might well beleeue that he which demolished the goodliest Ornaments they had, meant nothing lesse than (after such vastation) to hold their possession. Fere vi∣nolentiam . Epist. 84. crudelitas sequitur; Crueltie doth commonly follow drunkennesse: For so it fell out soone after, and often, in Alexander. §. XIII. The Treason of BESSVS against DARIVS. DARIVS his death. ABout this time he receiued a new supply of Souldiers out of Cilicia, and goes on to finde Darius in Media. Darius had there compounded his fourth and last Armie, which hee meant to haue increased in Bactria, had he not heard of Alexanders comming on, with whom (trusting to such companies as hee had, which was numbred at thirtie or fortie thousand) determined once againe to trie his fortune. He therefore cals toge∣ther his Captaines & Commanders, and propounds vnto them his resolution, who being desperate of good successe vsed silence for a while. Artabazus, one of his eldest men of Warre, who had sometime liued with Philip of Macedon, brake the yce, and protesting that hee could neuer be beaten by any aduersitie of the Kings, from the faith which he had euer ought him, with firme confidence, that all the rest were of the same disposition (whereof they likewise assured Darius by the like protestation) hee approued the Kings resolution. Two only, and those the greatest, to wit, , and Bessus, whereof the latter was Gouernour of Bactria, had conspired against their Master, and therefore aduised the King to lay a new foundation for the , and to pursue it by some such person for the present, against whom neither the gods nor Fortune had in all things declared themselues to bee an enemie: this preamble Naburzanes vsed, & in conclusion aduised the election of his fellow Trai∣tor Bessus, with promise, that the warres ended, the Empire should again be restored to Darius. The King swollen with disdaine prest towards Naburzanes to haue slaine him, but Bessus & the Bactrians whom he commanded, being more in number than the rest, with-held him. In the meane while Naburzanes with-drew himselfe, and Bessus followed him, making their quarter a-part from the rest of the Armie. Arta∣bazus, the Kings faithfull seruant, perswaded him to be aduised, and serue the time, seeing Alexander was at hand, and that hee would at least make shew of forgetting the offence made, which the King being of a gentle disposition, willingly yeelded, vnto. Bessus makes his submission and attends the King, who remooues his Patron, who commanded a Regiment of foure thousand Greekes, which had in all the former Battailes serued with great , and alwayes made the in spight of the Macedonians, offered himselfe to guard his person, protesting against the Treason of Bessus, but it was not in his destinie to follow their aduice who from the beginning of the Warre gaue him faithfull counsell but hee inclined still to Bes∣sus, who told him, that the Greekes with Patron their Captaine were corrupted by Alexander, and practised the diuision of his seruants. Bessus had drawne him thirtie thousand of the Armie, promising them all those things by which the louers of the World and themselues are wont to bee allured to wit, riches, safetie, and honour. Now the day following Darius plainely discouered the purposes of Bessus, and being ouercome with passion, as thinking himselfe vnable to make head against these vngratefull and vnnaturall Traytors, he prayed Artabazus his faithfull to depart from him, and to prouide for himselfe. In like sort he discharged the rest of his attendants, all saue a few of his Eunuchs; for his Guards had voluntarily abando∣ned him: His Persians being most base Cowardes durst not vndertake his defence against the Bactrians, notwithstanding that they had foure thousand Greekes to ioyne with him, who had beene able to haue beaten both Nations. But it is true, that him, which forsakes himselfe, no man followes. It had beene farre more Man-like and King-like to haue dyed in the head of those foure thousand Greekes, which offered him the disposition of their liues, (to which perswaded him) than to haue lien bewailing himselfe on the ground, and suffering himselfe to bee bound like a Slaue by those ambitious Monsters that layd hand on him, whom neyther the con∣sideration of his former great estate, nor the honours he had giuen them, nor the trust reposed in them, nor the world of benefits bestowed on them, could moue to pittie: no, nor his present aduersitie, which aboue all things should haue mooued them, could pierce their viperous and vngrateful hearts. Vaine it was indeed to hope it, for infidelitie hath no compassion. Now Darius, thus forsaken, was bound and layd in a Cart, couered with of Beasts, to the end that by any other ornament he might not bee discouered; and to adde despight and derision to his aduersitie, they fastned him with Chaines of Gold, and lo drew him on among their ordinary Carriages and Carts. For Bessus and perswaded themselues to redeeme their liues and the they held, eyther by deliuering him Prisoner to Alexander, or if that hope failed, to make themselues Kings by his slaughter, and then to defend themselues by force of Armes. But they failed in both. For it was against the nature of God, who is most iust, to pardon so strange villanie, yea though against a Prince purely Heathenish and an Idolater. Alexander hauing knowledge that Darius was retyred towards Bactria, and durst not abide his comming, hasted after him with a violent speed, and because hee would not force his Foot-men beyond their powers, hee mounted on horse-backe certaine selected Companies of them, and best armed, and with sixe thousand other Horse, rather ranne than marched after Darius. Such as hated the Treason of Bessus and se∣cretly forsooke him, gaue knowledge to Alexander of all that had happened, infor∣ming him of the way that Bessus tooke, and how neere hee was at hand: for many men of worth daily ranne from him. Hereupon Alexander againe doubled his pace, and his Vant-gard being discouered by Bessus his Reare, Bessus brought a Horse to the Cart, where lay bound, perswading him to mount thereon, and to saue himselfe. But the vnfortunate King refusing to follow those that had betraved him, cast Darts at him, wounded him to death, and wounded the Beasts that drew him, and slew two poore Seruants that attended his person. This done, they all fled that could, leauing the rest to the mercie of the Macedonian Swords. Polystratus a Macedonian, bcing by pursute of the vanquished prest with thirst, as he was refreshing himselfe with some water that he had discouered, espying a Cart with a Teame of wounded beasts breathing for life, and not able to moue, searched the same, and therein found Darius bathing in his owne bloud. And by a Persian cap∣tiue which followed this Polystratus, he vnderstood that it was Darius, and was in∣formed of this barbarous Tragedie. Darius also seemed greatly comforted (if dying men ignorant of the liuing God can bee comforted) that hee cast not out his last sorrowes vnheard, but that by this Macedonian, Alexander might know and take vengeance on those Traitors, which had dealt no lesse vnworthily than cruelly with him, recommending their reuenge to Alexander by this Messenger, which hee besought him to pursue, not because Darius had desired it, but for his owne honor, and for the of all that did, or should after wearc Crownes. Hee also, hauing nothing else to present, rendred thankes to Alexander for the Kingly grace vsed to∣wards his Wife, Mother, and Children, desiring the immortall Gods to submit vn∣to him the Empire of the whole world. As hee was thus speaking, impatient death pressing out his few remaining spirits, he desired water, which Polystratus presented him, after which he liucd but to tell him, that of all the best things that the world had, which were lately in his power, he had nothing remaining but his last breath, where-with to desire the Gods to reward his compassion. §. XIIII. How ALEXANDER pursued BESSVS, and tooke into his grace DARIVS his Captaines. IT was now hoped by the Macedonians, that their trauells were neere an end, euery man preparing for his . Heereof when Alexan∣der had knowledge, hee was greatly grieued; for the bounded earth sufficed not his boundlesse ambition. Many arguments hee there∣fore vsed to draw on his Armie farther into the East, but that which was, that Bessus, a most cruell Taitor to his Master Darius, ha∣uing at his deuotion the Hyrcanians, and Bactrians, would in short time (if the Ma∣cedonians should returne) make himselfe Lord of the Persian Empire, and enioy the fruits of all their former trauailes. In conclusion, hee wanne their consents to goe on: which done, leauing Craterus with certaine of foot, and Amyn∣tas with sixe thousand Horse in Parthenia, hee enters not without some opposition into Hyrcania; for the Mardons, and other barbarous Nations, defended certaine for a while. Hee passeth the Riuer of Zioberis, which taking beginning in Parthia, dissolues it selfe in the Caspian Sea: it runneth vnder the ledge of Moun∣taines, which bound Parthia and Hyrcania, where hiding it selfe vnder ground for three hundred furlongs, it then riseth and followeth its former course. In Zadracarta or , the same Citie which Ptolomie writes Hyrcania, the Metropolis of that Region, hee rested dayes, banquetting, and therein. Phataphernes, one of Darius his greatest Commanders, with other of his best follow∣ers, submit themselues to Alexander, and were restored to their places and gouerne∣ments. But of all other he graced Artabazus most highly for his approued & constant faith to his Master . Artabazus brought with him ten thousand and fiue hun∣dred Greekes, the remainder of all those that had serued Darius; He treats with Alexan∣der for their pardon, before they were yet arriued, but in the end they render them∣selues simply without promise or composition: he pardons all but the Lacedaemonians, whom he imprisoned, their Leader slaine himselfe. Hee was also wrought, (though to his great dishonour) to receiue Nabarzanes that had joyned with Bessus to murder Darius. §. XV. Of THALESTRIS Queene of the Amazons; where, by way of digression it is shew∣ed, that such Amazons haue beene, and are. HEre it is said, that Thalestris or Minothea, a Queene of the Amazones, came to visite him, and her sute was, (which shee easily obtayned) That shee might accompanie him till shee were made with childe by him: which done (refusing to follow him into India) she returned into her owne Countrie. Plutarch citeth many Historians, reporting this meeting of with Alex∣ander, and some contradicting it. But, indeede, the himselfe to Antipater, recounting all that befell him in those parts, and yet omitting to make mention of this Amazonian , may justly suspition of the whole matter as forged. Much more iustly may we suspect it as a , because an Hi∣storian of the same time reading one of his bookes to (then King of Thrace) who had followed in all his voyage; was at by the King for inserting such newes of the Amazons, as Lysimachus himselfe had heard of. One that accompanied Alexander tooke vpon him to write his acts; which to am∣plifie, He tolde how the King had fought single with an Elephant, and staine it. The King hearing such stuffe, caught the booke, and threw it into the Riuer of Indus; saying, that it were well donc to throw the writer after it, who by inserting such fa∣bles, the truth of his great exploits. Yet as wee beleeue and know that there are Elephants, though it were false that Alexander fought with one; so may we giue credit vnto writers, making mention of such Amazons, whether it were true or that they met with Alexander; as Plutarch leaues the matter vndetermined. Therefore I will heere take leaue to make digression, as well to shew the opinions of the ancient Historians, Cosmographers, and others, as also of some moderne disco∣uerers touching these warlike Women, because not onely Strabo, but many others of these our times make doubt, whether, or no, there were any such kinde of people. Iulius Solinus seates them in the North parts of Asia the lesse. Pom. Mela finds two Sol. c. 27. & 65. Regions filled with them; the one, on the Riuer Thermodoon; the other, neere the Casptan Sea; Quas (saith hee) Sauromatidas appellant; Which the people call Sauromati∣das. Lib. 1. The former of these two had the Cimerians for their Neighbours; Certum est (saith Vadianus, who hath Commented vpon MELA) illos proximos fuisse; It is that the Cimerians were the next Nations to the Amazones. PTOLOMIE Pt. l. 6. sets them farther into the Land North-wards, neere the Mountaines Hippaci, not Asiae. Tab. 2. farre from the Pillars of Alexander. And that they had Dominion in Asia it selfe . l. 6. c. 20. toward India, Solinus and Pliny tells vs; Where they gouerned a people called the Pandeans, or Padeans, so called after Pandea the Daughter of Hercules, from whom all the rest deriue themselues. Claudian affirmes, That they commanded many Nati∣ons: For he speakes (largely perhaps as a Poet) thus: Medis lenibus{que} Sabaeis Claud. de cap. Imperat hic sexus: Reginarum{que} sub armis, Proserpinae. Barbariae pars magnaiacet. Ouer the Medes, and light Sabaeans, raignes This female sexe: and vnder armes of Queene, Great part of the Barbarian Land remaines. Diodorus Siculus hath heard of them in Lybia, who were more ancient (saith hee) L. 2. than those which kept the bankes of Thermodoon, a Riuer falling into the Euxine Sea neere Heracltum. Herodotus doth also make report of these Amazons, whom hee tells vs that the Scythians call Aeorpatas, which is as much as Viricidas, or Men-killers. And that they made incursion into Asia the lesse, sackt Ephesus, and burnt the Temple of Diana, Manethon and Auentinus report, which they performed fortie yeeres after Troy was taken. At the siege of Troy it selfe wee readc of Penthesilea, That shee came to the Aenciad. 1. l. 3. succour of Priamus. Am. Marcellinus giues the cause of their inhabiting vpon the riuer of Thermodoon, L. 22. c. 7. speaking confidently of the Warres they made with diuers Nations, and of their o∣uerthrow. Plutarch in the life of Theseus, out of Philochorus, Hellanicus, and other ancient Hi∣storians, reports the taking of Antiopa Queene of the Amazons by Hercules, and by him giuen to Theseus, though some affirme, That Theseus himselfe got her by stealth when shee came to visit him aboord his ship. But in substance there is little diffe∣rence; all confessing, That such Amazons there were. The same Author in the life of Pompey speakes of certaine companies of the Amazons, that came to aide the Al∣banians against the Romans, by whom, after the battaile, many Targets and Buskins of theirs were taken vp: and hee saith farther, That these women entertaine the Gelae and Lelages once a yeere, Nations inhabiting betweene them and the Aba∣nians. But to omit the many Authors, making mention of Amazons that were in the old times; . Lopez who hath written the nauigation of Orellana, which he made down Histor. Ind. part. the Riuer of Amazons from Peru, in the yeere 1542. (vpon which Riuer, for the di∣uers 2. c. 28. turnings, he is said to haue sailed sixe thousand miles) reports from the relation of the said Orellana, to the Councell of the Indies, That hee both saw those women and fought with them, where they sought to impeach his passage towards the East∣Sea. It is also reported by Vlricus Schmidel, that in the yeere 1542. where he sailed vp the Riuers of Paragna and Parabol, that he came to a King of that Countric, callcd Scherues, inhabiting vnder the Tropick of Capricorne, who gaue his Captaine Ernando Rieffere, a Crowne of siluer, which hee had gotten in fight from a Queene of the Amazons in those parts. Ed. Lopes, in his description of the Kingdome of Congo, makes relation of such A∣mazons, telling vs, That (agreeable to the reprots of elder times) they burne off thcir right brest, and liue a part from men, saue at one time of the yeere, when they feast and accompanie them for one moneth. These (saith he) possesse a part of the King∣dome of Monomotapa in Africa, nineteene degrccs to the Southward of the line: and that these women are the strongest guards of this Emperour, all the East Indian Por∣tugals know. I haue produccd these authorities, in part, to iustifie mine owne relation of these Amazons, because that which was deliuered mee for truth by an ancient Cacique of Guiana, how vpon the Riuer of Papamena (since the Spanish discouerics called Ama∣zons) that these women still liue and gouerne, was held for a vaine and vnprobable report. §. XVI. How ALEXANDER fell into the Persians Luxurie: and how hee further pursued BESSVS. NOw as Alexander had begunne to change his condition after the ta∣king of Persepolis: so at this time his prosperitie had so much ouer∣wrought his vertue, as hee accompted clemencie to bee but basenesse, and the temperance which hee had vsed all his life-time, but a poore and humour, rather becomming the instructers of his youth, than the condition and state of so mighty a King, as the world could not equall. For hee perswaded himselfe that he now represented the greatnesse of the gods; he was pleased that those that came before him, should fall to the ground, and adore him; he ware the Robes and garments of the Persians, and commanded that his Nobilitie should doe the like; hee entertained in his Court, and Campe, the same shamelesse rabble of Curtisans, and Sodomiticall Eunuches, that Darius had done, and imitated in all things the proud, voluptuous, and detested manners of the Persians; whom hee had vanquished. So licentious is felicitie, as notwithstanding that hee was fully perswaded, that the Gods whom he serued (detesting the vices of the in∣uaded) him in all attempts against them, he himselfe, contrarie to the Religi∣on he profest (which how Idolatrous soeuer it were, could not be but fearefull vn∣to him by neglecting it) became by imitation, and not by ignorance or education, a more foule and fearefull Monster than Darius, from whose tyrannie hee vaunted to haue deliuered so many Nations. Yea, those that were dearest and neerest vnto him, began to be ashamed of him, entertaining each other with this, and the like scorne∣full discourse; That Alexander of Macedon was become one of Darius his licentious Courtiers; That by his example, the Macedonians were in the cnd of so many tra∣uailes, more impouerished in their vertues, than inriched by their victories; and that it was hard to iudge whether the Conquerors, or the Conquered were the baser slaues. Neither were these opinions so reserued, but that the noise of them came to his . He therefore with great gifts sought to pacifie the better sort, and those of whose iudgements he was most iealous; and making it knowne to the Armie, that Bessus had assumed the title of a King, and called himselfe Artaxerxes, and that hee had compounded a great Armie of the Bactrians, and other Nations, hee had argu∣ments enow to perswade them to goe on, to the end that all alreadie gotten, might not with themselues (so farre ingaged) be cast away. And because they were peste∣red with the spoiles of so many Cities, as the whole Armie seemed but the guard of their carriages, (not much vnlike the warfare of the French ) hauing commanded e∣uery mans fardells to be brought into the market-place, he together with his owne, caused all to bee consumed with fire. Certainely, this could not but haue prooued most dangerous vnto him, seeing the common-Souldiers had more interest in these things which they had bought with their painefull trauailes, and with their bloud; than in the Kings ambition; had not (as Seneca often obserued) his happie temeri∣tic ouer-come all things. As hee was in his way, newes came to him, that Satribar∣zanes, whom he had established in his former gouernement ouer the Arrians, was reuolted; whereupon leauing the way of Bactria, he sought him out, but the Rebell, hearing of his comming, fled to Bessus, with two thousand Horse. Hee then went on towards Bessus, and by setting a great pile of wood on fire, with the aduantage of a strong winde, wonne a passage ouer an high and vnaccessable Rocke, which was de∣fended against him, with thirteene thousand foote. For the extremitie of the Flame and smoke, forced them from the place, otherwise inuincible. I saw in the third ciuill warre of France, certaine Caues in Langucdoc, which had but one entrance, and that very narrow, cut out in the mid-way ofhigh Rockes, which wee knew not how to enter by any ladder or engine, till at last, by certaine bundels of straw, let downe by an yron chaine, and a waighty stone in the middest, those that defended it, were so smothered, as they rendred themselues with their plate, monie, and other goods therein hidden. There were also some three yeeres before my arriuall in Guiana, three hundred Spaniards well mounted, smothered to death, together with their Horses, by the Countrie-people, who did set the long dry grasse on fire to the East∣ward of them, (the winde in those parts being alwayes East) so as notwithstanding their flying from the smoke, there was not any one that escaped. Sr. Iohn Borrowes also, with a hundred English, was in great danger of being lost at Margarita, in the West-Indies, by hauing the grasse fired behinde him, but the smoke being timefully discouered, hee recouered the Sea-shore with the losse of of his men. I remember these things, but to giue caution to those that shall in times to come any part of those Countries, that they alwayes, before they passe into the Land, burne downe the grasse and sedge to the East of them; they may otherwise, without any enemie, than a handfull of straw set on fire, die the death of ho∣ny-Bees, burnt out of the Hiue. §. XVII. A Conspiracie against ALEXANDER. The death of PHILOTAS and PARMENIO. ALEXANDER was, after he parted hence, no where resisted, till he came into Aria, to the East of Bactria, where the chiefe City of that Pro∣uince, called Artacoana, was a while defended against him, by the re∣uolt of Sartibarzanes, but in the end hee receiued the Inhabitants to mercie. At this place his Armie was re-enforced with a new supply of thousand and fiue hundred soote, and neere fiue hundred Horse, out of Greece, Thessalte, & other places. His iournie out of Persia into these parts, is very confusedly described. For hauing (as all his Historians tell vs) a determination to find in Bacteria, he leaues it at the very entrance, and takes the way of Hyrcania; from thence hee wanders Northward towards the obscure Mardi, vpon the Caspian- Sea, and thence ouer the Mountaines Coronus into Aria, and Drangiana. At this time it was that the treason of Dimnus brake out, of which Philotas the sonne of Parmenio was accused, as accessarie, if not principall. This Dimnus, hauing (I know not vpon what ground) conspired with some others against the life of A∣lexander, went about to draw Nicomachus, a yong man whom hee loued, into the same treason. The Youth, although hee was first bound by oath to secrecie, when he heard so foule a matter vttered, beganne to protest against it so vehemently, that his friend was like to haue slaine him for securitie of his owne life. So, constrained by feare, hee made shew as if hee had beene wonne by perswasion, and by seeming at length to like well of the businesse, hee was told more at large what they were, that had vndertaken it. There were nine or ten of them, all men of ranke; whose names Dimnus (to countenance the enterprise) reckoned vp to Nicomachus. Nicomachus had no sooner freed himselfe from the company of this Traitor Dimnus, than he ac∣quainted his owne brother Ceballinus with the whole Historie: whereupon it was agreed betweene them, that Ceballinus (who might with least suspition) should goe to the Court, and vtter all. Ceballinus, meeting with Philotas, told him the whole bu∣sinesse; desiring him to acquaint the King therewith: which hee promised to doe, but did not. Two dayes passed, and Philotas neuer brake with the King about the matter, but still excused himselfe to Ceballinus by the Kings want of leisure. This his coldnesse bred suspition, and caused Ceballinus to addresse himselfe to another, one Metron, Keeper of the Kings Armorie, who forth-with brought him to Alex∣anders presence. Alexander, finding by examination what had passed betweene Ce∣ballinus and Philotas, did fully perswade himselfe that this concealement of the trea∣son, argued his hand to haue beene in the businesse. Therefore when Dimnus was brought before him, he asked the Traitor no other question then this: Wherein haue I so offended thee, that thou shouldest thinke PHILOTAS more worthie to be King than I? Dimnus perceiuing, when he was apprehended, how the matter went, had so woun∣ded himselfe, that he liued no longer, than to giue his last groane in the Kings pre∣sence. Then was Philotas called, and charged with the suspition, which his silence might justly breede. His answere was, That when the practice was vnto him by Nicomachus, he judging it to be but friuolous, did forbeare to acquaint Alex∣ander there withall, vntill he might haue better information. This errour of his, (if it were onely an errour) although Alexander, for the notorious seruices of his Father Parmenio, of his brother Nicanor lately dead, and of Philotas himselfe, had freely par∣doned and giuen him his hand for assurance; yet by the instigation of Craterus, hee againe swallowed his Princely promise, and made his enemies his Iudges: Curtius giues a note of Craterus in this businesse; How hee perswaded himselfe, that hee could neuer finde a better occasion to oppresse his priuate enemie, than by preten∣ding pietie, and dutie towardes the King. Heereof a Poet of our owne hath giuen a note as much better, as it is more generall in his Philotas. See how these great men cloathe their priuate hate, In these faire colours of the publike good, And to effect their ends, pretend the State, As if the State by their affection stood, And arm'd with power and Princes jealousies, Will put the least conceit of discontent Into the greatest ranke of treacheries, That no one action shall seeme innocent; Yea valour, honour, bountie, shall be made As accessaries vnto ends vnjust: And euen the seruice of the State must lade The needfull'st vndertaking with distrust, So that base vilensse; idle Luxurie, Seeme safer farre, than to doe worthily, &c. Now although it were so, that the King, following the aduice of Craterus, had re∣solued the next day to put Philotas to torment, yet in the very euening of the same night in which he was apprehended, he called him to a banquet, and as familiarly with him as at any other time. But when in the dead of the night Philo∣tas was taken in his lodging, and that they which hated him beganne to binde him; he cryed out vpon the King in these wordes: O ALEXANDER, the malice of mine Enemies hath surmounted thy mercie, and their hatred is farre more constant than the word of a King. Many circumstances were vrged against him by Alexander himselfe; (for the Kings of Macedon did in person examine the accusations oftreason) and this was not the least (not the least offence, indeede, against the Kings humour, who desired to be glorified as a God) That when Alexander wrote vnto him concerning the title giuen him by Iupiter Hammon; Hee answered, That hee could not but that he was admitted into that sacred Fellowship of the gods, and yet hee could not but withall grieue for those that should liue vnder such a one as would exceede the na∣ture of man. This was (saith Alexander ) a firme perswasion vnto me, that his heart was changed, and that hee held my glory in despight. See what a strange Monster Flatterie is, that can perswade Kings to kill those that doe not praise and allow those things in them, which are of all other most to bee abhorred. Philotas was brought before the multitude, to heare the Kings Oration against him: he was brought forth in vilde garments, and bound like a Theefe; where heard himselfe, and his ab∣sent Father the greatest Captaine of the World, accused, his two other Brothers, Hector and Nicanor hauing beene lost in the present Warre. Hee was so greatly op∣prest with griefe, as for a while he could vtter nothing but teares, and sorrow had so wasted his , as hee sunke vnder those that led him. In the end the King asked him, in what language would make his defence; he answered, In the same where∣in it had pleased the King to accuse him, which hee did, to the end that the Persians, as well as the Macedonians, might vnderstand him. But heereof the King made his aduantage, perswading the assembly, that hee disdained the language of his owne Countrie, and so with-drawing himselfe, left him to his mercilesse enemies. This proceeding of the Kings, Philotas greatly lamented, seeing the King, who had so sharpely inueyed against him, would not vouchsafe to heare his excuse. For, not his enemies onely were imboldened thereby against him, but all the rest, hauing discouered the Kings disposition and resolution, contended among themselues, which of them should exceede in hatred towardes him; Among many other argu∣ments, which he vsed in his owne defence, this was not the weakest; That when Ni∣comachus desired to know of Dimnus, what men of marke and power were his part∣ners in the conspiracie (as seeming vnwilling to aduenture himselfe with meane and base Companions) Dimnus named vnto him Demetrius of the Kings Chamber, Ni∣canor, Amyntas, and some others, but spake not a word of Philotas, who by being Commander of the Horse, would greatly haue valued the partie, and haue incoura∣ged Nicomachus. Indeede, as Philotas said well for himselfe, it is likely that Dimnus, thereby the better to haue heartned Nicomachus, would haue named him, though hee had neuer dealt with him in any such practice. And for more certaine proofe, that he knew nothing of their intents, that practised against the King, there was not any one of the Conspirators, being many, inforc'd by torments, or otherwise, that could accuse him, and it is true, that aduersity being seldome able to beare her owne burden, is for the most part found so malicious, as shee rather desires to draw others (not alwayes deseruing it) into the same danger, than to spare any that it can accuse. Yet at the last, howsoeuer it were, to auoide the extremity of resistlesse and vnnatu∣rall torments, deuised by his profest enemies Craterus, Cenus, Ephestion, and others, Philotas accused his owne selfe; being perswaded that they would haue staine him forthwith. But he failed euen in that miserable hope, and suffering all that could be layd on flesh and bloud, hee was forc'd to deliuer, not what he knew, but whatsoeuer best pleased their , that were farre more mercilesse than death it selfe. Of this kinde of judiciall proceeding S. Augustine greatly complaineth as a matter to bee bewayled, saith he, with Fountaines of teares. Quid cum in sua causa Aug. de Ciuit. torquetur: & cum quaeritur vtrum sit nocens cruciatur: & innocens luit pro incerto Dei, l. 19. c. 6. scelere certissim as poenas: non quia illud commisisse detegitur, sed quia non commisisse nesci∣tur? What shall we say to it, when is put to torture in his owne case; and tormented whi∣lest yet it is in question whether he be guiltie; and being innocent, suffers assured punishment for a fault, of which there is no certaintie, not because he is knowne to haue committed the of∣fence, but because other doe not know that he hath not committed it? It had beene enough for Alexanders safety, if Philotas had beene put to death with∣out torment, the rest would not much haue grieued thereat, because hee was greatly suspected. But Hemolaus, who afterward conspired against him, made the Kings cru∣elty and delight in bloud, the greatest motiue of his owne ill intent. Therefore, Se∣neca, speaking of Alexander, saith thus: Crudelit as minime humanum malum est, indig∣num Sen. de Clem. l. 1. tam miti ; ferina ista rabies est sanguine gaudere & vulneribus, & abiecto ho∣mine, in siluestre animal transire; Crueltie is not a humane vice; it is vnworthy of so milde a spirit. It is euen a beastly rage to delight in bloud and wounds, and casting away the nature of man, to become a sanage Monster. For the conclusion of this Tragedie, Curtius makes a doubt, whether the confessi∣on that Philotas made, were to giue end to the torments which hee could not any longer indure, or that the same was true indeede; For (saith hee) in this case, they that speake truely, or they that deny falsly, come to one and the same end. Now, while the Kings hands were yet wet in bloud, he commanded that Lyncestes, sonne-in∣Law to Antipater, who had beene three yeeres in prison, should be slaine: The same dispatch had all those that Nicomachus had accused: others there were that were suspected, because they had followed Philotas, but when they had answered for themselues that they knew no way so direct to winne the Kings fauour, as by lo∣uing those whom the King fououred: they were dismist. But Parmenio was yet li∣uing; Parmenio, who had serued with great fidelitie as well of Macedon the Kings Father, as himselfe; Parmenio that first opened the way into Asia; That had deprest Attalus the Kings enemie; that had alwaies, and in all hazards, the leading of the Kings Vant-guard, that was no lesse prudent in counsell, than fortunate in all at∣tempts; A man beloued of the men of Warre, and, to say the truth, hee that had made the purchase for the King of the Empire of the East, and of all the glorie and fame hee had: That he might not therefore reuenge the death of his Sonne, though not vpon the King, (for it was vnlikely that hee would haue dishonoured his fidelitie in his eldest age, now liued threescore and ten yeeres) yet vpon those that by the witchcraft of had possest themselues of his affection; it was resolued that he should be dispatcht. Polydamas was imployed in this businesse, a man whom of all other Parmenio trusted most, and loued best, who (to bee short) finding him in Media, and hauing Cleander and other Murderers with him, slew him walking in his Garden, while hee was reading the Kings letters. Hic exitus PARMENIONIS fuit, Lib. 7. militiae clari viri; Multa sine Rege prosperè, Rex sine illo nihil magnae rei gesse∣rat; This was the ende of PARMENIO (saith CVRTIVS) who had performed many notable things without the King, but the King, without him, did neuer effect any thing wor∣thy of praise. §. XVIII. How ALEXANDER subdued the Bactrians, Sogdians, and other people. How BESSVS was deliuered into his hands. How hee fought with the Scythians. WHen these things had end, Alexander went on with his Armie, and brought vnder his obedience the Araspians or Euergitans; hee made Amenides (sometime Darius his Secretarie) their Gouernour; then he subdued the Arachosians, and left Menon to commaund ouer them. Heere the Armie, sometimes led by Parmenio, findes him, consisting of twelue thousand Macedons and Greekes, with whom he past through some cold Re∣gions with difficultie enough. At length hee came to the foote of the Mountaine Taurus towards the East, where he built a Citie which hee honoured with his owne name, and peopled it with seuen thousand of his olde Macedons, worne with age and with trauailes of the warre, The Arians, who since hee left them were reuol∣ted, hee subdued againe by the industrie and valour of Caranus and Erigius; And now heresolues to finde out the new King Bessus in Bactria. Bessus, hearing of his com∣ming, prepares to passe ouer the great Riuer of Oxus which diuides Bactria from Sogdiana; Artabazus is made Gouernour of Bactria abandoned by Bessus; The Macedonian Armie suffereth for want of Water, insomuch as when they came to the Riuer of Oxus, there died more of them by drinking inordinately, then Alexander had lost in any one battaile against the Persians. And it may well be; For (as Clytus did after obiect vnto him) hee fought against women, not against men, and not a∣gainst their persons but their shadowes. Hee found on the bankes of this great Ri∣uer no manner of Timber or other materialls, to make either boates, bridges, or raffe, but was forst to sow together the Hides that couered his carriages, and stuffe them with straw, and on them in sixe daies to passe ouer his Armie; which Bessus might easily haue distrest, if he had dared but to beholde the Macedonian Armie a∣farre off. Hee had formerly complained against Darius for neglecting to defend the bankes of Tigris, and other , and yet now, when this traiterous slaue had styled himselfe a King, hee durst not performe any thing worthy of a slaue. And therefore those that were neerest vnto him, and whom he most trusted, to wit, , Dataphernes, Catanes, and others the Commanders of his Armie, moued both by the care of their owne safetie, and by the memorie of Bessus his Treason and cru∣eltie against Darius, bound him in the like manner that hee had done his Master, but with this difference, that he had the chaine closed about his neck like a mastiffe Dog, and so was dragged along to be presented to his enemie. In the meane while Alexander was arriued at a certaine Towne inhabited with Greekes of Miletum, brought thither by Xerxes, when long before he returned out of Greece, whose issues had well-neere forgotten their Countrey-language. These most cruelly (after they had receiued him with great ioy) hee put to the sword, and de∣stroyed their Citie. At this place he receiued Bessus, and hauing rewarded with the rest that deliuered him, he gaue the Traitor into the hands of Oxatres, Dari∣us his brother, to be tormented. But while he now thought himselfe secure, some twenty thousand Mountainers assaulted his Camp; in repelling whom he receiued a shot in the leg, the arrow head sticking in the flesh, so as hee was carried in a Horse-Lytter, sometime by the horse∣men, . sometime by the foote. Soone after hee came vnto Maracanda, which Perondinus takes to be Samar∣chand, the regall Citie of the great Tamerlaine. It had in compasse threescore and ten furlongs ( Curtius saith.) Heere he receiued the Embassadors of the Scythians (called Auians ) who offered to serue him. The Bactrians are shortly againe with the Sogdians stirred to Rebellion, by the same Spitamenes and Catanes, who had lately deliuered into his hands the Traitor Bessus. Many Cities were resoluedly defended against him, all which, after victorie, hee defa∣ced and rased, killing all therein. At one of these hee receiued a blow on the necke which strucke him to the ground, and much disabled him for many daies after. In the meane while Spitamenes had recouered Maracanda, against whom hee imployed Mencdemus with three thousand foote and eight hundred horse. In the heate of these tumults Alexander marched on (if we may beleeue Curtius and others) till he came to the Riuer of ; vpon whose banke he built another Alex∣andria furlongs in compasse, which hee beautified with houses within se∣uenteene daies after the walls built. The building of this Citie is said to haue beene occasion of a warre betweene him and the Scythians; the Scythian King perswading himselfe, that this new Towne was fortified of purpose to keepe him vnder. I doe not well vnderstand, why the Scythians, offering warre in such terrible manner that A∣lexander was iudged by his owne Souldiers to counterfeit sicknesse for very feare, should neuerthelesse make suite for peace: neither finde I the reason why Alexander (not intending the conquest of those Northerne desarts, but onely the defence of his owne banke) should refuse to let them alone, with whom he could not fur∣ther then they should agree to suffer him. Yet hereof is made a great matter; and a victorie described; in pursuit of which the Macedons ranne beyond the bounds and monuments of Bacchus his expedition. The truth is, That Curtius and Trogus haue greatly mistaken this Riuer which they call Tanais. For it was the Riuer of Iaxartes, that runnes betweene Sogdiana and Scythia, which Alexander past ouer, while Menedemus was imployed in the recouerie of Samarchand: But Tanais which diuides Asia from Europe, is neere two thousand miles distant from any part of Bactria and Sogdiana, and the way desart & vnknowne. So that Alexander had (besides Iaxartes ) the great Riuer of Volga and many others to swimme ouer, ere he could recouer Tanais: which (from the place where he was) he could hardly haue discouered with the Armie that followed him, if he had imploied all the time that he liued in Asia in that trauaile. Wherefore it is enough to beleeue, that the Asiatique Scythians, making some of∣fer to disturbe the erection of this new Citie, which was like to giue some hindrance to their excursions, were driuen away by the Macedonians; and being naked of de∣fensiue Armes, easily chased some tenne or twelue miles; which is the substance of Curtius his report. As for the limits of Bacchus his iournie; like enough it is that Bacchus (if in his life time he were as sober a man, as after his death he was held a drunken God) went not verie farre into that waste Countric, where hee could finde nothing but trees and stones, nor other businesse than to set vp a monument. Threescore of the Macedons are said to haue beene slaine, and one thousand one hundred hurt in this fight, which might casily be in passing a great Riuer, defended against them by good Archers. Of Scythian horses one thousand eight hundred were brought into the Campe, and many prisoners. It is sorbidden by some Historians, and indeede it is hardly possible, to set downe the numbers of such as perish in bat∣tell: yet Caesar commonly did it. And where the diligence of the hath beene so inquisitiue into the greatnesse of their owne successe, that writers haue beene a∣ble to deliuer such particulars by credible report, I hold it not vnlawfull to set downe what wee finde; especially when it serues to giue light to the businesse in hand. The small number which the Macedonians lost; the omission of the number which they slew (a thing not vsuall in Curtius, who forbeares nothing that may set out the greatnesse of Alexander ) and the little bootie that was gotten; doe make it probable, that this warre was no better than the repulsion of a few rouing Tartars (the like being yeerely performed by the Moscouite, without any boast) and there∣fore better omitted by some Historians, than so highly extolled as a great exploit by others. While Alexander was assuring himselfe of those Scythians bordering vpon Iaxartes, he receiued the ill newes that Menedemus was slaine by Spitamenes, the Armie (by him led) broken, and the greatest numbers slaine, to wit, two thousand foote, and three hundred horse. He therefore, to appease the rebellion, and to take reuenge of Spilamenes, makes all the haste he can; but Spitamenes flies into Bactria. Alexander kills, burnes, and laies waste all before him; not sparing the innocent children, and so departs, leauing a new Gouernour in that Prouince. To repaire this losse he receiued a great supply of nineteene thousand Souldiers out of Greece, Lycia, and Syria; with all which, and the old Armie, hee returnes to∣wards the South, and passeth the Riuer of Oxus; on the South-side whereof hee built sixe Townes neere each other for mutuall succour. But hee finds a new start∣vp-Rebell, called , (a ) followed with thirtie thousand Souldiers that defended against him a strong piece of ground on the top of a high Hill; whom when Alexander had sought in vaine to winne by faire words, hee made choise of three hundred yong-men, and promised ten talents to the first, nine to the second, and so in proportion to the rest, that could finde a way to creepe vp to the top there∣of. . This they performed with the losse of some two and thirtie of their men, and then made a signe to Alexander, that they had performed his commandement. Hereupon he sent one Cophes to perswade Arimazes to yeeld the place; who, being shewed by Cophes that the Armie of Macedon was alreadie mounted vp, yeelded sim∣ply to Alexanders mercie, and was (with all his kinred) scourged and crucified to death; which punishment they well deserued for neglecting to keepe good watch in so dangerous a time. For the place, as seemes by the description, might easily haue beene defended against all the Armies of the World. But, what strength can∣not doe; Mans wit, being the most forcible engine, hath often effected; Of which I will giue you an example in a place of our owne. The Iland of Sarke, ioyning to Garnsey and of that gouernement, was in Queene time surprised by the French, and could neuer haue beene recouered againe by strong hand, hauing and corne enough vpon the place to feede so many men as will serue to defend it, and being euery way so inaccessible, that it might bee held against the Great Turke. Yet by the industrie of a Gentleman of the Nether∣lands, it was in this sort regained. Hee anchored in the roade with one Ship small burden, and, pretending the death of his Marchant, besought the French, being some thirtie in number, that they might burie their Marchant in hallowed Ground, and in the Chappell of that Isle; offering a present to the French of such Commodities as they had aboord; whereto (with condition that they should not come a-shore with any weapon, no not so much as with a Knife) the French-men yeelded. Then did the Flemings put a Coffin into their Boat, not filled with a dead carkasse, but with Swords, Targets, and Harquebusses; The French receiued them at their landing; and searching euery of them so narrowly as they could not hide a Pen-knife, gaue them leaue to draw their Coffin vp the Rockes with great difficultie; some part of the French tooke the Flemish Boat and rowed aboord their Ship, to fetch the commo∣dities promised, and what else they pleased, but being entred, they were taken and bound. The Flemings on the Land, when they had carried their Coffin into the Chappell, shut the doore to them, and taking their weapons out of the Coffin, set vpon the French; they runne to the Cliffe and cry to their Companie Fle∣ming to come to their succour, but finding the Boat charged with Flemings, yeelded themselues and the place. Thus a Fox-taile doth sometimes helpe well to piece out the Lions-skinne, that else would be too short. §. XIX. How ALEXANDER slew his owne friends. AFter these Sogdian and Scythian Warres, we reade of Alexanders killing of a Lion, and other friuolous matter, and that hee committed the Go∣uernment of Maracanda, & the Country about it, to Clytus, and how he slew him sooneafter, for valuing the vertue of Philip the father before that of Alexander the sonne, or rather because he obiected to the King the death of Parmenio, and derided the Oracle of Hammon: for therein hee toucht him to the quicke, the same being deliuered in publike and at a drunken Banquet. Clytus, indeed, had deserued as much at the Kings hands, as any man liuing had done, and had in particular saued his life, which the King well remembred when he came to himselfe, and when it was too late. Yet to say the truth. Clytus his insolencie was intolerable. As he in his Cups forgat whom he offended, so the King in his (for neyther of them were themselues) forgat whom he went about to slay, for the griefe whereof he tare his owne face and sorrowed so inordinately, as, but for the perswa∣sions of Calisthenes, it is thought he would haue slaine himselfe. Wine begat Furie, Furie matter of Repentance: but preceding mischiefes are not amended by succeeding bewailings: Omne vitium ebriet as & incendit, & detegit; ob∣stantem malis conatibus remouet; vbi possedit animum nimia vis vini, quic∣quid mali , emergit: non facit ebrietas vitia, sed protrahit; Drunkennesse both kindles and layes open euery vice; it remooues out of the way that shame which giues impedi∣ment vnto bad attempts; where wine gets the mastrie, all the ill that before lay hidden breakes out: drunkennesse indeed rather discouers vices, than makes them. Soone after this, Spitamenes, who slew Bessus, and had lately reuolted from A∣lexander, was murdered by his Wife, and his head presented to Alexander. Spitamenes being taken away, the Dahans also seized vpon his fellow-conspirator Dataphernes, and deliuered him vp. So Alexander being now freed from all these pettie-Rebels, disposed of the Prouinces which he past ouer, and went on with his Armie into Ga∣baza, where it suffered so much Hunger, Cold, Lightning, Thunder, and Storme, as he lost in one Tempest a thousand of his Traine. From hence he inuaded the Sa∣cans and destroyed their Countrie. Then came he into the Territorie of Cohortanes, Curt. lib. 9. who submitted himselfe vnto him, feasted him greatly, and presented him with thirtie beautifull Virgins, among whom Roxane, afterward his Wife, was one: which although all the Macedonians disdained, yet none of them durst vse any free∣dome of speech after Clytus his death. From hence he directed his course towards India, hauing so increased his numbers, as they amounted to an hundred and twen∣tie thousand armed men. In the meane while he would needes bee honoured as a God: whereto that hee might allure the Macedonians, hee imploied two pernitious Parasites, and Gleo; whom Callisthenes opposed: For, among many other honest arguments vsed to the assembly, he told Cleo, That he thought, that Alexander would disdaine the gift of God-head from his Vassalls; That the opinion of Sanctity, though it did sometime follow the death of those, who in their life-time had done the greatest things, yet it neuer accompanied any one as yet liuing in the world. He further told him, That neither Hercules nor Bacchus were Deified at a banquet, and vpon drinke, (for this matter was propounded by Cleo at a carowsing feast) but that, for the more than manly acts by them performed while they , they were in future and suc∣ceeding Ages numbred among the gods. Alexander stood behinde a partition and heard all that was spoken, waiting but an opportunitie, to be reuenged on Callist∣henes, who being a man of free speech, honest, learned, and a louer of the Kings honour, was yet soone after tormented to death, not for that he had betraied the King to others: but because hee neuer would condescend to betray the King to himselfe, as all his detestable flatterers did. For in a conspiracie against the King made by one Hermolaus and others (which they confest) he caused Callisthenes with∣out confession, accusation, or triall, to be torne a-sunder vpon the racke: This deed, vnworthy of a King, Seneca thus censureth. Hoc est ALEXANDRI crimen aeternum, quod nulla virtus, nulla bellorum foelicitas redimet. Nam quotiens quis dixerit, Occidit Persarum multa millia: opponitur, & CALLISTHENEM: Quotiens dictum erit, Occidit DARIVM: opponitur, & CALLISTHENEM. Quotiens dictum erit, Omnia Oceano tenus vicit, ipsum quoque tentauit nouis classibus, & Imperium ex angulo Thraciae vsque ad Orien∣tis terminos protulit: dicetur, sed CALLISTHENEM occidit. Omnia licet antiqua Ducum Regumque exemplatransierit, ex his quae fecit nihil tam magnum erit quam scelus CALLIS∣THENES; This is the eternall crime of ALEXANDER, which no vertue nor felicity of his in Warre shall euer be able to redeeme. For as often as any man shall say, He slew many thou∣sand Persians; it shall be replied, He did so, and he slew CALLISTHENES: When it shall be said, He slew DARIVS, it shall be replied, and CALLISTHENES; When it shall bee said, He wanne all as farre as to the very Ocean, thereon also he aduentured with vnusuall Nauies; and extended his Empire from a corner of Thrace, to the vtmost bounds of the Orient, It shall be said withall; But he killed CALLLISTHENES. Let him haue out-gone all the ancient exam∣ples of Captaines and Kings; none of all his acts makes so much to his glory, as CALLIS∣THENES to his reproch. §. XX. Of ALEXANDERS iourney into India. The battaile betweene him and PORVS. WIth the Armie before remembred, of one hundred and twenty thou∣sand foot and horse, Alexander did enter the borders of , where such of the Princes, as submitted themselues vnto him, hee entertai∣ned louingly, the rest hee constrained; killing Man, Woman, and Child, where they resisted. Hee then came before Nisa built by Bac∣chus, which after a few daies was rendred vnto him. From thence he remoued to a Hill at hand, which on the top had goodly Gardens filled with delicate fruits and Vines, dedicated to Bacchus, to whom he made feasts for ten daies together. Now when hee had drunke his fill, hee went on towards Dedala, and thence to Acadera, Countries spoiled and abandoned by the Inhabitants, by reason whereof, victuals , he diuides his : Ptolomie led one part, Cenon another, and himselfe the rest. They take many Townes, whereof that of greatest fame was Mazage, which had in it three hundred thousand men; but after some resistance, it was yeelded vn∣to him by the Queene, to whom againe he restored it; at the siege of this Ci∣tie he receiued a wound in the legge. After this, Nora was taken by Polysperchon, and a Rocke of great strength by himselfe: he wannealso a passage vpon one Eryx, who was by his companie, and his head presented to Alexander. This is the summe of Alexanders doings in those parts, before such time as he arriued at the Riuer of Indus. Comming to Indus, he found there Ephestion, who (being sent before) had prepared boates for the transportation of his Army, and ere Alexanders , had perswaded Omphis King of that part of the Country to submit himselfe to this great Conquerour. Therefore, soone vpon Alexanders comming, Omphis presented himselfe with all the strength of his Country, and sixe and fiftie Elephants, vnto him; offering him his seruice and assistance. Hee made Alexander know, that hee was an Enemie to the next two great Kings of that part of India, named Abiasares and Porus; wherewith Alexander was not a little pleased, hoping by this disvnion to make his owne victorie by farre the more easie. Hee presented Alexander with a Crown of gold, so did he the rest of his Commanders, and withal fourescore talents of siluer coine, which Alexander not onely refused, but to shew that hee was co∣uetous of glory, not of gold, he gaue Omphis a thousand talents of his own treasure, besides other Persian rarities. Abiasares, hauing heard that Alexander had receiued his enemie Omphis into his protection, resolued to make his owne peace also: For, knowing that his owne did but equall that of Omphis, and that there was no other difference betweene them, than that which the chance of Warre gaue, he thought it an ill match when Alexander, who had alreadie beaten vnder foote all the greatest Princes of Asia, should make himselfe a Party and Head of the quar∣rell. So had Alexander none now to stand in his way but Porus, to whom he sent a commandement, that he should attend him at the border of his Kingdome, there to doe him homage. But from Porus hee this manly answere; That hee would satisfie him in his first demand, which was to attend him on his borders, and that well accompanied; but for any other acknowledgement hee was resolued to take counsell of his Sword. To be short, Alexander resolues to passe ouer the Ri∣uer Hydaspes, and to find Porus at his owne . Porus attends him on the farther banke with thirtie thousand foot, fourescore and ten Elephants, and three hundred armed Chariots, and a great troupe of Horse. If Darius had done the like on Tigris, Alexander had surely staied somewhat longer ere he had seene India. The Riuer was foure furlongs broad, which makes halfe a mile, and withall deepe and swift. It had in it many Ilands, among which there was one well shadowed with wood, and of good capacitie. Alexander sent vp the Riuer with a great part of the Ar∣mie, shrowding the rest from the view of Porus: who by this deuice being drawne from his first incamping, sets himselfe downe opposite to Ptolomie, supposing that the whole Armie of Macedon meant to force their passage there. In the meane while Alexander the farther shore without resistance. He orders his troups and aduanceth towards Porus, who at first rather , that Abiasares his Confe∣derate (but now the Confederate of fortune) had been come ouer Hydaspes to his aide, than that Alexander had past it. But he finds it otherwise, and sends his Bro∣ther Hagis with foure thousand horse, and a hundred armed waggons to entertaine him. Each waggon had in it foure to fight, and two to guide it; but they were at this time of little vse: for there had fallen so much raine, and thereby the fields were so moistned, as the horses could hardly trot. The Scythians & Dahans had the Vant∣guard, who so galled these Indians, as they brake their reines, & other furniture, ouer∣turning the waggons, and those in them. Perdiccas also gaue vp the Indian hors-men, and the one & the other were forst to recoile. Porus moues forward with grosse of his , that those of his Vantguard scattered might recouer his Reare: Alexander being followed with Ephestion, Ptolomie, and Perdiccas, tooke on him to charge the Indian horse-men on the left wing, commanding Cenus or Cenon to inuade the right; Antigonus and Leonatus, hee directed to breake vpon Porus his battaile of foote, strengthened with Elephants, Porus himselfe being carried vpon one of them of the greatest stature. By these beasts the Macedonian foot were most offended; but the Archers and Darters being well guarded with the long and strong Pikes of the Ma∣cedons, so galled them, as being inraged, they turned head, and ranne ouer the foote that followed them: In the end, and after a long and doubtfull fight, by the aduan∣tage of weapon, and by the courage and skilfulnesse of the Macedonian Captaines, the victorie fell to Alexander, who also farre exceeded Porus in number: for besides the Macedonians and other Easterne and Northern Nations, Porus was assailed by his owne Confederate and Countrie people. Yet for his owne person he neuer gaue ground otherwise then with his sword towards his enemies, till being weakened with many wounds, and abandoned by his army, he became a prisoner to the Con∣queror, from whom againe he receiued his estate with a great enlargement. §. XXI. How ALEXANDER finished his expedition, and returned out of India. I Forbeare to trouble my selfe and others with a friuolous discourse of Serpents, Apes and Peacocks, which the Macedonians found in these their trauailes: or of those pettie Wars which Alexander made betweene the ouerthrow of Porus, and his sailing downe the Riuer of Indus. The descriptions of places about the head and branches there∣of are better knowne vnto vs in this Age, by meanes of our late Nauigations into those parts, than they were in any former times. The magnificence and riches of those Kings we could in no sort be perswaded to , till our owne experience had taught vs, that there were many stranger things in the World, than are to bee seene betweene London and Stanes. Our great traueller Mandeuile, who died in the yeere 1372. and had seene so much of the World, and of the East India, wee accompted the greatest fabler of the World; yet had he another reputation among other Nations, as well able to iudge as we. Witnesse the Monument made of him in the Couent of the Friers Guillimins in Liege, where the religious of that place keepe some things of his, Comme pour ho∣norable Guic. in Disc. of the Low Countries. memoire de son Excellence; For an honourable memorie of his Excellencie, saith Guichar dine. The Countries towards the Springs of Indus, and where those many Riuers of Hydaspes, Zaradris, Acesines, and the rest, fall into the maine streame, are now possest by the great Mogor, the ninth from Tamberlane, who commands all that tract be∣tweene Persia and Indus towards the West, as also a great extent of Countrie to∣wards Ganges. In the mouth of Indus, the Ascension, a ship of London, suffered ship∣wracke, in the yeere 1609. and some of the company trauailed ouer Land till they came to Agra, the same great Citie (as I take it) which our later Cosmographers call Nagra, being named of old Dionysopolis. Phylostratus in the life of Apollonius Tyanaeus, speaking of the expedition of Bacchus and Hercules into the East India, tells vs, that those two great Captaines (whom Alex∣ander sought by all meanes to out-fame) when they indeuored to subiect vnto them the Oxydracae, a people inhabiting betweene the Riuers of Hyphasis and Ganges, they were beaten from the assault of their cities with thunder and lightnings. This may well be vnderstood by the great Ordinance that those people had then in vse. For it is now certainely known, that the great Kings of the vttermost East, haue had the vse of the Canon, many hundreds of yeeres since, and since their first and greatnesse, which was long before Alexanders time. But Alexander pierst not so farre into the East. It sufficed, that hauing alreadie ouer-wearied his Armie, hee discouered the rest of India by fame. The Indian Kings whom he had subdued, in∣formed him, that a Prince called Aggramenes, who commanded many Nations yond the Riuer of Ganges, was the powerfullest King of all those Regions: and that hewas able to bring into the field two hundred thousand Foot, three thousand Ele∣phants, twentie thousand Horse, and two thousand armed Chariots. With this report, though Alexander were more inflamed, than euer to proceede in this disco∣uerie and conquest, yet all the art he had, could not perswade the Souldiers to wan∣der ouer those great desarts beyond Indus and Ganges, more terrible vnto them than the greatest Armie that the East could gather. Yet at the last contented they were, after many perswasiue Orations, to follow him towards the South, to discouer such part of the Ocean Sea, as was neerer at hand, whereunto the Riuer of Indus was their infallible guide. Alexander seeing that it would be no otherwise, a prettie tricke, wherewith he hoped to beguile posteritie, and make himselfe seeme greater than he was. He enlarged his Campe, made greater trenches, greater cab∣bines for the Souldiers, greater Horse-stalles, and higher mangers than his Horses could feede in. He caused all furniture of Men and Horses to bee made larger than would serue for vse; and scattered these Armours and Bridles about his Campe, to be kept as reliques, and wondred at by the Sauages. Proportionable to these he rai∣sed vp twelue Altars to be the monument of his end. This was a rea∣die way to encrease the fame of his bignesse; to his greatnesse it could adde nothing saue a suspition, that it was lesse than is thought, seeing he stroue so earnestly to make it thought more than it was. This done, he returned againe to the banke of Acesines, and there determined to set vp his fleet where Acesines and Hydaspis incounter, where to testifie by a surer mo∣nument, how farre he had past towards the East, he built by those riuers two Cities: the one he called Nicaea, and the other Bucephalon, after the of his beloued Horse Bucephalus. Here againe he receiued a fourth supply of sixe thousand Thra∣cian Horse-men, thousand Foot, and from his Lieutenant at Babylon fiue and twentie thousand Armours, garnished with siluer and gold, which hee distributed among his Souldiers. About these Riuers he wanne many Townes, and commit∣ted great slaughter on those that resisted; It is then written of him, that assaul∣ting a Citie of the Oxidracans, he lept from the top of the wall into it, and fought, I know not how long, against all the Inhabitants; tales like those of Beuis of Southam∣pton, friuolous and incredible. Finally, hee past downe the Riuer with his fleete, at which time also the newes came vnto him of a rebellion in Bactria, and then of the arriuall of an hundred Embassadours from a King of India, who submitted himself vnto him. He these Embassadours vpon a hundred beds of gold, with all the sumptuosity that could bee deuised, who soone after their dispatch returned againe with a present of three hundred Horse, one hundred and thirtie Waggons, and to each foure Horses, a thousand Targets, with many other things rare and rich. Their entertainments ended, he sailes towards the South, passeth through many obscure Nations, which did all yeeld vnto him quietly, or compelled by force: among these he builded another Alexandria. Of many places which he took in this passage, Samus was one, the Inhabitants whereof fought against him with poisoned Swords, with one of which Ptolomie (afterward King of Aegypt ) was wounded, and cured by an hearbe which Alexander dreamt that he had seene in the mouth of a Serpent. When he came neere the out-let of Indus (being ignorant of the tides of the Sea) his Gallies as they were on a sudden shuffled one vpon another by the Floud, so on the Ebbe they were left on the drie ground, and on the sandie bankes of the Ri∣uer, wherewith the Macedonians were much amazed, but after he had a few daies obserued wel the course of the Sea, past out of the riuers mouth some few miles, and after Sacrifices offered to Neptune returned: and the better to informe him∣selfe, he sent Nearchus and Onesicritus, to discouer the coast towards the mouth of Euphrates. Arrianus in the beginning of his sixt Booke hath written this passage downe the Riuer of Indus at length, with the manner of the Vessels, in which hee transported his Army, the Commanders that were vsed therein, and other the mar∣uellous prouisions made. Neere the out-lets of this Riuer, he spent some part of the Winter, and in eigh∣teene daies march from thence recouered , in which passage his Armie suf∣fered such miserie for want of foode, that of a hundred and twentie thousand foot, and twelue thousand horse, which he carried into India, not the fourth part retur∣ned aliue. §. XXII. Of ALEXANDERS Riot, Crueltie, and death. FRom Gedrosia, Alexander led his Armie into Carmania, and so draw∣ing neere to Persia, hee gaue himselfe wholly to feasting and drinking, imitating the triumphs of Bacchus. And though this Swinish vice bee hatefull enough in it selfe, yet it alwaies inflamed this King to Cruel∣tie. For (saith Curtius ) the Hang-man followed the feast, for ASPASTES one of his Prouinciall Gouernors he commanded to be slaine, so as neither did the excesse of voluptuousnesse qualifie his crueltie, nor his crueltie hinder in ought his voluptuousnesse. While he refreshed his Army in these parts, a new supply of fiue thousand foote and a thousand horse, was brought him by Cleander, and his fellowes, that had been imploied in the killing of Parmenio. Against these Murderers great complaint was made by the Deputies of the Prouinces, in which they had commanded; and their offences were so outragious, as Alexander was perswaded, that, had they not altoge∣ther despaired of his returne out of India, they durst not haue committed them. All men were glad of the occasion, remembring the vertue of him, whom they had slaughtered. The end was, That Cleander, and the other chiefe, with sixe hundred Souldiers by them imploied, were deliuered ouer to the Hang-man: euery one re∣ioycing that the Ire of the King was at last executed on the ministers of his Ire. Nearchus and Onesicritus were now returned from the coast, and made report of an Iland rich in gold, and of other strange things; wherevpon they were com∣manded to make some farther discouerie: which done, that they should enter the mouth of Euphrates, and finde the King at Babylon. As he drew neere to Babylon, he visited the Sepulchre of Cyrus in Pasargada, now Arrianus hath a farre diffe∣rent descripti∣on of Tombe. called Chelquera: where he was presented with many rich gifts by Orsines, one of the Princes of Persia, of the race of Cyrus. But because Bagoas, an in especiall with the King, was neglected, he not only practised certaine loose fellowes to witnesse against Orsines, that he had robbed Cyrus tomb, for which he was condem∣ned to die; but he assisted the Hang-man with his owne handes in tormenting him. At which time also Alexander caused Phradates to be slaine, suspecting his greatnes. Caeperat (saith CVRTIVS) esse ad repraesentanda supplicia, item ad deteriora cre∣denda; He began head longly to shed bloud, and to beleeue false reports. It is true, that he tooke a way to make all men wearie of his gouernement, seeing crueltie is more fearefull, than all the aduentures that can be made against it. At this time it is said, that Calanus the Philosopher burnt himselfe, when hee had liued and thirteene yeeres. Whether herein he followed the custome of his Countrie, being an Indian, Or sought to preuent the and incommoditie of elder age, it is vncertaine: but in this the Historians agree, that fore-seeing and fore∣shewing Alexanders death, he promised to meete him shortly after at Babylon. From Pasargada he came to Susa, where hee married Statira, Darius his eldest Daughter, giuing her younger to his beloued Ephestion, and other Persian Ladies to his Captaines. There were sixe thousand guests inuited to the feast, to each of which he gaue a cup of gold. Here there came vnto him three thou∣sand yong souldiers out of his conquered Prouinces, wherat the Macedonians great∣ly murmured. Harpalus, his Treasurer in Babylon, hauing lauishly consumed the mo∣nies in his keeping, got him going with fiue thousand talents, and sixe thousand hi∣red Souldiers, but he was reiected in Greece, and there slaine. Alexander greatly re∣ioyced at the fidelitie of the Greeks, whom Harpalus with these forces and treasures could not stirre: yet he sent commandement, that they should againe receiue their banished men, whereunto (fearefull of his indignation) all submitted themselues, (except the Athenians ) though they resolued, that it was a manifest preparation to∣wards their bondage. After this there followed a maruellous discontentmēt in his Army, because he had resolued to send into Macedon all those old Souldiers which could no longer indure the trauell of Warre, and to keepe the rest in Asia. He many orations to satisfie them, but it was in vaine during the tempest of their fury. But afterward, as Whales are drawne to the Land with a twine threed, when they haue tumbled a while, so are the vnconsiderate multitude easily conducted when their first passions are evaporate. With such as were licenced to depart, he sent , to whom he gaue the of Macedon, Thessaly, and Thrace, which Antipater had held from his first departure out of Europe, who had beaten the re∣bellious Greeks in his absence, discharged the trust committed vnto him with great fidelity, and sent him so many strong supplies into Asia from time to time. Cer∣tainely, if Alexander had not taken counsel of his cups, he would haue cast some bet∣ter colour on this alteration, and giuen Antipater a stronger reason for his remoue, than to haue imploied him in the conduction of a new supply to be brought him to Babylon, the warre being now at an ende. For Antipater saw nothing in this re∣moue, but the Kings disposition to send him after Parmenio, and the rest. With this Antipater, the King, notwithstanding his great courage, had no great appetite to grapple: Princes, though iealous, doc not stand in doubt of euery man ill affected though valiant: but there is a kind of Kingly courage, compounded of hardinesse and vnderstanding, which is many times so fearefull vnto them, as they take leaue both of Law and Religion, to free themselues thereof. After he had sent for Antipater, he made a iourney into Media to settle things there; where Ephestion, whom he fauoured most of all men, dies. The King accor∣ding to the greatnesse of his loue, laments his losse; hangs his Phisicion; and be∣stowes vpon his Monument twelue thousand talents: After which he returnes to Babylon. Thither Antipater came not, but sent; and not to excuse himselfe, but to free himselfe. For if we beleeue Curtius (whom Plutarch and others gaine-say) Anti∣pater by his Sonnes, Cassander, Philip, and Iolla, who waited on Alexanders cup, gaue him poison, Thessalus (who was of the conspiracie) hauing inuited him to a drinking feast of purpose. For after he had taken a carouse in Hercules his cup, a draught of drinke stronger than Hercules himselfe, he quitted the World within a few daies. Certainely the Princes of the World haue seldome found good, by making their ministers ouer-great, and therby suspicious to themselues. For he that doth not ac∣knowledge fidelitie to be a debt, but is perswaded, that Kings ought to purchase it from their Vassals, will please himselfe with the price giuen. The only resto∣ratiue, indeed, that it, is the goodnes and vertue of the Prince, and his liberality makes it more diligent; so as proportion and distance be obserued. It may be that Antipater hauing commanded two or three Kingdoms twelue yeeres, knew not now how to play any other part; no more than Caesar did, after he had so long a time gouerned the Gaules, where hevtterly forgat the art of obedience. A most cruel and vngratefull traitor Antipater was, if Curtius doe not belie him: For though he feared some ill measure vpon his remoue (the Tragedies of Parmcnio, Clytus, and Callisthenes, hauing been so lately acted) yet hee knew nothing to the contrarie, but that the King had resolued to haue giuen him some other great gouernement in Asia: The old Souldiers thence returned, hauing perchance desired to be gouerned by Craterus, whom they had followed in all the former Warre. §. XXIII. Of ALEXANDERS Person and qualities. HOwsoeuer it were, Alexanders former cruelties cannot bee excused, no more than his vanitie to be esteemed the sonne of Iupiter, with his excessiue delight in drinke and drunkennesse, which others make the cause of his feuer and death. In that hee lamented his want of enter∣prising, and to consider what hee should doe when hee had conquered the World, Augustus Caesar found just cause to deride him, as if the well gouerning of so many Nations & Kingdomes, as he had alreadie conquered, could not haue offered him matter more than aboundant, to busie his braines withall. That he was both learned and a louer of learning, it cannot bee doubted. Fran∣cis Bacon, in his first booke of the aduancement of learning, hath proued it sufficient∣ly. His liberalitie I know not how to praise, because it exceeded proportion. It is said, That when he gaue a whole Citie to one of his Seruants, He, to whom it was giuen, did out of modestie refuse it, as disproportionable to his fortune: to whom Alexander replyed, That hee did not enquire what became him to accept, but the King to giue: of which SENECA; Animosa vox videtur & regia, cum sit stultissima. L. 2. de Ben. c. 1. Nihil enim per se quenquam decet. Refert, quid, cui, quando, quare, vbi, &c sine quibus facti ratio non constabit; habeatur personarū & dignitatum proportio, & cum sit virtutis modus, aeque peccat quod excedit, quā quod deficit; It secmes a braue & royall speech, where∣as indeede it is very foolish. For nothing simply considered by it selfe beseemes a man. Wee must regard what, to whom, when, why, where, and the like; without which considerations no act can be approued. Let honours be proportioned vnto the persons: for whereas vertue is euer limited by measure, the excesse is as faultie as the defect. For his Person, it is very apparant, That he was as valiant as any man, a disposi∣tion taken by it selfe, not much to be admired; For I am resolued that hee had ten thousand in his Armie as daring as himselfe. Surely, if aduenturous natures were to be commended simply, wee should confound that vertue with the hardinesse of Theeues, Ruffians, and mastife Dogges. For certainely it is no way praise-worthie but in daring good things, and in the performance of those lawfull enterprises, in which we are imployed for the seruice of our Common-weales. If we compare this great Conquerour with other Troublers of the World, who haue bought their glorie with so great destruction, and effusion of bloud, I thinke him farre inferiour to Caesar, and many other that liued after him, seeing hee neuer vndertooke any warlike Nation, the naked Scythians excepted, nor was euer with any Armie of which he had not a most mastring aduantage, both of wea∣pons and of Commanders, euery one of his Fathers old Captaines by farre excce∣ding the best of his Enemies. But it seemeth, Fortune and Destinies (if we may vse those termes) had found out and prepared for him, without any care of his owne, both heaps of Men, that willingly offered their necks to the yoke, and Kingdomes, that inuited and called in their owne Conquerours. For conclusion, we will agree with Seneca, who speaking of Philip the Father, and Alexander the Sonne, giues this judgement of them. Quod non minores fuere pestes mortalium quàm inundatio, qua pla∣num Natur. quast, l. 3. q. 1. omne perfusum est, quàm conflagratio qua magna pars animantium ; That they were no lesse plagues to mankinde, than an oner-flow of waters, drowning all the leuill; or some burning droughth, whereby a great part of liuing creatures is scorched vp. CHAP. III. The raigne of ARIDAEVS. §. I. Of the question about succession to ALEXANDER. THE death of Alexander left his Armie (as the Athenian then compared it) in such case, as was that monstrous Giant Polyphemus, hauing lost his on∣ly eye. For, that which is reported in fables of that great Cyclops, might well be verified of the Macedoni∣ans: their force was intolerable, but for want of good guidance vneffectuall, and harmefull chiefly to them∣selues. The causes whereof (vnder the diuine ordi∣nance) were, partly the vncertainetie of Title to suc∣cession in the Kingdome of Macedon, partly the stub∣borne pride of Alexander himself, who thinking none worthy to bee his Heire, did refuse to establish the right in any one, leauing euery one to his owne fortune: but especially the great ambition of his followers, who all had learned of their Master to suffer no equals; a lesson soone taught vnto spirits re∣flecting vpon their owne worth, when the reuerence of a greater obiect faileth. Ithath formerly beene shewed, That Philip (the Father of Alexander ) gouer∣ning in Macedon as Protector, assumed vnto himselfe the Kingdome, not rendring it vnto Amyntas, (the Sonne of his elder brother Perdiccas ) when he grew to mans e∣state; but only bestowing vpon him in marriage a Daughter of his owne: by which bond, and much more by his proper strength, he assured the Crowne vnto himselfe: Amyntas neuer attempting ought against Philip; though (with price of his life) hee did against Alexander in the beginning of his raigne. Wherefore Eurydice the sole issue of his marriage, ought in reason to haue beene acknowledged Queene after Alexander; as hauing better Title thereto, than either He or Philip had, when they liued, vnlesse (peraduenture) some Law of that Nation forbade the raigne of wo∣men. But the excellent vertue of those two Princes had vtterly defaced the right of all Pretenders, not claiming from their owne bodies: and so great were their con∣quests, that Macedon it selfe was (in regard of them) a very small Appendix, and no way deseruing to be laied in ballance against the demand of their posteritie, had they left any able to make challenge of the Royall seate. Alexander hauing taken many wiues, had issue by none of the principall of them. the Daughter of Artabazus a Persian had borne vnto him a yong Sonne: and Roxane the Daughter of Oxyartes (whom he had more solemnely married) was left by him great with child. But the basenesse of the Mothers, and contempt of the conquered Nations, was generally alleaged in Barre of the Plea made for them, by some that would (perhaps) haue wrought out their owne ends, vnder the name of Alexanders children. Cleopatra the sister of Alexander, widdow to the King of Epirus, and Aridaeus his base brother (sonne to Philip by a Concubine of no account) who had married the Ladie Eurydice before mentioned, were next in course. Of Cleopatra there was no speech, which may giue suspicion, that either Law or Custome had made that sexe vncapable of the Aridaeus (besides his bastardie) was neither for person nor qualitie fit to rule as King; yet vpon him the election fell, but slowly, and (as happeneth often) for lack of a better: when the Counsailors hauing ouer-labo∣red their disagreeing wits in deuising what was best, were content for very weari∣nesse to take what came next to hand. Ptolomie (soone after King of Aegypt ) concurring with them who rejected all mention of the halfe- Persian broode, King Alexanders children, was of opinion, that the rule of all should be giuen to the Captaines, that going for law which by the greater part of them should be decreed: so farre was hee from acknowledging any one as true Heire to the Crowne. This Ptolomie was called the sonne of Lagus, but reputed of Philip: who hauing vsed the company of Ptolomeis mother, deliuered her in marriage to Lagus being great with child. Therefore, whether it were so, that he hoped well to worke his owne fortune out of those dissensions, which are incident vnto the consultations of many ambitious men, equall in place, forcing them at length to redeeme their quiet with subiection to one, deseruing regard by his bloud, and trust for his euen carriage; or whether hee desired onely to get a share to himselfe, which could not haue come to passe, had all beene giuen to one: plaine enough it is, that he thought not on preferring Aridaeus before himselfe; and therefore gaue such counsaile as fit∣ted his owne and other mens purposes. Yea, this deuice of his tooke place in deede, though not in forme as he had propounded it: For, it was in effect all one, to haue assembled at Alexanders emptie chaire, as Ptolomie had conceiued the forme of their consultations, or to set in the chaire such a King as Aridaeus, no wiser then the chaire it selfe. Also the controuersies arising were determined by the greater part of the Captaines; by the greater part, if not in number, yet in puissance. But as these counterfait shewes of dissembling aspirers, doe often take check by the plaine dealing of them, who dare to goe more directly to worke: so was it like to haue fared with Ptolomie and the rest, when Aristonus, another of the Captaines, interpreted the words of Alexander; saying, That he left his Kingdome to the worthiest, as designing Perdiccas, to whom (lying at the point of death) hee deliue∣red his ring. It seemed good in reason, that Alexander should bee disposer of his owne purchases; and those tokens of Alexanders purpose appeared plaine enough, so long as no man would interpose another construction: euery one being vncer∣taine how the secret affections of the rest might be inclined. Many therefore, either out of their loue, or because they would not be of the latest, vrged Perdiccas to take vpon him the Royall. He was no stranger to the Royall bloud; yet his birth gaue him not such reputation, as the great fauour of his dead King, with whom hee had beene very inward, and that especially since the death of Ephestian (a powerfull Minion) into whose place he was chosen. For his owne worth hee might well bee commended, as a good man of Warre, and one that had giuen much proofe of his priuate valour. But very surly hee was: which qualitie (joyned with good fortune) carried a shew of Majestie: being checkt with misaduenture, it was called by a true name Pride; and rewarded with death. In the present businesse a foolish ouer-weening did him as great harme, as it had beene great happinesse to haue succeeded Alexander. For not content to haue the acclamation of the Souldiers, approuing the sentence of Aristonus, he would needs counterfait modestie; thinking that euery one of the Princes would haue intreated him to take the waightie burden of an Empire, which would bee the lesse enuious, the more solemnity he vsed in the acceptance. It is truely said, He that faineth him∣selfe a sheepe, may chance to be eaten by a Wolfe. Meleager, (a man by nature en∣uious, and bearing a particular hatred to Perdiccas ) tooke aduantage of his irresolute behauiour, and very bitterly inueighed against him. In conclusion, he pronounced, that whosoeuer was Heire to the Crowne, the Souldiers ought to be Heires to the treasure; and therefore he inuited them, who were nothing slow, to share it. This disturbed all the Consultation. The Captaines were left alone, farre enough from agreeing, and not able to haue brought any conclusion to good effect without con∣sent of the Souldiers, who greedie of spoile thronged about Meleager. §. II. The election of ARIDAEVS, with the troubles there-about arising; the first diuision of the Empire. DVring this vp-rore, mention was made of Aridaeus by some one, and entertained with good liking of many, vntill at last it grew to the voice of the Armie. Meleager hauing with drawne himselfe tumul∣tuously from the company of the Lords, was glad of so saire an oc∣casion to make himselfe great: therefore he produced Aridaeus, com∣mended him to the Souldiers, who called him by his Fathers name Philip, and brought him into the Palace, inuesting him in Alexanders Robes, and proclaiming him King. Many of the Nobles withstood this election, but in vaine: for they could not resolue what course to follow, reiecting this. Only Python, a hot-headed man, tooke vpon him to proclaime the Sonne of Alexander by Roxane, according to the counsaile which Perdiccas at first had giuen, appointing Perdiccas and Leonatus his Protectors. But this child was not yet borne, which made that attempt of Python vaine. Finally, Perdiccas with sixe hundred men, and Ptolomie with the Kings Pages tooke vpon them to defend the place where Alexanders bodie lay: but the Armie conducted by Meleager, who carried the new King about whither he listed, easily brake in vpon them, & inforced them to accept Aridaeus for their Lord. Then by the intercession of the ancient Captaines, a was propoun∣ded and admitted, but on neither side faithfully meant. Leonatus, who was of the Roiall bloud, a goodly Gentleman and valiant, issued out of Babylon, being followed by all the horse, which consisted (for the most part) of the Nobilitie. Perdiccas abode in the Citie (but standing vpon his guard) that he might be readie to take the opportunitie of any commotion, that should happen a∣mong the infantrie, The King (who was gouerned by Meleager ) commanded or gaue leaue to haue Perdiccas made away; which attempt succeeded ill, being neither secretly carried, nor committed to sure executioners. Their comming was not vn∣expected: and they were by Perdiccas rebuked with such grauitie, that they depar∣ted honester than they came; being sorrie of their bad enterprise. Vpon the newes of this attempt the campe was in an vp-rore, which the King seeking to pacifie, wan∣ted authoritie, as hauing newly got the Crowne by them, and holding it by their courtesie. The matter it selfe affoorded no good excuses, and his indiscretion made them worse. He said, that no harme was done, for Perdiccas was aliue: but their ex∣clamations were against the tyrannous enterprise, which hee imputed to Meleager; abandoning the surest of his friends to the rage of the multitude, who were not ap∣peased, vntill the King by offering to resigne his estate vnto them, renued out of their pittie that fauourable affection, which had moued them to set him vp at the first. Perdiccas hauing now ioyned himselfe with Leonatus, kept the fields, intending to cut off all prouision of victuals from the Citie. But after sundrie Embassies pas∣sing betweene the King and the Nobles, (they requiring to haue the Authors of se∣dition giuen vp into their handes; the King, that Meleager might bee ioyned with Leonatus and Perdiccas, as a Third in gouernement of the Armie) things were com∣pounded according to the Kings desire. Meleager should haue done well to consi∣der, that such men as had one day demanded his head, were not like the day follow∣ing to giue him a principall place among them without any new occasion offered, had not some purpose of lurked vnder their great facilitie. Generall peace was renewed, and much loue protested where little was intended. The face of the Court was the same which it had beene in Alexanders time: but no longer now did the same heart giue it life; and windie spirits they were which moued in the arte∣ries. False reports were giuen out by appointment of Perdiccas, tending to his owne disgrace; but in such termes as might seeme to haue proceeded from Meleager: who finding part of the drift, but not all, tooke it as an injurie done to himselfe; and (as desirous of a true friendship) desired of Perdiccas, that such authors of discord might bee punished. Perdiccas (as a louer of peace) did well approue the motion; and therefore agreed that a generall Muster should bee made, at which time the distur∣bers of the common quiet should receiue their punishment (as was the manner for Souldiers offending) in presence of the Armie. The plot was mischieuously laied: Had Meleager giuen way to seditious rumours, he must needs haue incurred the ge∣nerall hatred of all, as a sower of dissension; and thereby with publike approbation might haue beene cut off, as hauing often offended in that kinde: his Prince being too weake a Patron. Now seeking redresse of these disorders, he hastened his owne ruine, by a lesse formall, but more speedie way. This kinde of Muster was very so∣lemne, and practised with many ceremonies, as for cleansing of the Armie. The Horse-men, the Elephants, the Macedonian foot, the Mercinaries, were each accor∣ding to their qualitie set in array, a part from others, as if they had beene of sundrie sorts, met at aduenture: which done, the manner was to skirmish (as by way of ex∣ercise) according to direction of their seuerall Captaines. But at that time the great battaile of Macedonian Pikes, which they called the Phalanx, led by Meleager, was of purpose bestowed in a ground of disaduantage; and the countenance of the horse and Elephants beginning to giue charge vpon them, was such, as discouered no pastime nor good intent. Kings were alwaies wont to fight among the horse∣men: of which custome Perdiccas made great vse that day, to the vtter confusion of his enemies. For Aridaeus was alwaies gouerned by him, which for the present had him in possession. Two or three daies before he had sought the death of Perdiccas at the instigation of Meleager: now he rides with Perdiccas vp and downe about the foot-men, commanding them to deliuer vnto the death all such as Perdiccas requi∣red. Three hundred they were who were cast vnto the Elephants, and by them slaine, in the presence of the King, who should haue defended them, and of their af∣frighted companions. But these three hundred were not the men whose punish∣ment Meleager had expected: they were such as had followed him, when he distur∣bed the first consultation that was held about the election of a new King, and some of them his especiall friends. Hauing therefore kept himselfe quiet a while, as vn∣willing to giue offence to them which had the aduantage; when hee saw their pro∣ceedings tend very manifestly to his destruction, he fled a way into a Temple, which he found no Sanctuarie: for thither they sent and slew him. The Armie being thus corrected was led into the Citie, where a new Councell of the Princes was held, who finding what manner of man their King was, diuided all the Prouinces of the Empire among themselues; leauing to Aridaeus the office of a Visitor, and yet making Perdiccas his Protector, and Commander of the forces re∣maining with him. Then were the funerals of Alexander thought vpon; whose bodie hauing beene seuen daies neglected, was opened, and embalmed by the Ae∣gyptians: no signe of poison appearing, how great soeuer the suspition might bee. The charge of his buriall was committed to Aridaeus: one of the Captaines, who was two yeeres preparing of great and costly shew, making a stately Chariot in which the corps was laid; many coarses of his friends being laied in the ground, before that of Alexander was bestowed in Alexandria, a Citie of his owne building in Aegypt. §. III. The beginning of the Lamian Warre. WHilest these things were in doing, or presently after, Antipater and Crater us, two principall Noble men, and inferiour to none of Alexan∣ders followers, if not greater than any of the rest, were busied in Greece with a Warre, which the Athenians more brauely than wisely had begunne in Alexanders life, but now did prosecute more boldly than before, vpon the courage which they had taken by his death. Alexander, not long before he died, had commanded that all the banished Greekes (few excepted) should be restored vnto their former places. Hee knew the factious qualitie of the Graecian Estates, and therefore thought so to prouide, that in euery Citie hee would haue a sure partie. But it fell out otherwise: For he lost the hearts of many more than hee wanne by this proud injunction. His pleasure indeede was fulfilled; yet not with∣out great murmuring of the whole Nation, as being against all order of Law, and a beginning of open tyrannie. The Athenians greatly decayed in estate, but retaining more, was needfull, of their ancient spirits, forbade the execution of this decree in their Dominions; so did also the Aetolians, who were valiant men, and inhabited a Region well fortified by nature: yet neither of them tooke Armes, but seemed to beare themselues, as men that had done no more then they might well by reason: neuerthelesse to preuent the worst, the Athenians gaue secret instructions to Leosthenes a Captaine of theirs, willing him to leauie an Armie, but in his owne name, and to keepe it in a readinesse for their vse. This was no hard thing for Leo∣sthenes to doe: great numbers of Greeke Souldiers being lately returned from the A∣sian Warre in poore estate, as defrauded of their pay by the Captaines. Of these he had gathered vp eight thousand, when the certaine newes were brought of Alexan∣ders death: at which time the Citie of Athens declared it selfe, and more honorably than wisely, proclaimed open Warre against the Macedonians, for the libertie of Greece. Hereupon Leosthenes drew in the Aetolians, and some other Estates, gaue battaile to the Boeotians, who sided with Antipater, and ouerthrew them; growing so fast in reputation, and so strong in Adherents; That Antipater (arming in all haste, yet suspecting his owne strength) was faine to send into Asia to Craterus for succour. Nothing is more vaine than the feares and hopes of men, shunning or pursuing their destinies a-farre off, which deceiue all mortall wisdome, euen when they seeme neere at hand. One moneth was scarcely past, since nothing so heauily burthened the thoughts of Antipater as the returne of Craterus into ; which hee then feared as death, but now desired as the most likely assurance of his life. Craterus, whom Alexander held as of all men the most assured vnto him, was sent into Mace∣don to conueigh home the old Souldiers (that was the pretence) and to succeed An∣tipater in the gouernement of Macedon and Greece. The suspicions were strong that he had a priuie charge to put Antipater to death: neither did that which was com∣monly published sound much better; which was, That Antipater should bee sent vnto the King, as Captaine of the yong Souldiers, newly to bee leauied in Europe. For Alexander was much incensed against him by his Mother Olympias: and would sometimes giue out speeches testifying his owne jealousie and hatred of him; but yet he stroue to smother it, which in a cruell Prince betokeneth little good. Few of Alexanders Lieutenants had escaped with life: most of them indeede were meane persons in regard of those who followed him in his Indian expedition, and were therefore (perhaps) remoued to make place for their betters. But if the Kings ri∣gour was such, as could finde rebellious purposes (for so hee interpreted euen lewd gouernement) in base persons; little might Antipater hope for, who hauing sitten Viceroy ten yeeres in the strongest part of the Empire, was called away to the pre∣sence of so fell a Master, and the enuie of a Court, wherein they had beene his infe∣riors, which would now repine to see him their equall. Therefore whether his feare drew him to preuention, working first the Kings death by poison, giuen by his Son Iolaus, Alexanders cup-bearer; or whether it brake not forth vntill opportunitie had changed it into the passion of reuenge, which was cruelly performed by his Sonne Cassander: great cause of much feare he had, which I note in this place, as the ground of effects to be produced in very few yeeres. At the present Craterus was sent for, and all the Captaines of companies lying neere, sollicited to make haste. Not without cause. For in Macedon there could not at that time be raised more than thirteene thousand foot, and sixe hundred horse; which Muster was of raw Souldiers, all the force of the Countrie being emptied in∣to Asia. The Thessalians indeede who had long stood firme for Philip and Alexan∣der, who also were the best horse-men of Greece, furnished him with very braue troupes, that might haue done great seruice, had their faith held out, which they changed for the libertie of Greece. With these forces did Antipater in trie the fortune of a battaile with Leosthenes; rather (as may seeme) fearing the increase of his enemies power and rebellion of the , (were they not checkt at the first) than presuming on his owne strength. For Leosthenes had of Athenians, Aetolians, and Mercinaries, two & twentie thousand foot, besides the assistance of many petty Signories, and of some Illyrians, and Thracians: of horse hee brought into the field about two thousand and fiue hundred; but ouer-strong he was that way also, when once the Thessalians had reuolted vnto him. So Antipater lost the day: and his losse was such, that he neither was able to keepe the field, nor to make a safe retraite into his owne Countrie: therefore he fled into the Towne of Lamia, which was well for∣tified, and well prouided of all things necessarie to beare out a siege. Thither did Leosthenes follow him, present him battaile againe, and vpon the refusall close vp the Towne with earth-workes, and a wall. There will wee leaue him for a while, tra∣uailing in the last honourable enterprise that euer was vnder taken by that great Citie of Athens. §. IIII. How PERDICCAS emploied his Armie. KIng Aridaeus liuing vnder the rule of Perdiccas, when all the Princes were gone each to his owne Prouince, kept a naked Court: all his greatnesse consisting in a bare title, supported by the strength of his Protector, who cared not for him otherwise than to make vse of him. Perdiceas had no Prouince of his owne peculiar, was he like to be welcome to any whom he should visit in his Gouernement. A stronger Armie then any of the rest he had, which he might easily hope in that vnsettled condition of things to make better worth to him, than many Prouinces could haue been. The better to accomplish his desires, he closely sought the marriage of , the si∣ster of Alexander; yet about the same time hee either married Nicaea the Daughter of Antipater, or made such loue to her as blinded their , who did not somewhat narrowly search into his doings. Ariarathes the Cappadocian, the second of that name, and tenth King of that Countrie, had continued faithfull to the Persian Empire as long as it stood: follow∣ing the example of his forefathers, euen from Pharnaces the first that raigned in Cap∣padocia, who married Atossa sister to the great Cyrus. Some of his Ancesters had (indeede) beene oppressed by the Persians: but what Fortune tooke from them at one time Vertue restored at another, and their faithfull Princes had much increased all. But now in the fatall Period of so great an Empire, with much wisedome, and ( Darius being slaine) with sufficient honour, he might haue acknowledged the Ma∣cedonian in the Persians roome. This hee did not; neither did Alexander call him to account, being occupied with greater cares. But Perdiccas, who had no greater bu∣sinesse wherein to entertaine his Armie, found it expedient both for the honour of the Empire, to take in that in-land Kingdome, surrounded with Prouinces of the Macedonian conquest, and for his owne particular to haue one opportune place of sure retrait, vnder the gouernement of a friend. Therefore he entred Cap∣padocia, fought with Ariarathes, who drew into the field thirtie thousand foot, and fifteene thousand horse (a strong Army, had it not incountred a stronger, and better trained) wanne the victorie, and thereby the whole Kingdome. But with much did he vse the victorie: for hauing taken Ariarathes prisoner with many o∣thers, hee crucified him, and as many of his Kindred as he could light vpon: and so deliuered that Prouince to Eumenes, whom of all men liuing he trusted most. Another part of his forces he had committed to Python; rather as to the most ho∣nourable of such as remained about him, than as to the most assured. Python was to subdue the Greekes, rebelling in the high Countries of Asia. Aboue twenty thou∣sand foot, and three thousand horse they were, (all old Souldiers) who planted in Colonies by Alexander, to bridle the barbarous Nations, were soone wearie of their vnpleasant habitations, and the rude people, among whom they liued: and there∣fore tooke aduantage of the present troubles to vnto themselues a better for∣tune. Against these Python went, more desirous to make them his owne, than to de∣stroy them: which intent of his Perdiccas discouering, did both giue him in charge to put all those Rebels to the sword, giuing the spoiles of them to his Souldiers, and further enioyned it vnto Pythons Captains (his own creatures) that they shuld see this command executed. These directions for vse of the victory might haue pro∣ued needlesse; so vncertaine was the victorie it selfe. A Captaine of the Rebels commanding ouer three thousand, corrupted by Python, did in the heat of the fight (which was very doubtfull) without necessitie to a Hill not farre off. This dis∣maied the rest, and gaue the day to Python: who being farre enough from Perdiccas, offered composition to the vanquished, granting vnto them their liues and libertie, vnder condition of laying down their armes; and hereupon he gaue them his faith. Being master of these companies, he might well haue a good opinion of his owne power: all power being then valued by strength in followers, when as none could vaunt himselfe as free Lord of any Territorie. He had thirteene thousand foot, and eight thousand eight hundred horse, besides these new Companions, whom need∣lesse feare without great losse had caused to leaue the field: but in true estimation all the greatnesse whereof Python might thinke himselfe assured, was (and soone ap∣peared to be) inherent in Perdiccas. For by his command were ten thousand foote, and eight thousand horse, of those which followed Python, leauied; the Rulers of the Prouinces carefully obeying the letters of Perdiccas, by which they were enioy∣ned to giue assistance to that businesse: and by vertue of the precept giuen vnto them by Perdiccas, did the Macedonians cut in pieces all those poore men who had yeelded themselues; leauing Python as naked as he came forth to returne vnto his great Master. Now was Perdiccas mightie aboue the mightie, and had faire leisure to pursue his hopes of marriage with Cleopatra, and thereby to make himselfe Lord of all: but this must be secretly carried for feare of opposition. How it succeeded will appeare, when the Lamian warre taketh ending. §. V. The processe of the Lamian Warre. WE left Antipater hardly besieged, wanting meanes to free himself with∣out succours from his friends in Asia. Those helps not appearing so soone as he expected, he came to parle with , & would haue yeelded vnto any termes of reason, wherewith men possessed with hope of victorie, do seldome limit their desires. Leosthenes willed him without further circumstance to submit himselfe to discretion. This was too much for him, that had once commanded ouer them, who now required of him such a dis∣honourable composition. Wherefore knowing that the extremities, from which as yet he was far enough, could bring no worse with it, Antipater prepared for the de∣fence; and the other for winning the Towne, which felt great want of victuals. In this lingring war, the Aetolians (whether wearie of sitting still at a siege, or ha∣uing busines which they pretended at home) took their leaue, & returned into their owne Countrie. Their departure left the trenches so thinly manned, that Antipater found means to sally out vpon his enemies to their great losse: for many were , and Leosthenes himselfe among them, ere he could be repulsed into the Towne. Yet hereby the Macedonians were nothing relieued, victuals wasted, and they were not strong enough to deale with the Greeks in open fight. Craterus was long in com∣ming. Lysimachus who was neerest at hand in Thrace, had work too much of his own, leading no more than 4000. foote, and 2000. horse, against Seuthas the Thracian King, who brought into the field aboue foure times that number; and though Lysimachus, not without losse, had gotten one victorie, yet the enemie abounding in multitude, felt not the blow so much as might abate his courage. Therfore Leonatus was earnestly sollicited by Antipaters friends, to make all haste to the rescue. He had the gouernement of the lesse, and was able to raise an Army of more than 20000. foote, and 2500. horse, whether leauied out of his Prouince, or appointed vnto him out of the maine Armie, it is vncertaine. Certaine it is, that he was more willing to take in hand the iourny into Greece, than Antipater was to haue him come. For Cleopatra had written vnto him, desiring his presence at Pella, the chiefe Citie of Macedon, and very kindly offering her selfe to be his wife; which letters he kept not so close as had beene requisite, and therefore brought himselfe into great suspition, that soone ended with his life. Antiphilus, chosen Generall by the Athenians in place of Leosthenes, hearing of his approch, forsooke the siege of Lamia, and took the ready way to these great Conquerors of Asia, with purpose to giue them an euill welcome home, before Antipater and they should ioyne in one. He had (notwithstanding the departure of the Aetolians ) the aduantage of Leonatus in horse, by the ods of 2000. Thessalians; in other things he was equall to him; in cause he thought himselfe Supe∣rior; in the fortune of that day he proued so: for he wan a great victorie (chiefly by vertue of the Thessalians ) which appeared the greater by the end of Leonatus him∣selfe; who fighting valiantly, was driuen into a marish of ground, where hee found his death, which desperately he had sought among the Indians, but it waited for him at home, not far frō the place of his natiuitie. He was the first of Alexanders Captaines which died in battaile, but al, or most of the rest, shal follow him the same way. After this day, the Athenians did neuer any thing sutable to their ancient glory. The vanquished Macedonians were too weake to renew the fight, & too proud to . They betooke themselues to high grounds, vnfit for seruice on horse-back, and so abode in sight of the enemie that day; the day following Antipater with his men came into their camp and tooke the charge of all. The Athenians perceiuing their strength to be at the greatest, and fearing left that of the enemie should increase, did earnestly seeke to determine the matter quickly by another battaile. But still Anti∣pater kept himselfe on ground of aduantage: which gaue more than reasonable con∣fidence to the Greekes, many of whom departed to their homes, accounting the ene∣mie to be vanquished. This rechlesnesse (incorrigible in an Armie of voluntaries) was very inexcusable; seeing that the victories by Land were much by losses at Sea, where the labouring to haue made themselues once againe Masters, were put to the worst. But now the fatall captiuitie of Greece came on, of which she neuer could bee de∣liuered vnto this day. Craterus with a strong Armie hauing made great marches from Cilicia, passed ouer into Europe, and comming into Thessalie, ioyned himselfe with Antipater. The forces of , Antipater, and Craterus, being ioyned in one, contained fortie thousand waightily armed, three thousand light-armed men, and fiue thousand horse; of which numbers the Greekes wanted a thousand and fiue hundred in horse, in foot eighteene thousand. Carefully therefore did Antiphilus la∣bour to auoide the necessitie of a battaile, vntill such time as the Townes confede∣rate, should returne vnto the campe those bands which had straggled from it. But those companies were so slow in comming, and Antipater so vrgent vpon the Greeks, that compelled they were to put the matter in hazard without further attendance. Like enough it is, that with a little more helpe they had carried away the victorie: for the Thessalians had the vpper hand, and held it, vntil such time as they perceiued their battailes (ouer-laied with multitude) retire vnto the higher grounds, which caused them also to fall back. So the Macedonians became Lords of the field, hauing little else to boast of, considering that with the losse of a hundred and men, they had purchased only the death of some fiue hundred enemies. Yet hereof was great vse made. For the Greekes, as not subiect vnto the full command of one Gene∣rall, and being euerie one desirous to preserue his owne estate, and Citie; concluded to make a treatie of peace with Antipater; who being a subtile artificer, & wel vnder∣standing their aptnesse to diuision, refused to harken to any generall composition, but willed euery City to deale apart for it self. The intent of his deuice was so appa∣rent, that it was reiected; the Greekes choosing rather to abide the comming of their Assistants, whose vnreasonable carelesnes betraied the cause. Antipater and Craterus besieging & winning townes in Thessalie, which the army of the Confederates wanted meanes & courage to relieue, wearied that Nation from attending any lon∣ger vpon other mens vnlikely hopes, with their owne assured and present calamity. §. VI. Of the peace granted to Athens by ANTIPATER. Of DEMOSTHE∣NES his death. THe Thessalians falling off, all the rest soone followed seuerally, and sued for peace; the gentle conditions giuen to the most forward, inuiting such as were slack. Only the and Aetolians held out. Little fauour could they hope for, hauing beene Authors of this tumult; and their feare was not great; the seate of the warre being farre from them. But the celeritie of Antipater confounded all their imaginations; who sate still at Athens, vpon courses of prosecuting the Warre to come, which came to their dores, before their consultation could finde issue. He was ready to enter vp∣on their Frontiers; they had no abilitie to resist, and were as heartlesse as friendlesse. All that remained was to send Embassadors, desiring peace vpon some good termes: necessitie enforcing them to haue accepted euen the very worst. Phocion, with De∣mades the Orator, and Xenocrates the Philosopher, were chiefe of this Embassage; Phocion as the most Honorable; Demades as a strong Perswader; (both of them well respected by Antipater ) and Xenocrates, as one admired for wisedome, grauitie of manners, and vertue; but all these ornaments consisting in speculation, and there∣fore of lesse regard, when their admiration was to cost much in reall effects. Antipater calling to minde the pride of Leosthenes, required of the Athenians, that they should wholly submit themselues to his pleasure; which being (perforce) granted, he commanded them to defray the charges of the warre past, to pay a fine, and a Garrison. Further, he abrogated the popular estate, committing the gouernement of the Citie to those of most wealth, depriuing of the right of suf∣frage all such as wanted a conuenient proportion of riches. About nine thousand they were, all men of good substance, to whom the of the Common-wealth was giuen; a number great enough to retaine the name and forme of a . But the rascall multitude of beggerly persons, ac∣customed to get their liuings out of the commō troubles, being now debarred from bearing offices and giuing their voices, cried out, that this was a meere Oligarchie; the violent vsurpation of a few incroaching vpon the publike right. These turbu∣lent fellowes (of whom King Philip had been wont to say, That warre to them was peace, and peace warre) Antipater planted in Thrace, and gaue them lands to manure; leauing as few of them as he could to molest the quiet of Athens. To the same end (yet withall for satisfying his owne suspitions and hatred) hee caused Demosthenes and Hyperides famous Orators, with some others to bee slaine. Had the death of these two, especially of Demosthenes, beene forborne, the rest of his proceedings in this action might well haue passed for very milde: whereas now all such, as either are delighted with the of Demosthenes, or haue sur-ren∣dred their iudgements to Authors iustly admiring him, as the most eloquent of all that euer did speake and write, condemne him vtterly, calling him a bloudy tyrant. Such grace and reputation doe the learned arts finde in all Nations, that the done to a man, famous in one of them, is able to blemish any action, how good soeuer otherwise it be, or honourably carried. Demosthenes had taken Sanctuarie in the Temple of Neptune, in the Isle of Ca∣lauria; there did Archias (sent with Souldiers by Antipater for the purpose) finde him, and gently perswade him to the place, but not so preuailing, threat∣ned violence. Then Demosthenes, entreating a little respit as it had beene to write somewhat, secretly took poison, which he had kept for such a necessity, and so died; rather choosing to doe the last execution vpon himselfe, than to fall into the hands of such as hated him. Only this act of his (commendable, perhaps, in a Heathen man) argued some valour in him; who was otherwise too much a coward in bat∣taile, howsoeuer valiant in perswading to enterprises; wherein the way to very ho∣nourable ends was to be made through passages dangerous. Hee loued monie well, and had great summes giuen him by the Persian, to encourage him, in finding worke for the Macedonians at home. Neither did hee ill (me thinkes) in ta∣king from the Persians which loued not his Countrie, great reward, for speaking such things as tended to his Countries good; which hee did not cease to procure, when the Persians were no longer able to giue him . Such as in tender contemplation of his death can indure no honourable, though true, mention of An∣tipater, may (if they can) Lucian, who tells vs, That it was Antipaters pur∣pose to haue done him great honour. Sure it is, that hee was a enemie to the Macedonians; therefore discretion required that he should be cut off. The matters of Athens thus ordered, the chiefe command was left in the hands of Phocion, a vertuous man, and louer of his Countrie, yet applying himselfe to the necessity of the times; by which commendations he had both at other times done the Citie much good, and now procured this peace, which (though grie∣uous to free-men, yet fauourable to the vanquished) hee endeuoured carefully to preserue. §. VII. How CRAYERVS and ANTIPATER were drawne from their Aetolian Warres into Asia. The grounds of the first betweene the Lords. SO Antipater with Craterus returned into Macedonia, where they strengthned their friendship with a new alliance; Craterus taking Phi∣la, the Daughter of Antipater, to Wife. Shortly after they went against the Aetolians, whose pouertie was not so easily danted, as the luxurious wealth of the more powerfull State of Athens had beene. Their Countrie was rough and mountainous, hauing many places of great fastnes, into which they conueied such of their goods as they most esteemed, and of their people, as were least fit for warre: with the rest they fortified the strongest of their Cities, and so abode the comming of the Macedonians, whom they manfully . With great obstinacie did the Macedonians contend against the difficulties of the places, which the Aetolians made good as long as their victuals held out. But when Craterus had shut vp all passages, and vtterly debarred them of reliefe; then were they put to a miserable choice; either to descend from their strong holds, and fight vpon equall ground, with vnequall numbers; or to en∣dure the miseries of hunger and cold, against which they could make no long resi∣stance; or to yeeld themselues to the Macedonians: who incensed by the losse of many good Souldiers, were not like to leaue so stubborne enemies in places, which might giue confidence to rebellion. In cases of extremitie, much finenesse of wit apprehending all circumstances of danger commonly doth more hurt, than a blunt consideration of that only, which at the presentis in hand. These Aetolians did not as yet want meat; but their enemies daily molested them: wherefore as yet they thought vpon nothing but fighting. Fortune was gracious to their . For such newes came out of Asia into the Macedonian campe, as made Antipater and Cra∣terus thinke houre a moneth, till they had rid their hands of these Aetolians, giuing them whatsoeuer conditions they would aske. yet with purpose to call them to seuere account; yea, to roote them out of Greece by death, or by captiuitie, when once they should haue settled the affaires of Asia; as they hoped and desired. But of mens purposes God is the disposer: in whose high Counsell it was ordained, that this poore Nation should continue a troublesome barre to the proceedings of Ma∣cedon and Greece, and (when time had ripened the next ) an open gate to let the Roman Conquerors into those and other Prouinces. Likewise concerning the matters of Asia, the reformation intended by Antipater and , was so farre from taking effect, that it serued meerely as an introduction to all the ciuill warres ensuing. The grounds of the Asiatique expedition, which did set the world in an vp-rore, were these. Antipater and Craterus were of Alexanders Captaines the mightiest in reputation: The one, in regard of his ancient precedencie, and the present rule which he bare in the parts of Europe. The other, as of all men the best beloued, and most respected, both of Alexander and of the whole Armie. Next vnto these had Perdiccas beene; whom the aduantage of his presence at the Kings death did make equall, or superiour, to either of these, if not to both together. The first intents of Perdiccas were, to haue consorted with these two, and to haue beene with them a third partner in the gouernement of all; to which purpose the dis∣course of marriage with one of Antipaters Daughters. But feeling in short space the strength of that gale of which bore him vp, he began to take wing and soare quite another way. Aridaeus was a very simple man, yet wel enough to weare the of that Maiestie, whereof Perdiccas being Administrator, and hoping to be∣come , the practice was more seuere than had been in the daies of Alex∣ander: the desire to seeme terrible, being very familiar with weake Princes, and their ambitious Officers, who know no other meanes of preseruing themselues from con∣tempt, and of giuing such a fierie lustre to their actions, as my dazell the eies of the beholders. How cruelly the poore Greekes in the higher Asia were all put to the sword; and how tyrannously the King and Princes of Cappadocia were crucified, hath alreadie beene . The were the next who felt the wrath of these counterfait Alexanders. One Citie of theirs was vtterly razed; the children sold for slaues, and all the rest massacred. The Isaurians by this example growne desperate, when after two or three daies triall they found themselues vnable to continue the defence, lockt themselues into their houses, and set the Towne on fire, into the flame whereof the yong-men did throw themselues, after that they had a while re∣pelled the Macedonians from the wals. These exploits being performed, the Armie had no other worke than to sift the ashes of the burnt Citie for gold and siluer; but Perdiccas had businesse of greater importance troubling his braines. Nothing was more contrarie to his ends, than to sit still without imploiment: letting his Souldiers grow idle about him, whilest o∣thers grew great, and tooke deepe roote in their seuerall Prouinces. Hee purposed therefore to transport his forces into Europe, vnder pretence of bringing the King into Macedonia, the seate of his Ancestors, and head of the Empire. The Kings presence would make the offices of his Vice-roies (during the time) actually voide; Antipater with Craterus being once in case of priuate men, and onely Perdiccas hol∣ding authoritie, the match with Cleopatra might easily bee made. So should great∣nesse meete with a good title; and what more could be wished? Some impediment the power of Ptolomie might giue, who held Aegypt well fortified with men, but much better with loue of the people; yet if the businesse prospered in Macedonia, like enough it was that either Ptolomie would follow of himselfe, or bee driuen to come to reason. Antigonus likewise then gouerning in Phrygia, a busie-headed man, and ill affected to the side, was to bee looked into, and made away, for feare of fur∣ther trouble. So thought Perdiccas, and was deceiued in so thinking. Antigonus was as good a man of warre, of as deepe a judgement, as high a spirit, and as great vndertaking, as any of Alexanders Captaines. His imploiments had beene lesse than some of theirs, which made him also the lesse respected. But his thoughts were as proud as theirs: for, he valued himselfe by his owne worth, not by the opinions of other men; with carefull attention had hee watched Perdiccas, and sounded the depth of his purposes, which it was now high time to discouer. For Perdiccas ha∣uing with a jealous eye pried into the demeanour of Antigonus, and finding him no way fit for his turne, caused him to be charged with such accusations, as might suf∣fice to take away his life, especially by a Iudge that sought his death. This deuice Antigonus would not seeme to perceiue, but prepared himselfe in shew to make an∣swere, indeede, to make escape, which easily he did, putting himselfe and his sonne Demetrius aboord of some Athenian Gallies, that carried him to Antipater, laden with such tidings, as finished the Aetolian warre before mentioned. As the comming of Antigonus made Craterus and Antipater manifestly perceiue their owne danger: so his flight gaue Perdiccas to vnderstand that his intentions were laied open, and must now be justified by the sword. Therefore hee prepared as fast as he could, not only for defence, but (as hauing on his side the Kings name) to meet with them at home, who were nothing slack in prouiding to encounter him. Pto∣lomie being aduertised of these proceedings, and considering how neerely they con∣cerned him, sided with Antipater. To his gouernement of Aegypt hee had annexed the Dominion of Cyrene, not without consent of the chiefe Citizens; and now in the middest of these garboiles he celebrated the funerall of Alexander with great so∣lemnitie, purchasing thereby to himselfe much good will and many partakers, not∣withstanding the terrible report of the Kings Armie comming against him. §. VIII. PERDICCAS his voyage into Aegypt, and his death. PERDICCAS, vncertaine which way to bend his maine power, at length resolued to set vpon Ptolomie; leauing Eumenes to keepe to his vse, against Craterus and Antipater, the parts of Asia bordering vpon Europe. It may seeme strange, that hee did not rather make head against those who were to come out of Greece with a great number, and of more able men than Ptolomie could bring. Perhaps he thought to make a quick end with Ptolomie; or beleeued that Craterus would not be readie for him soone enough. Sure it is that he tooke a bad course, and made it worse with ill handling. Ptolomie by his sweet behauiour allured many to his partie, without helpe of any bad arts. Perdiccas contrariwise was full of insolencie, which neuer faileth to be re∣warded with ; that is truely defined. An affection founded vpon opinion of an vnjust contempt. The whole storie of his proceedings in Aegypt is not worth relating: for he did nothing of importance; but (as a wilfull man) tired his fol∣lowers, and wasted them in hard enterprises without successe. His most forceable attempt was vpon a little Towne, called the Camels Wall: thither he marched by night, with more haste then good speed; for Ptolomie preuenting him, did put him∣selfe into the place, where behauing himselfe not only as a good Commander, but as a stout Souldier, hee gaue the foile to Perdiccas, causing him to retire with losse; after a vehement, but vaine, assault continued one whole day. The night following, Perdiccas made another journie, (which was his last) and came to the diuisions of Nilus, ouer against Memphis. There with much difficultie hee beganne to passe ouer his Armie into an Iland, where he meant to incampe. The current was strong, the water deepe, and hardly foordable. Wherefore he placed his Elephants aboue the passage, to breake the violence of the streame, and his horse men beneath it; to take vp such as were carried away by swiftnesse of water. A great part of his Armie being arriued on the further banke, the channell beganne to waxe deepe; so that whereas the former companies had waded vp to the chinne, they who should haue followed could finde no footing. Whether this came by rising of the water, or flit∣ting away of the ground; (the earth being broken with the feete of so many Men, Horse, and Elephants) no remedie there was, but such as had passed must repasse a∣gaine, as well as they might: for they were too weake for the enemie, and could not be relieued by their fellowes. With great confusion therefore they committed themselues to the Riuer, wherein aboue two thousand of them perished, a thou∣sand were deuoured by Crocodiles; a miserable spectacle euen to such as were out of danger; such as were strong and could swimme, recouered the Campe; many were carried downe the streame, and driuen to the contrarie banke, whereby they fell in∣to the hands of their enemies. This misfortune exasperated the Souldiers against their Generall, giuing libertie to their tongues, which long time had concealed the euill thoughts of their hearts. While they were thus murmuring, newes came from Ptolomy, which did set them in an vp-rore. Ptolomie had not only shewed much compassion on those who fell into his hands aliue, but performed all rights of funerall to the dead carcases, which the Riuer had cast vpon his side; and finally, sent their bones and ashes to be interred by their Kinsmen or Friends. This did not onely moue the common Souldier, but made the Captaines fall to mutinie, thinking it vnreasonable to make warre vpon so vertuous and honorable a person, to fulfill the pleasure of a Lordly ambitious man, vsing them like slaues. The sedition growing strong wanted only a head, which it quickly found. Python was there, who inwardly hated Perdiccas, for the disgrace which hee had suffered by his procurement, after the victorie vpon the rebellious Greekes. Python had liued in honourable place about Alexander; he was in the diui∣sion of the Prouinces made Gouernour of Media; hee had followed Perdiccas, and being in all things (the Protectorship excepted) equall to him, had neuerthelesse beene scornefully vsed by him, which now he requited. Drawing together a hun∣dred of the Captaines, & a good part of the horse, which consisted of the Gentrie, (the footmen hauing declared themselues before) he entred the Tent of Perdiccas, where without further circumstance they all ranne vpon him, and him. Such end had the proud mis-gouerning authoritie of Perdiccas. Hee might haue liued as great as any, could he haue suffered any as great as himselfe; yea, peraduenture ma∣ster of all, had he not beene too masterly ouer those which were already his. The next day Ptolomie came into the campe, where he was joyfully receiued; he excused himselfe of things past, as not hauing beene Author, or giuen cause of the Warre, and was easily beleeued: the fauour of the Armie being such toward him, that needs they would haue made him Protector in the roome of Perdiccas. But this hee refused. It was an office fit for one, that would seeke to increase his great∣nesse with his trouble. Ptolomie was well enough alreadie; wherefore, for his owne quiet he forbare to accept it, and for their well-deseruing of him hee procured that honourable charge to Python, and to Aridaeus the Captaine, who hauing had some companies of Souldiers, to furnish with their attendance the solemnities of Alexan∣ders Funerals, did with them adhere to him against Perdiccas. In the middest of these businesses came newes of two great victories obtained by Eumenes; which newes, had they arriued two or three daies sooner, had beene en∣tertained with joyfull acclamations; and would haue giuen such reputation to Per∣diccas, as bad caused both his priuate maligners to continue his open flatterers, and his open enemies to haue accepted any tolerable composition. But these good ti∣dings comming in ill time, when death had stopped the eares which would haue giuen them wel-come, found bad acceptance, as shall be shewed hereafter. §. IX. Victories of EVMENES in the lower Asia. BEfore wee proceede in the relation of things, happening about the person of the King, it is meete that wee speake of those businesses in the lower Asia, which were handled by Eumenes with notable dexte∣ritie, whileft Perdiccas was occupied in the Aegyptian warres. Alcet as, the brother of Perdiccas, and Neoptolemus, had receiued command from Perdiccas to be assistant to Eumenes, and to follow his directions. But Alcetas made flat answere, That he would not; alleaging the backwardnesse of his men to beare armes against so great a person as Antipater, and a man so much honoured as , Neoptolemus was content to make faire shew, but inwardly hee repined at the Precedencie giuen to Eumenes, as thinking himselfe the better man. Eumenes dis∣couering, through the counterfaited lookes of Neoptolemus, the mischiefe lurking his heart, wisely dissembled with him, in hope to winne him by gentle behauiour, and sweet language, that commonly are lost, when bestowed vpon arrogant crea∣tures. Yet the better to fortifie himselfe, that hee might stand vpon his owne strength, he raised out of the Countries vnder his jurisdiction, about sixe thousand horse, giuing many priuiledges to such as were seruiceable, & training them well vp. Not without great neede. For when vpon aduertisement of the great preparations made by Craterus and Antipater (who had newly passed the Hellespont ) for the inua∣sion of his Prouinces, hee willed Neoptolemus to come to him with all his power, Neoptolemus did (indeed) aduance, but in hostile manner, though vnprouoked, pre∣sented him battaile. Neoptolemus had secretly couenanted with Antipater to lay o∣pen the way for him to the conquest of Asia, which now intending to performe, he thy Masters sonnes wife, euen as hath said. This their often vsing of the name of IEHOVAH, which is the proper Name of the true God, is a signe that they had the knoledge of him. Now although it be the opinion of Saint , and some later writers, as , Oleaster, Musculus, Caluin, Mercer, and others, that Laban was an Idolater, be∣cause he retained certaine Idols, or houshold Gods, which stole from him; yet that he beleeued in the true God it cannot bee denied. For hee acknowledgeth the God of Abraham and of , and he called Abrahams seruant, blessed of IEHOVAH, as aforesaid. So as for my selfe I dare not auow, that these men were out of the Church, who sure I am were not out of the faith. §. VI. That the naming of ABRAHAM first of the three brethren, Gen. 11. v. 26. doth proue that hee was the eldest: together with diuers reasons that ABRAHAM was not the eldest sonne of TERAH. TO the maine obiection which I answere last, because it seemeth of most strength, by which, those that striue to shorten the times, ende∣uour to proue that Abraham was the eldest sonne of Terah, and borne in the 70. yeere of Terahs life: grounding themselues first and chiefly on this place of the Scripture, And TERAH liued 70. yeeres and begat ABRAHAM, NAHOR, and HARAN: To this I say, that although Abraham in this Gen. 11. v 26. verse be first named, yet the same is no proofe at all that he was the eldest & first born sonne of Terah. For it is no necessary consequence, that the first named in Scrip∣tures was therefore eldest in bloud and birth, neither doth it appeare, that it plea∣sed God to make especiall choice of the first sonnes in nature and time: for Seth was not the first borne of Adam; nor Isaac of Abraham; nor Iacob of Isaac; nor Iuda and Ioseph of Iacob: nor Dauid the eldest of Iesse; nor Salomon of Dauid: as is formerly re∣membred. But it is written of NOAH; NOAH was 500. yeres old, and NOAH begat SHEM, HAM, and IAPHET: shewing that at the 500. yeere of his age he began to beget the first of those three sonnes. For according to S. Augustine, speaking generally, Nec Aug. . super Gen. 25. est in his or do natiuitatis, sed significatio futurae dignitatis: in qua excelluit ABRAHAM. The order of natiuitie is not here to be respected, but the signification of the future dignitie: in which ABRAHAM was preferred. And therefore, as in the order of the sonnes of Noah: so is it here; where it is said, that TERAH 70. yeeres, and beg at ABRAHAM, NAHOR, and HARAN: For it was late ere Terah began to beget Sonnes, him∣selfe being begotten by his Father Nachor at 29. as other his Ancestors were at 30. The like also happened to : for whereas Adam begat Seth at 130; Kenan at 90; Kenan Mahalaleel at 70; Mahalaleel Iered at 60: Noah was yet 500. yeeres old when he began to beget the first of his three sonnes, as aforesaid. And S. Augu∣stine in the place before cited, rather inclineth to the opinion that Abraham was the yongest of Terahs sonnes, then otherwise: though for his excellencie he was wor∣thily named first. His owne words are these: Fieri enim potuit vt posterior sit gene∣ratus ABRAHAM: sed merito excellentiae, qua in Scripturis valdè commendatur, prior nominatus. It might be, saith he, that ABRAHAM was begotten later: but was first na∣med in regard of his excellencie, for which in he is much commended. So as the naming first or last proueth nothing who was first or last borne: either in those is∣sues of Noah, or in these of Terah: Neither hath God any respect of the eldest in na∣ture, as touching his election or spirituall blessing, for Moses nameth first the chil∣dren of the promise, and the and first in Gods fauour. Piet as ergò vel po∣tiùs electio diuina, quae trahit pietatem, & Dei , prim as partes dat SEMO in liberis NOA, & ABRAHAMO in liberis Thare. Pietie, saith he, or rather diuine election, which doth euermore draw with it or after it and the feare of God, gaue place and precedencie to SEM among the children of NOAH, and to ABRAHAM among those of Thare. For the rest it is manifest, that Abraham entred Canaan in the 75. yeere of his age. And it was in Canaan that Hagar bare him Ismael, when Abraham had liued 86. yeeres. Gen. 12. 4. It was at Ger ar (the South border of Canaan ) that Sarah bare Isaac, when Abraham Gen. 16. 16. had consumed 100. yeeres. It was from the valley of Mamre in Canaan that Abra∣ham rose out, when he rescued Lot and ouerthrew Amraphel: and he had then but the age of 83. yeeres: and it is as manifest that he parted from Haran after his Father Act. 7. 4. & Terah was dead. But if Terah begat Abraham at 70. yeere old, then must Abraham Gen. 14. haue beene 135. yeeres when hee first set his foote in Canaan: seeing Terah must bee dead ere he parted, and so 70. added to 135. made 205, the true age of Terah, which is contrary to all those places of Scripture before remembred. For hee entred at 75: hee rescued Lot at 83: hee had at 86: hee had Isaac at 100. proued by the former places. Moreouer, if Abraham were the eldest sonne of Terah, and borne in the 70. yeere of his age: then had liued till Isaac had beene 35. yeeres old, and Ismael, 49. both which must then haue been borne in Mesopotamia, and therein fostered to that age: vnlesse we should either denie credit to S. Stephen, who saith that Abraham departed from Mesopotamia after his Fathers death: or else giue credit to the inter∣pretation of Daniel Angelocrator, who in his , saith it was about his Fathers death: because the Greeke word, , may bee transported by the Latine sub, aswell as by post: which though elsewhere it may bee, yet cannot it be so in this place. For it were most improperly spoken, to say that those things were done a∣bout Terahs death, which were 60. yeeres before. Wherefore supposing Abraham to haue beene borne in the 70. yeere of Terah; we must giue those times and places of birth to Abrahams children, which no authoritie will warrant; For Abraham had no children in Vr of Chaldea, nor in Haran: nor in 10. yeeres after his arriuall into . For the yeere of Terahs death, in which Abraham left Haran, was the yeere of the World 2083. and the yeere of Ismaels birth was the Worlds yeere 2094: which maketh 10. yeeres difference. And that Isaac was borne in Canaan, and was to bee offered vpon the mountaine Moriah therein, 39. miles from Berjabe, where Abraham then inhabited: and that three Angels first of all appeared to Abraham in the valley of , no man doubteth. And therefore it cannot be that any of Abrahams sonnes were borne in Mesopota∣mia; nor while Terah liued; nor in lesse then 10. yeeres after Terahs death: and then consequently was not Abraham the eldest sonne of Terah, nor borne in the 70. of age. Thirdly, whereas Abraham came into Canaan at 75: if Terah had begotten 70, then had Terah liued but 145. for 70. and 75. make 145. which Gen. 12. been the full age of Terah: but Terah liued 205. yeere: and therefore was not A∣braham borne in the 70. yeere of Terah. Fourthly, the ages of Lot and Sarah make it manifest, that Haran was the elder, if not the eldest brother of Abraham; for Sarah or wanted but 10. yeeres of age: Isaac beeing borne when Abraham was 100. and Sarah 90. yeeres olde. It followeth then, that if Abraham had beene the elder brother of Haran, Ha∣ran must haue begotten Sarah at 9. yeeres old: for granting that Haran was borne but one yeere after Abraham, and Sarah within 10. yeres as old as Abraham, then of necessitie must Haran beget her, when hee had liued but 9. yeeres; which were too ridiculous to imagine. And that was Sarah, Rab. Solomon affirmeth; both names, saith he, bearing the same signification; and names of principalitie. Againe, to what end was the word or inserted in this place, if Sarah were not meant thereby? for to was shamefully disappointed. For though his foot-men, being all Macedonians, had much the better, and preuailed farre vpon Eumenes his battailes; yet were his horse driuen out of the field, and himselfe compelled, with a few of them, to runne away, leauing naked the backs of his Macedonian foot-men, to bee charged by Eumenes, who forced them in such wise, that casting downe their Pikes, they cried for mercie, and gladly tooke their oath to him faithfull seruice. Antipater and Craterus en∣deuored with many goodly promises to draw Eumenes into their societie, who con∣trariwise offered himselfe, as a meane of reconciliation, betweene Perdiccas and Cra∣terus, whom he dearely loued; professing withall his hatred to Antipater, con∣stant faith to the cause which he had vndertaken to maintaine. Whilest these negotiations were on foot, Neoptolemus came with his broken crue to Antipater, and his Associates, vilifying Eumenes, and calling him a Scribe (at which foolish railing they laught) but extolling the vertue of (as well might) with high commendations; assuring them, that if Craterus did but once , or that his voice were but heard by any Macedonian in Eumenes his Campe, the vi∣ctorie was wonne, for they would all forth-with reuolt vnto him. Earnestly there∣fore he desired them to giue him aide against Eumenes, and especially requested that Craterus might haue the leading of the Armie to be sent. Their owne affections did easily leade them to condescend to his motion; and good hope there was, that the reputation of Craterus might preuaile as much, as the force which hee drew along. For he had in the middest of Alexanders venities, when others (imitating their King) betooke themselues to the Persian fashions of garments and customes, retained the ancient Macedonian forme of behauiour, and apparell; whereby hee became verie gracious with the common Souldiers, who beheld these new tricks of Asia, with dis∣contented eies, as reprochfull and derogarorie to the manners of their natiue coun∣trie. So Antipater tooke the way toward Cilicia, to hold Perdiccas at bay, and to joyne with Ptolomie. Craterus vsed great celeritie, to haue taken Eumenes reuelling (as he hoped) according to the common fashion of Captaines after a great victory. But hee had a warie and well aduised enemie to encounter, who kept good espiall vpon him, and with much wisedome fore saw all that was to bee feared, and the meanes of preuention, which his courage did not faile to execute. Eumenes was not ignorant, that Craterus was able to defeat him without battaile, yea without stroke; him therefore he feared more than the Armie following him: (yet the Armie following him was such, as much exceeded his owne in footmen, but was inferiour in horse-men) and thought it more vneasie to keepe the Macedonians from reuolting to him, than from knowing him. Hereupon hee tooke in hand a strange piece of worke, which desperation of all courses else taught him, and wise managing, prosperously accomplished. He gaue out reports, that Neoptolemus was returned with such companie as hee could gather together, and had gotten Pigres (a Captaine of no great estimation, who lay not farre off) to joyne with him. Ha∣uing animated his men against Neoptolemus, whom hee knew to be despised and ha∣ted among them, (as hauing been vanquished by some of them, & for saken others in plaine field, whilest they valiantly fought in his quarrell) hee tooke great care to keepe them from receiuing any intelligence of the enemies matters. Peremptorily he commanded, that no Messenger nor Trumpetter should be admitted; and not herewith satisfied, he placed against Craterus no one Macedonian, nor any other that much would haue regarded him had he been knowne: but Thracians, Cappadocians, and Persians, vnder the leading of such, as thought more highly of none, than of Per∣diccas and himselfe. To these also he gaue in charge, that without speaking or hear∣kening to any word, they should runne vpon the enemie, and giue him no leisure to say or doe any thing, but fight. The directions which he gaue to others, he did not faile to execute in his owne person: but placing himself in the right wing of his bat∣taile, opposite to Neoptolemus, who (as hee vnderstood) conducted the left wing on the contrarie side, he held the Macedonians arranged in good order, and readie to charge the enemie as soon as the distance would giue leaue. A rising of ground lay betweene them, which hauing ascended, the Armies discouered each other: but that of Eumenes euery way prepared for the fight, the other wearied with long jour∣nies, which ouer-hastily they had made, seeking the deceitfull issue of friuolous hopes. Then was it high time for Craterus (hauing failed in surprising them as ene∣mies) to himselfe to his old friends and fellow-souldiers, of whom hee could see none. Phoenix a Tenidian, and Artabazus a Persian, had the leading of that side, who mindfull of their instructions, beganne to giue vpon him, with such coun∣tenance as told him his errour; which to redeeme, he bade his men fight and winne the day, and take the spoile to themselues. But the Beare whose skinne hee sels is not yet caught. The ground whereon the battaile was fought gaue most aduan∣tage to the horse, who encountred very roughly on all parts: especially about Eu∣menes and Neoptolemus, who as soone as they had discouered one another, could not containe themselues, but with great rage met bodie to bodie, and letting loose their bridles, grappled so violently together, that their horses ran from vnder them, lea∣uing both of them tumbling on the ground. Neoptolemus rose first vp, but Eumenes had his sword first drawne, where-with he houghed the other, causing him to fall downe and fight vpon one knee. In this conflict they receiued many wounds, but Neoptolemus giuing slight ones tooke such as were deadly, by which hee died in the place, and was there (being halfe-dead halfe-aliue) stripped by his mortall enemie, whose reuilings hee requited, lying euen at the last gaspe, with one wound in the groine, dangerous had it not wanted force. The death of Neoptolemus caused his fol∣lowers to runne away vpon the spurre, and seeke shelter behind the battailes of their foote. They were nothing hotly pursued. For Eumenes pained himselfe to carrie succour to his left wing, which he suspected much to be distressed; but found accom∣panied with the same fortune, that had assisted him when he fought in person. Cra∣terus had gallantly borne himselfe a while, and sustained the impression of Artaba∣zus and Phoenix, with more courage than force; holding it nothing agreeable with his honour to retire and protract the fight, when he was charged by men of little e∣stimation or note. Otherwise it is not vnlikely, that hee might haue either carried the day, or preserued himselfe to a better aduenture by giuing ground, as the rest (when he and Neoptolemus were slaine) did. But whilest hee sought to preserue his reputation, hee lost his life by the fall of his horse, or his falling from his horse, through force of a wound receiued; vpon which accident hee was trampled vnder foot by many that knew him not, and so perished vnknowne, till it was too late to know it. Eumenes comming to the place where he lay, made great lamentation, as hauing alwaies loued and honoured Craterus, of whose death hee was now become the instrument. The vanquished Armie entertained a Treatie of peace with Eume∣nes, making shew of willingnesse to become his followers; but their intent was only to refresh themselues, which (by his permission) hauing done, they stale away by night, and fled toward Antipater. This battaile fought within ten daies of the former, wanne to Eumenes more re∣putation than good will: for his owne Souldiers took the death of Craterus heauily; and the Armies lying further off were inraged with the newes. But other matters there were which incensed men against him, besides the death of Craterus, whereof it manifestly appeared, that hee was as sorrie as any that pretended greater heaui∣nesse. His Armie wanted pay. This was a great fault; which he wisely amended, by giuing to them the spoile of such Townes as were ill-effected to him. So he re∣deemed the loue of his owne men, who of their meere motion appointed vnto him a guard for defence of his person. Others were not so easie to be reconciled. They who had beene Traitors to Perdiccas, hated him for his faithfulnesse, as greatly, as they thought that he would hate them for their falshood; neither found they any fairer way of excusing their late reuolt, than by accusing and condemning the side which they had forsaken. Wherefore they proclaimed Eumenes a Traitor, and condemned him to die: but it was an easier matter to giue that sentence, than to put it in execution. §. X. Quarrels betweene the Queene, and PYTHON the Protector. PYTHON resignes his office, into which ANTIPA∣TER is chosen. PYTHON and Aridaeus being chosen Protectors of King Aridaeus, and the children of Alexander, tooke the way to Asia the lesse, conduct∣ing the Armie through Syria. Of these two, Python was the greater in reputation, yet farre too weake to sustaine so important a charge. For Eurydice, wife to King Aridaeus, was come to her husband, a La∣die of a masculine spirit, well vnderstanding what she was or should bee, and think∣ing her selfe able to support the waight which Fortune had laicd vpon her foolish husband, being due to her owne title. Her Mother Cyna, sister to Alexander by her Father King Philip, was married (as hath beene shewed) to Amyntas, who was right Hcire to the Kingdome of Macedon, being the onely sonne of King Perdiccas, Phi∣lips elder brother. This Cyna was a warlike woman; shee had led Armies, and (as a true Sister of Alexander ) fighting hand to hand with Caeria Queene of the Phrygians, a Virago like vnto her selfe, had slaine her. Shee brought vp this Eurydice in the same vnwoman∣ly art of warre, who now among the Souldiers beganne to put in practice the rudi∣ments of her education, to the small contentment of Python, that could not brooke her curious intermeddling in his charge. Whether it were so, that Python had some purpose to aduance the sonne of Alexander by Roxane, to the Kingdome; (as once he had sought to doe) or whether the Queene did suspect him of some such intent; or whether onely desire of rule caused her to quarrell with him; quarrell did, which disturbed the proceeding against Eumenes. The Armic hauing shaken off such a rank-rider as Perdiccas, would not afterward be reined with a twined threed. Python bearing himself his office, took vpon him to giue directions in the kings name, which the Queene did oftentimes controll, vsing the same name, with more authoritie, and better liking of the Souldiers. Python, seeing this, would needes re∣signe his office, whether vpon wearinesse of the contentions daily growing, or on purpose to bring the Queene into enuie, it is vncertaine. Perhaps hee thought, that now being the farre worthiest man in the Campe, he should be intreated to retaine the place, and haue his authoritie confirmed, or (as might be) increased, were it but for want of a fit Successour. Eurydice was nothing sorrie at this course; for now she thought to manage the affaires of the Empire at her owne wil, being freed from the trouble some assistance of a Protector. But the Souldiers disappointed both her and Python, of their contrarie expectations: choosing Antipater, the onely powerfull man of Alexanders Captaines, then liuing, into the roome of Python. Hereat the Queene fretted exceedingly, and beganne to deale earnestly with the Macedonians, that they should acknowledge no Lord saue onely the King their Soueraigne. Yet shee failed of her purpose, being hindred (as may seeme) by three things: the appa∣rent weakenesse of her husband: the growth of Alexanders children, who (though borne of outlandish women) were bred in the Macedonian campe; and the mighti∣nesse of Antipater, who commanding a great Armie neere at hand arriued in few daies at the campe, and enforced Eurydice to hold her selfe content. Antipater was of such power, that he needed not to worke by any close deuices, as Perdiccas had done: he had no concurrents, all the Gouernours of Prouinces that remained aliue, acknowledged him their better: yea, many of them he displaced out of hand, put∣ting others in their roomes. This done, hee tooke the King, Queene, and Princes along with him into Macedonia, leauing Antigonus Generall of the Royall Armie: to whom for his good seruices done, and to be done against Eumenes, hee gaue the rule of Susiana, besides his former Prouinces, and committed into his hands the go∣uernment of Asia during that warre. §. XI. ANTIGONVS Lieutenant of Asia, winnes a battaile of EVMENES, and besiegeth him in Nora: He vanquisheth other followers of PERDICCAS. HEre beginnes the greatnesse of Antigonus, whose power in few yeeres ouergrowing, the rest wanted little of spreading it self ouer the whole Monarchie. Hee was to make warre vpon Eumenes, Alcetus the bro∣ther, and Attalus the brother in-law to Perdiccas: worke enough to keepe his Armie imployed in the publike seruice, till such time as he might find occasion to make vse of it in his owne businesse. The first of these which he vndertooke was Eumenes, with whom Alcetus and Attalus refused to ioyne, ha∣uing vnseasonably contended with him in time of common danger about the chief place. Eumenes had an Army strong in number, courage, and all needfull prouisions; but obedient only at discretion. Therefore Antigonus tried all waies of corrupting his Souldiers; tempting first the whole Armie with letters: which practice failing by the cunning of Eumenes (who made shew as if he himselfe had scattered abroad those letters, to trie the faith of his men) he dealt apart with such Captaines, as hee thought most easie to be wonne. Of these Captaines one rebelled, breaking out too hastily before any helpe was neere him, yet looking so carelesly to himselfe, that he and his were surprised, when he thought his enemies farre off. Another follower of Eumenes (or rather of good fortune, which he thought now to be in company with Antigonus ) kept his treacherie secret, reseruing it for the time of execution. Vpon confidence of the treason which this fals man Apollonides had vndertaken, Antigonus presented battaile to Eumenes; in the heate whereof Apollonides, General of the horse to Eumenes, fled ouer to the contrary side, with such as he could get to follow him: but was closely followed by some, whose company he desired not Eumenes, percei∣uing the irrecouerable mischiefe which this traiterous practice brought vpon him, pursued the villain, and cut him off before he could thrust himself into the troupes of Antigonus, and boast of his treacherie. This was some comfort to Eumenes in the losse of that battaile, which disabled him vtterly to keepe the field, and left it very hard for him to make a safe retrait. Yet one thing he did which much amazed his enemies, and (though a matter of small importance) caused Antigonus himselfe to admire his high resolution. It was held no small part of the victorie to get possessi∣on of the dead bodies. , whilest Antigonus held him in chace, turned out of the way, and fetching a compasse, returned to the place where the battaile had been fought; there he burned (according to the maner of the time) the bodies of his own men, and interred the bones and ashes of the Captaines, and common Souldiers, a∣part, raising vp heapes of earth as Mountaines ouer them, and so went his way. As this bold aduenture bred in the Macedonians, (returned to their campe) great admi∣ration of his braue spirit: so the newes which Menander (who was set to looke vnto their carriages) brought and published among them, enticed them to loue him as their honourable friend. He had found Menander in an open Plaine, carelesse, as af∣ter an assured victorie, and loaden with the spoyles of many Nations, the rewards of their long seruice; all which hee might haue taken: but fearing lest such a purchase should proue a heauie burthen to him, whose chiefe hope consisted in swift expedi∣tion, he gaue secret warning to Menander to flie to the mountaines, whilest he detai∣ned his men (vvhom authoritie could not haue restrained) by this sleight, setting them to baite their horses. The Macedonians extolled him for this courtesie, as a noble Gentleman, that had forborne when it lay in his power to strippe them out of al their wealth, and make their children slaues, and to their wiues: but An∣tigonus told them, that he had not forborne to do this out of any good wil to them; but out of meere subtiltie had auoided those precious fetters, which would haue hindered his speedie flight. He told them true. For Eumenes did not onely thinke all cariages to be ouer-burdensome, but the number of his men to be more trouble∣some than auaileable in his intended course. Wherefore he sent them from him as fast as he could, wishing them to shift for themselues; and retaining onely fiue hun∣dred horse, and two hundred foote. When he had wearied Antigonus awhile in following him vp and downe, he came to Nora: where againe, keeping no more a∣bout him, than necessity required to make good the place, he louingly dismissed all the rest. Nora was a little Fortresse in the borders of & Cappadocia, so strong∣ly situated that it seemed impregnable, and so well victualed and stored with all ne∣cessaries, that it might hold out for many yeeres. Thither did Antigonus follow, him, with more desire to make him his friend, than to vanquish him in warre. To this purpose he entertained parlee with him, but in vaine. For whereas Antigonus offered him , and his loue; Eumenes required restitution of his Prouinces, which could not be granted without Antipaters consent. Then was Nora closed vp; where Antigonus leauing sufficient strength for continuance of the siege, tooke his iournie into Pisidia against Alcetus and Attalus, with whom hee made short worke. He came vpon them vnexpected, and seized on passages, which wanted not men, but such a Captain as Eumenes, to haue defended them. and Attalus, as they had beene too secure before his comming, so were they too aduenturous in sighting at the first sight, vpon all disaduantages: and their folly was attended with sutable euent. Attalus with many principall Captaines was taken; Alcetus to the Citie of Termesus, where the loue of the yonger sort was toward him so vehement, that stopping their eares against all perswasions of the ancient men, they needes would hazzard their liues and their Countrie in his defence. Yet this auailed him nothing: For the Gouernours of the Towne hauing secretly compounded with Antigonus, caused the yong men to sally out; and vsing the time of aduantage, they with their seruants did set vpon Alcetus, who vnable to , himselfe. His dead body was conueied to Antigonus, and by him barbarously torne, was cast forth without burial. When Antigonus was gone, the yong men interred the carcasse with solemne funerals, hauing once beene minded to set on fire their ovvne tovvne in reuenge of his death. Such fauour had hee purchased vvith courteous liberalitie: but to make an able Generall, one vertue, hovv great soeuer, is insufficient. §. XII. PTOLOMIE winnes Syria and Phoenicia. The death of ANTIPATER. WHilest these things were in doing, the rest of the Princes lay idle, ra∣ther seeking to enioy their Gouernments for the present, than to con∣firme or enlarge them. Onely Ptolomie looking abroad, wanne all Sy∣ria and Phoenicia: an action of great importance, but not remarkeable for any circumstance in the managing. Hee sent a Lieutenant thither with an Armie, who quickly tooke Laomedon prisoner, that ruled there by appoint∣ment of Antipater, and formerly of Perdiccas; but (as may seeme) without any great strength of Souldiers, farre from assistants, and vainely relying vpon the authority which had giuen him that Prouince, and was now occupied with greater cares, than with seeking to maintaine him in his Office. Antipater was old and sickly, desirous of rest, and therefore contented to let Antigonus pursue the dispatch of those businesses in Asia. Hee had with him , one of the most ancient of Alexanders, Captaines, that had lately sup∣pressed a dangerous insurrection of the Aetolians, which Nation had stirred in the quarrell of Perdiccas, preuailing farre at the first, but soone losing all that they had gained, whilest Antipater was abroad in his Cilician expedition. In this Polysperchon, Antipater did repose great confidence; so farre foorth, that (suspecting the youth of his owne Sonne Cassander of insufficiencie in so great a charge) hee bequeathed vn∣to him on his death-bed the Gouernment of Macedon and Greece, together with his Office of Protectorship. So Antipater died, being foure-score yeeres old, hauing al∣waies trauailed in the great affaires of mightie Princes, with such reputation, that Alexander in all his greatnesse was of him, and the successours of Alexander did either quietly giue place vnto him, or were vnfortunate in making oppositions. In his priuate qualities he was a subtile man, temperate, frugall, and of a Philoso∣phicall behauiour, not vnlearned, as hauing beene Scholler to Aristotle, and written some Histories. Hee had beene much molested by Olympias, Alexanders mother, whom after the death of her Sonne, hee compelled to abstaine from comming into Macedonia, or entermeddling in matters of estate: yea, at his owne death he gaue e∣speciall direction, that no woman should bee permitted to deale in the administrati∣on of the Empire. But this precept was soone forgotten; and yet, ere long, by sor∣rowfull experience approued to haue been sound and good. §. XIII. Of POLYSPERCHON who succeeded vnto ANTIPATER in the Protector∣ship. The insurrection of CASSANDER against him. POLYSPERCHON was very skilfull in the art of warre, hauing long time beene Apprentise in that occupation; other qualities, requisite in so high an Office as he vnder-went, either Nature had not giuen to him, or Time had robbed him of them. He mannaged his busines more formally, then wisely, as a man of a second wit, fitter to assist, than commaund in chiefe. At the first entrance vpon the stage, hee called to coun∣saile all his friends, wherein, for waightie considerations (as they who waighed not the contrary reasons held them) the Queene Olympias was reuoked out of Epirus in∣to Macedon, that the presence of Alexanders mother might countenance and streng∣then their proceedings. For the condition of the times requiring, that the Gouer∣nours of Prouinces abroad should keepe greater Armies, than were needesull or easie to be retained about the person of the King in Macedonia; it seemed expedi∣ent, that the face of the Court should be filled with all maicstie, that might giue au∣thoritie to the Iniunctions from thence proceeding, and by an awfull regard con∣taine within the bounds of dutie such as could not by force haue beene kept in or∣der, being strong, and lying too farre off. Such care was taken for preuention of imaginarie dangers and out of sight, whilest present mischiefe lay vnregarded in their bosomes. Cassander, the Sonne of Antipater, was not able to discouer that great sufficiencie in Polysperchon, for which his father had reposed in him so much confidence: neither could hee discerne such oddes in the qualitie of himselfe and Polysperchon, as was in their fortune. Hee was left Captaine of one thousand; which Office by practice of those times was of more importance, than the title now seemes to implie. He should thereby haue beene as Campe-master, or Lieutenant generall to the other: a place no way satisfying his ambition, that thought himselfe the better man. Therefore hee began to examine his owne power, and compare with the forces likely to oppose him. All that had relied on his Father, were his owne assured, especially such as commanded the Gar∣risons bestowed in the principall Cities of Greece. The like hope was of the Magistrates, and others of principall authoritie, in those Common-weales, whose formes had beene corrected by Antipater, that they would follow the side, and draw in many partakers: it concerned these men in their owne particular to adhere vnto the Captains, by whom their faction was vp-held; and by whom the rascall multitude, couetous of regaining the tyrannous power which they had for∣merly exercised ouer the principall Citizens, were kept in order, obaying their bet∣ters perforce. Besides all these helpes, Cassander had the secret loue of Queene , who had in priuate rendered him such courtesie, as was due onely to her hus∣band. But neither the Queenes fauour, nor all his other possibilities, gaue him con∣fidence to brcakc out into open rebellion; because he saw much reue∣renced among the Macedonians, and strong enough to suppresse him, before he could haue made head. Therefore he made shew of following his pleasures in the coun∣trie, and calling many of his friends about him, vnder pretence of hunting, aduised with them vpon the safest course, and most free from all suspition. The neccssitic was apparant of raising an Armie, before the businesse were set on foot; and to doe this, opportunitie presented him with faire meanes. Ptolomie had by fine force, without any commission, annexed Syria to his gouernement of Aegypt and Cyrene: this was too much either for the King to trust him with, or for him to part with. An∣tigonus vpon the first newes of Antipaters death, began to lay hold vpon all that hee could get, in such sort, that he manifestly discouered his intent of making himsclfe Lord of all Asia. These two therefore stoodc in needc of a ciuill Warre; which Cassander well noted, and presumed withall, That the friendship which had passed betweene his Father and them, would auaile him somewhat. Whereupon hee se∣cretly dispatched messengers to them both; and within a little while him∣selfe on a sudden ouer the Hellespont, that hee might in person aduance the businesse with grcater spcede. Much perswasion is needlesse in winning a man to what hc de∣sireth. Antigonus coueted nothing more, than to finde worke, by rai∣sing some commotion in Greece. Yet (as formalities must not be neglected) Cassan∣der did very earnestly presse him, by the memory of his Father, and al requisite con∣iurations, to assist him in this enterprise; telling him, that Ptolomie was readie to de∣clare for them, and vrging him to a speedie dispatch. Antigonus on the other side repaied him with the same coine; saying, That for his owne sake, and his dead Fa∣thers, whom he had very dearely loued, hee would not faile to giue him all manner of succour. Hauing thus feasted one another with words, they were nothing slacke in preparing the common meanes, leading to their seucrall ends. §. XIIII. The vnworthie courses held by POLYSPERCHON, for the keeping downe of CASSANDER. GReat necessitie there was of timely prouision. For Polysperchon needed no other instructions to informe him of Cassanders drift, than the newes of his departure. He was not ignorant of the ready disposition, which might be found in Antigonus and Ptolomie, to the strengthning of rebellion; and well hee knew that one principall hope of Cassander was reposed in the confidence of such as ruled in the Graecian Estate. Therefore (lo∣uing to work circumspectly) he called another Councel, wherein it was concluded, That the Popular forme of gouernment should be erected in al the Cities of Greece; the Garrisons withdrawne; and that all Magistrates and principall Men, into whose hands Antipater had committed the supreme authority, should forthwith bee ei∣ther slaine or banished. This was a sure way to diminish the number of Cassanders friends, and to raise vp many enemies to in all quarters. Yet hereby was disclo∣sed both an vnthankefull nature in Polysperchon, and a factious malice in his adhe∣rents. For how could he be excused of extreme ingratitude, that for hatred of the Sonne went about to dishonour the Fathers actions, whose only bountie had ina∣bled him to doe it? or what could bee said in their defence, who sought to destroy many worthie men, friends to the State, by whom the Greekes were held restrained from stirring against the Macedonians: and in opposition to their priuate Enemie, gaue the rule of things to base Companions, and such as naturally maligned the Empire? But as in mans bodie, through wcs newly issuing from one branch, a finger is more vexed by inflammation of his next Neighbour, than by any distem∣per in the contrarie hand: so in bodies politique, the humours of men, subdiuided in faction, are more inraged by the disagreeable qualities of such as curbe thcm in their purposes, than they are exasperated by the opposition of such as arc diuided from them in the maine trunke. Hereby it comcs to passe, that con∣trarie religions are inuited to helpe against Neighbour Princes; bordering enc∣mies drawne in, to the part in ciuill warres; and ancient hatred called to counsaile against iniurious friends. Of this fault Nature is not guiltie; shee hath taught the arme to offer it selfe vnto manifest losse in defence of the head: they are depraued affections, which render men sensible of their ownc particular, and of the more generall good, for which they werc created. The decree, whereby the Greekes were presented with a vaine shew of libertie, ranne vnder the Kings name; but so, as might easily discerne, that Polysperchon had guided his pen. For the maine point was, That they should follow such dire∣ctions, as Polysperchon gauc, and treate with him about all difficulties. In the rest it contained such a deale of kindnesse, as on a sudden from those who had kept them in hard subiection, might well appcarc to haue some other root than the pretended good will; and was of it selfe too base and vnfit for a King to vse toward his Subiects, and often subdued Rebels. §. XV. Of the great commotions raised in Athens by POLYSPERCHONS decree. The death of PHOCION. NEuerthelesse the Athenians with immoderate ioy entertained this hap∣pie-seeming Proclamation, and sought how to put it in execution without further delay. But Nicanor, Captaine of the Garrison, which kept one of their Hauens, called Munychia, in the lower part of the Townc, would needes take longer time of deliberation, than was pleasing to their hastie desires. Nicanor, as a trusty follower of Cassander, was by him shifted into the place, and Menillus (that was Captaine there before) discharged, when Antipater was newly dead. His comming to Athens was no way gratcfull to the Citizens, who soone af∣ter hearing the newes of death, cried out vpon Phocion, saying, That hee had sufficient intelligence of that accident, and might by aduertising them in due time, haue put into their hands a faire opportunity of thrusting out the Macedonians. But these exclamations argued no more than desire to shake off the Macedonian yoke. Farre more grieuously would they haue bcene offended, had they knowne the instructions, which Cassander had giuen to Nicanor, and his to follow them. It was concluded, That he should not only retainc Munychia, any iniunction to the contrarie not withstanding; but that hce should finde meanes to thrust some Companies into , and fortifie that also, which was the principall Hauen, a∣gainst the high-Towne. How to accomplish this, he rather wanted some reasona∣ble pretence, than good abilitie. But the Athenians were not long in giuing him suf∣ficient cause to do that, which he would haue done without any cause giuen. They desired him to come vnto their Councell, assembled in the Piraeus, there to consider of the Kings Proclamation: whither vpon Phocions word and safe conduct he came, and earnestly pressed them to hold with Cassander in the warre which was ready to breake fourth. Contrariwise they vrged him first of all, to make them Masters of their owne, which how to vse, they might consult afterwards, Each of them refu∣sing to condescend vnto the others demand; the Athenians (who did alwaies mea∣sure iustice by profit, yet seldome thriued by that course) practised with Dercyllus, a Captaine following Polysperchon, and then lying neere at hand, that he should en∣ter into the Towne, and take Nicanor prisoner. But Phocion, who then gouerned in Athens, a man very vnlike to the rest of the Citizens, being nothing pleased with such a tricke of politique dishonestie, did quietly suffer him to depart and saue himsclfc. hereupon beganne to deuise vpon taking Piraeus; not as following now the proiect of Cassander, but prosecuting his owne iust reuenge. He leauied as many Souldiers as he could, and drew them closely into Munychia; which done, he issued into Piraeus, tooke it, and intrenched himselfe thercin, to the exceeding discomfort of the Athenians, who lately impatient of his keeping the one Hauen, saw him now Master of both. Alexander, the sonne of Polysperchon, came after with an Armie. Then were the Citizens in great hope of recouering all, and ad∣dressed themsclues vnto him; who made faire shewes, intending meere mischiefe, which they perceiued not, being blinded with the vaine Epistles of his Father, and of Olympias the old Queene. Olympias taking vpon her to command, before shee durst well aduenture to returne into Macedon, had peremptorily charged Nicanor to restore to the Athenians the places which hce held: but hee would first consider more of the matter. Polysperchon had further ordained, that the Isle of Samos should be rendred vnto them: a goodly offer, had it accorded with his power and meaning. He was (indeede) so farre from purposing to let them haue Samos, that as yet he did not throughly intend to lct them haue themsclues. The commoditie of their Ha∣uens was such, as he would rather get into his owne hands, than leaue in theirs; yet rather wished in theirs, than in Cassanders. His sonne Alexander not ignorant of this, made faire shew to the Athenians, and spent much labour in communing with Nicanor, but suffered not them, for whom he seemed to labor, to intermeddle with the businesse. Hereupon the Citizens grew iealous, and the displeasure they con∣ceiued against him they powred out vpon Phocion, depriuing him of his office. This was done with much tumult: banished men and strangers, thrusting themselues in∣to the assembly of the Citizens, who distracted with sundry passions, growing out of their present misfortunes, thought euery one that best could inucigh against things past, a most likely man to finde some remedie for the euill threatning them. In this hurly burly was Alexander deuising how he might come to some good point of composition with Nicanor, and held much priuie conference with him; which he could not so secretly carrie, but that his negotiation was discouered, whereby the vp-rore in the Towne was so farre incrcased, that Phocion with many of his friends were accused, and driuen to seeke saueguard of their liues by flight. So they came to Alexander, who entertained them gently, and gaue them his letters of commen∣dation to his Father, desiring him to take them into his protection. Polysperchon was in the Countrie of Phocis, readie to enter with an Armie into Attica. Thither came Phocion with his Companions, hoping well that the letters which they brought, and their owne deserts, (hauing alwaies beene friends to the Macedonians, as farre as the good of their Countrie gaue leaue) should be enough to get patronage to their innocencie. Besides all this, Dinarchus a Corinthian, Polysper∣chons familiar friend, went along with them, (in an euill houre) who promised to himselfe and them great fauour, by meanes of his acquaintance. But Polysperchon was an vnstable man, very earnest in what he tooke in hand, yet, either for want of iudgement in following them, or of honestie in holding the best of them, easily changing his intended courses, and doing things by the halues, which made him commonly faile of good successe. For feare of Cassander, he had offered wonderfull kindnesse to the Athenians; this had caused them to loue him: out of their loue hee gathered hope of deceiuing them, which made him to change his minde, and secke how to get into his owne hands those keyes, with which Cassander held them fast lockt vp: finding himselfe disappointed of this purpose, and suspected as a false dis∣honourable man, hee stood wauering betwecne the contrarie allurements of profit and reputation. To keepe the Athenians perforce at his dcuotion, would indcede haue done well: but the effecting of this beganne to grow desperate; and many Townes of importance in Grecce beganne to cast their eyes vpon his proceeding in that action. Whcrefore hee thought it the wisest way to redeeme their good opi∣nion, by giuing all contentment vnto the popular faction, which then was growne to be Master of that Citie. And in good time for this purpose were the Athenian Embassadours come, (as one may say) vpon Phocions hcelcs, whom they were sent to accuse. Thcse had solemne audience giucn to them in the Kings pre∣scnce, who was attended by many great Lords, and for sake was glo∣rified with all exteriour shewes of majestie; yet all too little to change Aridaeus in∣to Alexander: for he did nothing there, but either laugh or chafe, as hee saw others do. For beginning of the businesse Polyspherchon commanded that Dinarchus should be tortured and slaine. This was enough to testifie his affection to the Com∣monaltie of Athens, in that he spared not his old acquaintance for their sake; whose Embassadours hee then bade to speake. When their errand was done, and answere to it made by the accused, who had no indifferent hearing, Phocion and the rest were pronounced guiltic of treason; but to giue sentence, and doe the vpon them, was (for Honours sake) referred vnto the Citie of Athens, because they were Burgesses. Then were they sent away to Athens, where the rascall multitude, not suffering them to speake for themsclucs, condemned them to die. So they perished being innocent. But the death of Phocion, a man very conspicuous, made the for∣tune of the rest to be of the lesse regard. Fiue and fortie times had hee beene cho∣sen Gouernour of the Citie, neuer suing for the placc, but sent for when hee was absent: so well was his integritie knowne, and so highly valued, euen of such as were no pretenders to the same vcrtue. Hec was a good Commander in Warre, wherein though his actions wcre not great, yet were they of good impor∣tance, and ncuer vnfortunate. Ncuer did the Citie repent of hauing followed his counsaile: nor any priuate man of hauing trusted his word. Philip of Macedon high∣ly esteemed him; so, and much more did Alexander, who (bcsides other signes of his loue) sent him two hundred talents of siluer, and offered to bestow vpon him of foure Cities in Asia any one which hce would choose. But Phocion refused these and other gifts, howsoeuer importunately thrust vpon him; resting well contented with his honest pouertie: wherein he liued aboue fourescore yeeres, and then was com∣pelled by the vnjust judgement of wicked men to drinke that poyson, which by just judgement of the righteous God, so infected the Citie of Athens, as from that day forwards it neuer brought forth any worthie man resembling the vertue of their Ancients. §. XVI. Of POLYSPERCHON his vaine expedition against CASSANDER. NOt long after these things were done, Cassander with such forces as Antigonus lent him, entrcd into Piraeus; which newes drew Poly∣sperchon head-long into Attica, with a great Army, but so ill victualed, that he was faine to depart without any thing done. Onely hee had giuen some impediment to the enemie; who not contented with what he held, beganne to looke out, and make new purchases abroad. Fin∣ding therefore himselfe vnable to driue Cassander out of Athens, hee left his sonne Alexander, with such number of men, as excecded not the proportion of victuals, to withstand his further incroching. The greatest part of his Armie he carried into Peloponnesus, to make the Countrie sure to himselfe, wherein Cassander had many Friends. His doings in Peloponnesus were such, as they had beene in other parts of Greece. First, he beganne to fight with Edicts, restoring the Democratie, or Popular forme of gouernement. He commanded that the principall Citizens, that had by Antipater beene made Rulers, should be either slaine, or driuen into exile. This decree tooke immediate effect in most places: The vulgar sort being very ready to seale the Char∣ter of their freedome and authoritie, with the bloud of those who had kept them in subjection. Yet many Cities there were, which delighted in the rule of the chiefe Citizens; and many which wished well to Cassander; especially they of Megalopolis, on whom Polysperchon meant to inflict an exemplarie punishment of disobedience to him, which he termed Rebellion. Megalopolis had in it fifteene thousand ser∣uiceable men, well furnished of necessaries, and resolued to endure the worst. And neede there was of such resolution. For Polysperchon comming thither with all his power did so much, that ouerthrew, by a Mine, three of their Bulwarks, and all the space of wall betweene them. But the Defendants manfully repelled the Mace∣donians which came vp to the breach; and at the same time with great labour they raised vp an inner wall, to beare out the next assault. The Assailants hauing failed to carrie the Towne at the first attempt, tooke much paine to cleare the ground, and make faire way for their Elephants, whose violence was likely to ouerthrow all that came in their way. But the townes-men perceiuing their drift, prepared boords driuen through with long nailes, which they vsed as gall-throps, bestowing them sleightly, couered with the points vpwards, in the way by which the beasts were to passe. Neither did they set any to encounter them in front, but appointed certaine light-armed men to beat vpon their sides with Arrowes and , as they were in∣structed by some that had learned the manner of that fight in the Asian Warres. Of these prouisions they made happie vse in the next assault. For by them were the E∣lephants (wherein the enemie chiefly trusted) either sorely hurt, or driuen back vp∣on the Macedonians, whom they trampled vnder feet. Polysperchon came as iil for long abode to Megalopolis, as before to Athens. Therefore being neither able to dispatch the businesse quickly, nor to take such leisure as was requisite, hee forsooke the siege, with some losse, and much dishonour; leauing some part of his Armie to lie before the Towne for his credit. After this hee sent Clitus, his Admirall, to Sea, to joyne with Aridaeus that was come out of Phrygia, and to cut off all succour which might come to the enemy out of Asia. Cassander also his whole Fleet vnder Nicanor, who taking along with him some ships of Antigonus, came to the Propontis, where hee fought with Clitus, and was beaten. But Antigonus hearing of the ouer-throw, gathered together the ships that were escaped, and manning them very well, sent out againe, assu∣ring him of the victorie, as well he might. For hee sent out sufficient numbers of light-armed men, whom hee had caused to bee wafted ouer the Straights in small Vessels by night; these before day-light setting vpon Clitus, draue his men, that lay securely on the land, head-long into their ships; in which tumult Nicanor arriuing did assaile them so lustily, that few or none escaped him. This losse at Sea, together with his bad successe by Land, brought Polysperchon into great contempt. He had a good facilitie in penning bloudy decrees, but when the execution was referred to his owne sword, he could finde the matter more diffi∣cult. Wherefore the Athenians, perceiuing that hee had left them to shift for them∣selues, and was not able to giue them protection against the enemie which lay in their bosomes, came to agreement with Cassander; accepting a Gouernour of his appointment; and all things to the same state wherein Antipater had left them. The like inclination to the partie of Cassander, was found in very many Ci∣ties of Greece, which daily and willingly reuolted vnto him; as to an industrious man, likely to preuaile in the end. Thus was the whole Countrie set in a com∣bustion, vneasie to be quenched; which presented vnto Antigonus an , that he neglected not, of making himselfe Lord of Asia. §. XVII. ANTIGONVS seekes to make himselfe an absolute Lord: and thereupon treates with EVMENES, aho disappointeth him. Phrygia and Lydia wonne by ANTIGONVS. ANTIGONVS had in Antipaters life time a firme resolution, to make vn∣to himselfe the vtmost benefit that he might of the Armie committed to his charge. And in faire season for aduancement of his purposes came the newes of Antipaters death; euen then, when all the businesse in Pisidia was dispatched, and no more imployment for the Armie re∣maining, saue onely the continuance of the siege of Nora; a smal thing of it selfe, but as hard as a greater matter; and requiring few men, but much time; when time of all things was most precious. Eumenes lay in that Fort of Nora, able to make the place good, and hoping that the mutabilitie, to which the present estate was mani∣festly subiect, would in continuance of some yeeres (which he might abide) worke more for him, than his enemies in that space could worke against him. His most feare was, that for want of exercise in that narrow Castle, his men and horses might grow sickly and vnseruiceable: which made him to practise many deuices of kee∣ping them in health and lustie. But when he had continued shut vp in this manner about a yeere, his hopes came to good passe, and he was eased of his cares by Anti∣gonus himselfe, whose forces held him besieged. Antigonus knowing the great sufficiencie of Eumenes, and considering his fide∣litie shewed vnto Perdiccas, thought that hee could not finde in all the world a fitter man than him, to imploy in managing those high designes, wherein hee doubted not that hee should bee withstood by the mightiest Princes of the Empire. Hee sent therefore to Eumenes by one that was friend to them both, acquainting him with some part of his intent, and promising to make him a greater Lord than euer hee had beene, and the next man to himselfe, if things fell out as he desired: in re∣gard whereof hee required onely his friendship, and thereupon sent him an oath to take; which done, he might at his good pleasure issue safely out of Nora, and en∣ioy his perfect libertie. Eumenes perusing the forme of the oath, perceiued the mea∣ning of Antigonus; which was, rather to make him his follower than his fellow. For whereas, in a few words, it mentioned the King and Princes of the bloud, rather to keepe the Decorum, than vpon any loyall intent; the binding words and summe of all the rest were such, as tied him fast onely to Antigonus, omitting all reseruation of dutie to the King or any other. This he liked not, holding it vnseemely to be∣come a sworne man to him, with whom hee had fought for the mastrie, and being assured that his voluntarie assistance, which way soeuer he gaue, would be more ac∣ceptable, and farre more honourable, than the course propounded. Yet would hee not therefore breake off the negotiation, and waite for some better occasion of in∣largement, which might perhaps be long in comming: but seeming to bee well a∣greed with Antigonus, hee prepared to giue vp his Hold and depart. As for the oath it selfe, when he came to take it, he made shew of dislike, in that it was not solemne enough for such personages as they were, who could not be too ceremonious in their Allegiance. The Macedonians which lay incamped before Nora, liked his words, and gaue him leaue to put in Olympias, and the children of Alexander, binding himselfe to them and their adherents, as well as to Antigonus; and so he de∣parted. Antigonus had taken vpon him, as soone as hee came downe to the Sea-side, to remoue some of the Gouernours of Prouinces, behauing himselfe according to the authoritie which hee had receiued of Antipater, to exercise in the time of warre. Neither did hee want sufficient pretence whereby to iustifie his proceedings. For if Polysperchon might lawfully hold the Protector-ship, which the old man doting on his death-bed bequeathed vnto him, as a legacie, without consent of the Princes or Souldiers; why might not he himselfe as well retaine the Lieutenantship of Asia, that was granted vnto him for the generall good of the State, in presence of the whole Armie, by the King, and by Antipater, who had power to ordaine what should seeme conuenient whilest he liued, not to dispose of things that should happen af∣ter his death? To giue a faire colour to his ambition, this was enough: if any were not herewith satisfied, he had threescore thousand footmen, ten thousand horse, & thirtie Elephants in a readinesse to answere them. The first that perceiued his drift, and prouided to resist him, was Aridaeus Go∣uernour of Phrygia; who fortified the Townes of his owne Prouince, and sought to haue wonne Cyzicus, a faire Hauen Towne, and seated very conueniently for him, but was faine to goe away without it. Hereupon Antigonus tooke to command him out of the Countrie. Aridaeus was so farre from obeying him, that he sent forces to relieue Eumenes. Neuerthelesse finding that he was vnable of himselfe to make long resistance, he tooke such companies as hee could draw along with him, and so passed ouer into Europe, to complaine at the Court. The like for∣tune had Clitus, who ruled in Lydia, and sought the like remedy of his , with some hope at the first (for both of them were entertained with very good words) which quickly vanished, and grew desperate, when they were beaten at Sea, as hath already been declared. §. XVIII. ANTIGONVS pursues EVMENES. EVMENES hauing authoritie from the Court, raiseth great Warre against ANTIGONVS in defence of the Royall house. ANTIGONVS hauing thus gotten into his hands all, or most of Asia the lesse, was able to haue entred Macedon, and seized vpon the Court; which that he forbare to doe, it proceeded (as may seeme) for some of these reasons. It would haue bred as much jealousie in Cassander, as feare in Polysperchon, which might haue brought them to tearmes of reconciliation; It would aske more time then hee could spare; and the enuie which followed the Protector-ship was such, as he that had power enough without the Office, ought rather to shunne, then to pursue. Besides all this, it was manifest that Eumenes would not only refuse to take his part, but would make war vpon him in defence of the Royall house, to which it was found that Antigonus did not stand well-affected. Against him therefore hee bent his course, and with an Armie of twentie thousand foote, and foure thousand Horse, made great haste toward Cilicia, hoping to suppresse him before hee should bee able to make head. Eumenes was one of those few that continued faithfull to their dead master, which being well knowne in the Court, hee had commission sent vnto him from thence to raise an Armie, and make warre vpon Antigonus, taking of the Kings treasure as much as hee should neede. Other letters also there were directed to all the Gouer∣nours of Prouinces, requiring them to giue assistance to Eumenes, and bee ordered by his direction: especially to the Captaines of the olde Souldiers, called the Ar∣gyraspides, or siluer-sheelded bands, commandement was giuen to be at his appoint∣ment. He had of his old followers gathered together two thousand foote, and fiue hundred horse, before this authoritie was giuen him: but now he purposed with all the strength which he could make, to fight with Antigonus in defence of the Roiall bloud. Olympias had written to him, desiring him to bring help to her and her Ne∣phew the sonne of Alexander; and in the meane time to giue her his aduice in that which Polysperchon required of her: for she was desirous to returne into Macedon, but suspected his ambition, as not contained within lawfull bounds. Eumenes therefore counselled her to remaine in Epirus, till such time as hee could bring the warre to a good issue; which done, he that his faith and care should not be wanting to the seede of Alexander. Strange it is to consider, that in all the Empire scarce any one could be found a∣mong the Noble-men, in whom Alexanders mother, wiues, and children, might re∣pose firme confidence, sauing onely this Eumenes, a stranger to the Macedonian bloud, borne at Cardia, a Citie of Thrace. His reputation was no more than his owne had made it; his followers obeyed at their owne discretion; and compelled hee was to trauaile as farre as Persia, to gather together an Armie sufficient, to resist the enemies that pursued his heeles. §. XIX. How the Princes of Macedon stood affected mutually. OLYMPIAS takes ARIDEVS and EVRYDICE, whom shee cruelly puts to death. NOw, forasmuch as in this present warre all the Rulers of the Prouin∣ces did entermeddle; and great alterations happened, not onely in the parts of Asia, but Macedon it selfe, which brought a new face vnto the State, by the extirpation of the roiall house of Philip and Alexan∣der: I hold it conuenient in this place, before we enter into the parti∣culars of the warre it selfe, to shew briefly how the great ones did mutually stand ; and by what passions they were drawne into those courses, which ouer∣threw most of them, and out of their ruines built the greatnesse of a few: as like wise to what extremitie the fraction brake out in Macedon it selfe, about the maine con∣trouersie of title to the Crowne, whereupon all other quarrels were or should haue beene depending. Aridaeus the King, being simple and fearefull, did onely what hee was bid∣den. Polysperchon, desirous to continue long in Office, had a purpose to aduance the sonne of Alexander by Roxane to the Kingdome, and become Gouernour to a King of his owne making. Eurydice the Queene discouering plainely this intent, and meaning nothing lesse than to let her husband serue as a Stale, keeping the throne warme till another were growne old enough to sit in it, grew acquainted with Cassander, who hated the memory of Alexander, and was therefore the fitter for her turne. Cassander held fresh in minde the danger wherein his family had beene through Alexanders malice, together with the indignitie offered to himselfe by Alexander, who knocked his head against a wall for deriding one that adored him after the Persian manner. The displeasure hereof; and the pleasure which he tooke in the a∣morous Queene, made him to resolue, both to suppresse the linage which he hated, and to maintaine his beloued mistresse, either by supporting her weake husband, or by taking her to be his owne wife. The rest of the Lords held it a thing indifferent who raigned ouer all, so as they might raigne in their seuerall Countries, and establish their authoritie in such wise, that it might not be taken from them. Among these, Ptolomie and Antigonus were well enough alreadie, if their ambiti∣on would haue suffered them to see it. Pitho and Seleucus lying farre off, and being strong, had some good hope to en∣croach vpon their neighbours. Against these, Pencestes and some others with much adoe hardly made resistance, vntill such time as Eumenes came to them; who pro∣pounded to himselfe great matters which he liued not to accomplish. Olympias the old Queene (as it is common with step-dames) hated the children of her husband by his other wiues. It was thought that shee had giuen poyson to , which failing to take away his life, had much impaired both his bodie and wits. Now shee considering, that Eumenes was too full of businesse to come home so soone as she wished that he should; and that Cassander daily preuailed in Greece: thought it the best way to ioyne with Polysperchon, and set vp, as King, her Nephew Alexander, the sonne of Roxane, remouing before Cassander were able to defend him. To this intent she procured men among her kindred in Epirus, and so tooke her way towards Polysperchon, who ioyning with her, entred into Macedon. Eurydice hearing these newes, wrote very earnestly to Cassander, praying him to set aside all other businesse, and come to succour her. Shee her selfe by entreatie, gifts and promises, drew to her partie as many of the as shee could, vn∣till shee thought her owne side strong enough; and then taking her husband with her, went boldly forth against Olympias, and the Traitor Polysperchon. These two Queenes met armed, as if the matter should haue beene determined by their own hands, which ended without any stroke stricken, by the reuolt of those who followed Eurydice. For as soone as the Macedonians beheld Olympias; calling to mind her former Estate, and the victorious reignes of her husband and sonne, they refused to lift any weapon against her. Eurydice finding her selfe thus forsaken, fled towards , but was intercepted and made prisoner with her husband. Olympias hauing obtained this victorie without bloud, thought that all things would succeed as easily, and that vpon the same considerations for which they had refused to beare Armes against her, the Macedonians would not sticke to maintaine , whatsoeuer her proceedings were. Hauing therefore shut vp and his wife in a close roome, where they could scarce turne round, shee fed them through a little hole, till after a while it came in her head, (for feare lest the people should haue commiseration of him, that had raigned almost sixe yeeres and a halfe) to put them to death. So she deliuered to some barbarous Thracians, who tooke away his life by cruell torments: to Eurydice she sent a sword, a halter, and a cup of poyson, willing her to choose the instrument of her owne death, who praying that the like presents might one day be sent to Olympias, yeelded her necke to the halter, hauing spent her last curses not in vaine. the brother of Cassander, and a hundred the chiefe of his friends, did Olympias then choose out, all whom she com∣manded to be slaine. His brother Iolaus that was alreadie dead and buried, shee ac∣cused of poyson giuen to Alexander, & thereupon caused his Tombe to be throwne downe, and his bones to be scattered abroad. The Macedonians wondering at this furie, began to condemne themselues, and the folly of Polysperchon, who had, quite contrarie to Antipaters charge giuen on his death-bed, called this outragious woman to the gouernement of the Empire. §. XX. How CASSANDER was reuenged vpon OLYMPIAS. † I. The great expedition of CASSANDER. OLYMPIAS shuts her selfe in∣to Pydna, where CASSANDER besiegeth her. AEACIDES King of Epirus, comming to succour OLYMPIAS, is for∣saken, and banished by his owne Subiects. CASSANDER at that time lay before Tegea, in Peloponnesus; whither when all these ill tidings were brought to him, hee neuer staied to take the Citie, nor to giue order for the State of things in that Coun∣trie, (though Alexander the sonne of Polysperchon were there with an Armie) but compounding with them of Tegea, hee willed his as∣sociates to looke to themselues as wel as they could, til his returne, and so in al haste he tooke his iournie toward Macedon, carried headlong with the greedy desire of iust reuenge. The Aetolians had taken the Straights of Thermopylae, in fauour of the Queene and , to hinder his passage; but he, not willing to mis-spend any time in dealing with them, got together as many ships as he could, great and small, with which he transported his Army into Thessaly. There he diuided his compa∣nies, appointing some vnder Callas, a subtile Captaine, to hold Polysperchon busied, who then lay incamped neere to ; with the rest he marched directly against . Shee, hauing once preuailed by the respect giuen to her dignitie, tooke more care how to appeare Maiesticall, than to make her selfe strong. To this ende she made a solemne progresse to Pydna, a Sea-towne, and well fenced, hauing in her companie all the flowre of the Court, especially the great Ladies, among whom was Roxane, and her yong sonne Alexander, heire to the great Alexander, by his grandmothers designement: who, during his minoritie, kept the Soueraigne power in her owne handes. But all this pompe serued to little vse, against the violence of the enemie, that soone presented himselfe before the wals; onely it fed the besieged with a vaine hope of succour, that would from all partes arriue, to rescue persons of their qualitie. And hereof there soone appeared faire likelihood, which as soone vanished, and went away in smoke. For Aeacides King of Epirus, made great haste to bring succour to Olympias, his co∣sen, with whom Deodamia his daughter was also shut vp. Neuerthelesse, his Subiects were nothing forward in this expedition; but finding certaine passages taken in the way by Cassanders men, they called vpon him to retire, and quit the enterprise. The Kings importunitie vrging them to proceed, and the obstinate refusal of the Army, brake out at length into such termes, that when hee had raged in vaine against the multitude; his authority, with which he thought to haue preuailed vpon them, by them taken from him, and he compelled to forsake his Kingdom, and to wander vp and downe in forraine Countries a banished man, his people ioyning with the enemie, against whom he had led them forth to . Pydna in the meane time was closed vp straightly, both by Sea and Land, so that neither any could issue out of the Citie, nor any reliefe be conueied into it; but it held out as long as any food was left, no memorable seruice being done there, whilst great actions were mannaged abroad. †. II. A continuation of OLYMPIAS her . defeated. Extreme famine in Pydna. OLYMPIAS yeeldes to CASSANDER. NOw, though order of time require it, that we should rehearse the doings of EVMENES and ANTIGONVS in this place, leauing OLYMPIAS yet a while to the hower of her destinie, which growes the vpon her, be∣cause shee may discerne it comming; yet that wee may not bee compelled to interrupt the course of our narration, by inserting her Tragedy in the midst of things, not manifestly coherent with it; wee will here (as elsewhere we haue done, and elsewhere must) continue to an ende one History, that we may not bee therewith distracted, when we shall come to the relation of another. All the hope of the besieged, remaining in Polysperchon, was in like maner disappointed, as their for∣mer trust had been, which was reposed in the succours of the Epirot. For Callas, who was sent against him, found the meanes to corrupt the greatest part of his Army with money, leauing him within a little while so slenderly accompanied, that hee was fit for no other businesse of warre, than a swift retrait. When famine had so farre preuailed in the city, that the horses were killed as a precious food, many mē feeding on the dead carcasses of their fellowes, and sawdust being giuen to the Elephants for prouender; some of the souldiers obtaining the Queenes leaue, (who could not denie it) others, without asking leaue, yeelded themselues to the enemy, & were by him gently relieued, and sent abroad into the Country. The newes of the Queenes affaires, dispersed by these men, did so affright her wil-willers, that such as had reser∣ued themselues to the euent, came in apace, and submitted them to Cassander. At length, when the mortalitie so great in the Towne, that the liuing were euen poysoned with the noysome sent of the dead; Olympias bethought her selfe of stea∣ling away by Sea in a Galley that she had: wherewith her successe was as bad as in the rest. For God had appointed this Towne, by her chosen as a place of refuge, to be vnto her as a house of torment, and a Iaile, out of which shee should not be deli∣uered, but vnto an euill death. Being therefore vtterly broken with miseries, which daily afflicted her and the other Ladies, vnaccustomed to so wretched a kind of life, she offered composition, and with much labour hardly obtained of Cassander (who hauing fetcht her Gally out of the Hauen, accounted himselfe as good as master of her bodie) a graunt of her owne life. Immediately vpon her apprehension, Pella, the chiefe Citie of the Kingdome, was yeelded to Cassander. Amphipolis did stand out: for Aristonus, to whom Olympias had giuen charge of such forces as were left abroad in the Country, taking courage from the successe of some pettie seruices wherein hee had preuailed, began to promise himselfe great vnlikelihoods. But Olympias, to win Cassanders fauour, very earnestly required him vpon his faith to her, that he should giue it vp. He did so, and presently after was killed by his priuate enemies, that were set on by Casiander, who partly hated him vpon old respects, partly doubted him, as a man likely to seeke innouation. †. III. The death of OLYMPIAS, and her condition. VVHen Olympias had now heard sorrowfull tidings of all her friends, shee her∣selfe was called into question, and accused in an assembly of the Macedoni∣ans, for the murthers (they were so stiled in her affliction, which in time of pro∣speritie she called iustice) by her committed. There was shee, (being not heard nor called to speake) condemned to die. The suite was commenced and prosecu∣ted against her, by the kindred of those whom she had slaine. But it was at Cassan∣ders instigation; who (to hasten the execution) sent her word, that he would furnish her, with a ship, and other necessaries, to saue her selfe by flight: which when she re∣fused, saying, that shee would plead for her selfe, and tell her owne tale; she dissem∣bled no longer, but sent vnto her such men as hated her most, who tooke away her miserable life. Shee was daughter, and sister, vnto two Kings of Epirus; wife, and mother, vnto two the mightiest Kings, of that, or many other ages; a stout Lady, and of vnreproueable chastitie, but her ambition was boundlesse, her hatred vnappeas∣able, and her furie in reuenge, most vnwomanly. Her peruerse conditions made her husband seeke other wiues and Concubines, which caused her to hate both him, and them. She was thought priuie to her husbands death; after which, very cruel∣ly she slew his late wife Cleopatra, hauing first murdered one of her two children in her armes, and with a beastly furie broiled the other aliue in fire, in a copper bason. For these things, her sonne Alexander (otherwise louing her wel) forbade her to meddle in the gouernement of Macedon. But God more seuere vnto cruell Ty∣rants, than only to hinder them of their wils, permitted her to liue & fulfill the rest of her wickednesse; (which was his iustice vpon the adulteries of Philip, and the oppression done by him and others) after all which, He rewarded her malice, by re∣turning it vpon her owne head. †. IIII. CASSANDER celebrates the funerall of ARIDEVS and ; and seekes to make himselfe King of Macedon. AFter her death, Cassander gaue honourable buriall to Aridaeus and Eurydice, a∣mong their Progenitors, Kings of Macedon. And looking further into his owne possibilities of greatnesse, he married the Lady Thessalonica, whom he had taken at Pydna, being the daughter of King Philip, by another of his wiues; that by her he might haue some title to the Crowne. For the same end he committed Roxane, and yong sonne, to close prison, remouing thereby some part of his impediment. And, the better to encrease his fame, and purchase loue, built a Citie, called by his owne name Cassandria, that soone grew to be very great and powerfull. He reae∣dified likewise Thebes in Greece, and restored it vnto the old inhabitants, after it had laine twentie yeeres waste, being vtterly razed by Alexander. By these meanes, espe∣cially by the restauration of Thebes, whereunto all Greece voluntarily contributed, he grew so strong, that few remained enemies vnto him; and they, with much labour, hardly could resist him. Leauing him therefore daily preuailing in Greece, we will returne to them, who contended in Asia, for lesse titles, but larger Prouinces, with greater forces. CHAP. IIII. Of the great Lordship which ANTIGONVS got in Asia. §. I. The iourney of EVMENES into Persia. His wise dealing with those that ioyned with him. EVMENES, hauing ioyned vnto his company the Argyraspides, made haste into the Easterne parts, to take possession of those Countries, according to his commission, and strengthen himselfe against . Hee tooke his iourney through Coelosyria and Phoenicia, hoping to reclaime those Prouinces, vsur∣ped with the rest of Syria (as hath beene shewed) by Ptolomie, to the Kings obedience. But to effect this, his haste of his passing forward was too great, his Armie too little, and the readinesse of the people, to returne to their due obedience, none at all. Besides all which impediments, one inconuenience troubled him in all his proceedings, ma∣king them the lesse effectuall. The Captaines of the Argyraspides were so froward, that they scorned to repaire to him, and take his directions, and their fidelity was so , that he might haue more easily dealt with open Traitors. It was not expedient, that he, being Generall, should weaken his authority by courting them; neither lay it in his power to keepe them in order by compulsion. Therefore hee , that Alexander had appointed vnto him in a dreame, a place for their mee∣ting, namely, in a rich pauilion, an emptie throne was placed, as if Alexander himselfe had beene present at their consultations. Thus hee freed himselfe from their vaine pride; but of their faith he could haue no assurance. Yet when Ptolomie requested them, & Antigonus bribed them to forsake him, they continued (though not without considering of the matter) to take his part. So hee marched on, sen∣ding before him the Kings warrant; which Pytho & Seleucus refused to obey; not as reiecting the kings authority, but excepting against the person of Eumenes, as a man condemned to die by the Macedonian Armie, for the death of Craterus. Eumenes, knowing well that he was not to relye vpon their assistance, who stood otherwise affected then his affaires required, and were not to bee dealt with by perswasion, sought passage by strong hand, through the Countrie of Babylon, in such wise that Seleucus, hauing in vaine assaied to hinder him, by opening the of Euphrates, was glad at length to grant him friendly way, as desirous to be ridde of him. Thus he came to Peucestes and the rest of the Easterne Lords, who were glad of his com∣panie, because of the differences betweene Pytho, Seleucus, and themselues. Yet the contention about superioritie, grew verie hot among them; euery one finding mat∣ter enough, to feede his owne humour of selfe-worthinesse. But the former deuice of assembling in one pauilion, made all quiet; the conclusion euer being sure to fol∣low that which Eumenes propounded, who was both wisest in giuing aduice, and best able to reward, by meanes of the authoritie giuen him, to take what he pleased of the Kings treasures. By these meanes he wonne to himselfe many of those, who had most power to doe good or hurt. §. II. How ANTIGONVS, comming to set vpon EVMENES, was driuen off with losse. ANTIGONVS, hearing that Eumenes lay in the Prouince of Susa, had an earnest desire to follow him, and driue him further from the Kings treasures, which were kept there. To which end, as soone as he had made himselfe strong enough, he remoued out of Mesopotamia, where he had wintered; and taking to him Pytho and Seleucus, with their men, hee marched directly against the enemies, with intent to giue them battaile. Eumenes had fortified the Castle of Susa and was retired backe toward Persia, kee∣ping the Riuer of Tygris betweene him and his pursuers. The passages of the Ri∣uer were wel guarded, and good espiall kept vpon Antigonus, to obserue which way he tooke. Before he came to Tygris it selfe, he was to passe ouer Coprates, a great Ri∣uer, and not foordable, which he sought to doe by small vessels, whereof he had no great store. A great part of his Armie had gotten ouer, when Eumenes, who kept a bridge vpon Tygris, came with a thousand horse, and foure thousand foot, to see their demeanour: and finding them out of order, charged them, brake them, and draue them headlong back into Coprates, wherein most of them were drowned; ve∣rie few escaping with life, except foure thousand that yelded themselues prisoners, in sight of Antigonus, that was not able to relieue them. This losse made glad to fall off; and the heat of that Countrie in the dog-daies, breeding diseases in his Army, by which many perished, caused him to remoue as farre as into . So he tooke Pithon with him; (leauing Seleucus to besiege the Castle of Susa ) and seeking to go the neerest way, passed through sauage Nations, that continually vex∣ing him with skirmishes, slew great numbers of his men, before he could arriue in Media, with his troupes that were quite heart-broken. §. III. Of EVMENES his cunning. A battaile betweene him and ANTIGONVS. AFter his departure, Eumenes with his associates fell into consultation, about the remainder of their businesse. Faine hee would haue had them to enter vpon those Prouinces, which Antigonus had left be∣hinde him; to which also the Captaines of the Argyraspides or Siluer∣shields were very inclinable, as desiring to draw neerer to Greece. But Peucestes, and the rest, whose dominions lay in the high Countries, had more care of their owne particular Estates, and would needes march East∣ward. These carried it; for the Armie was not strong enough to diuide it selfe in∣to parts. When they came into Persia, Peucestes, ruling there, feasted them royally, & sought by all meanes to win the Souldiers loue to himselfe. Eumenes perceiuing wherunto those doings tended, suffred him a while to keepe good cheare, till the time of warre drew neere. Then did he faine an Epistle, directed, as from Orontes Gouernor of Ar∣menia, to Peucestes himselfe: The purport wherof was; that Olympias had vanquished , and sent ouer a great Armie vnder Polysperchon, to ioyne with Eumenes. These newes, as they filled the Campe with vaine ioy, so they wrought in all mens mindes a great willingnesse to obey Eumenes, by whom was the likeliest apparance of their preferment; wherein they dealt wisely, he being farre the most sufficient Commander, as they found soone after. For when Antigonus, comming out of Media, drew neere vnto them, Eumenes by some mischance was fallen sicke, and faine to be carried in a Litter; the Armie marched in very bad array, and was likely to haue beene forced to take battaile in that disorder. But Eumenes, when the rest of the Captaines were amazed, was carried about the Armie in his Litter, and vpon the sodaine did cast his men into so good forme, that Antigonus, perceiuing him a farre off, could not refraine from giuing him deserued commendations. Yet he did not cease to promise great rewards to the Captaines, and all sorts of men, if they would forsake Eumenes: which hopes deceiuing him, he came to the triall of a bat∣taile. Eumenes had more Elephants than Antigonus; otherwise, he was inferiour in number both of horse and foote by a third part. The battaile was fought with va∣riable successe, and great losse on both sides, continuing a great part of the day, and of the night following. Yet the victorie was vncertaine. For Eumenes could not force his men to lie farre from their carriages: by which meanes Antigonus (who had a more absolute command ouer his) incamping on the ground whereon they fought, had in his power the dead bodies; which was accounted the signe of victo∣rie; for he buried his owne, and gaue leaue to his enemies crauing it, to doe the like. But a greater signe of victorie had Eumenes. For he abode still in the same place, and not onely buried his men very honourably, at great leisure, but held the Countrie round about; whereas Antigonns was glad (hauing tarried but one day) to steale away by night, and returne into Media, from whence he came. §. IIII. Of diuers stratagems practised by ANTIGONVS, and EVMENES, one against the other. THus did the Warre continue doubtfull, and was protracted to a grea∣ter length, each part hauing stout Souldiers, and skilfull Generals: but the side which had hitherto preuailed, being hindred by the e∣quall authoritie of many, from pursuing all aduantages to the best. Antigonus grew dayly weaker in men and repuration, so that to re∣paire himselfe he could finde no way safer, then to put all to aduenture. Hee knew that his enemies lay in their wintering places, quartered farre asunder, so that if he could suddenly come among them, he was likely to put them in great distresse. Be∣tweene him and them, the way was not long, being onely nine daies iourney, but very bad, through a rough drie wildernesse, hardly passable. Another way, fairer and leading through a Countrie well peopled, but requiring twentie fiue daies iour∣ney, he forsooke, partly for the length, partly, and chiefely, because he would come vndiscouered. So therefore taking his iourney in the dead of Winter, he forbade vnto his men the vse of fire by night, because he would not haue them descried a off. This commandement had beene well obserued foure or fiue , when continuance of time (as commonly) breeding negligence, and cold weather pinching them, they were bold to cherish themselues, being neere to their wayes ende. The light of these fires gaue notice of their comming; which being re∣ported to Peucestes, and other Captaines, they were so astonished with the sodaine danger, that in all haste they betooke themselues to flight. But Eumenes, meeting with the newes, began to harten his affrighted companions, promising to make Antigonus march leisurely, and willing them to abide, and draw vp their men to∣gether. They could scarce beleeue him; yet they were content to be ruled, and did as hee appointed, who failed not in making his word good. Hee tooke with him some companies of the readiest men, wherewith hee occupied certaine toppes of mountaines, looking toward the Campe of Antigonus: there he chose a conuenient ground to incampe vpon, and made great store of fires in sundrie places, as if the whole Armie had beene present. This was a sorrowful spectacle to Antigonus who thought himselfe preuented of his purpose; and began to feare lest he should be compelled to fight, whilest his men were tired with a long and painefull journey. Therefore hee resolued to turne aside, and take the way to such places, as might better serue to refresh his Armie. This he did with great care and circumspection, at the first, as knowing how readie Eumenes would be vpon all aduantages. But af∣ter a while, considering that no stirred about him, hee began to pause, and thinke in himselfe, that somewhat or other was not fallen out according to his opi∣nion. To be the better informed in the matter, he caused some Inhabitants of that Desert to be taken, and brought before him; of whom he learned, that they had seene no other Armie than his thereabout, but onely a few men that kept on the hil-tops. It vexed him exceedingly to finde that he had been so deluded. Ther∣fore he went against these troupes with great furie, meaning to take sharpe venge∣ance on them, for hauing so deceiued him. But by this time, strength was arriued there, which could not be forced without much businesse, and long stay. All the Armie was come, saue onely Eudamus, Captaine of the Elephants, who, besides those beasts, had no more than foure hundred horsemen in his company. Anti∣gonus hearing of this supply comming to his enemies, sent aboue two thousand horse, and all his light-armed footmen, to cut it off by the way. being fal∣len into this danger, was faine to place his Elephants round about his carriages, and so to defend himselfe as well as he ; for his horsemen, ouerlaied with multi∣tudes, were quickly broken, and driuen to runne away vpon the spurre. Neither knew they, who sate vpon the Elephants, which way to turne them; for on all sides they receiued wounds, and were not able to requite them with the like. In this ex∣tremitie there appeared braue troupes of horse and foot, that came vnexpected to the rescue; and charging the assailants vpon the backe, draue them to seeke their owne safetie by speedy flight. These were sent by Eumenes; who though knew not what his aduersarie meant to doe, yet hee knew very well what was fit∣test for him to doe: and therefore, playing both games himselfe, prouided the re∣medie. §. V. The conspiracie of PEVCESTES and others, against EV∣MENES his life. BY these meanes Eumenes wanne great honour, and was by the whole Armie acknowledged a most expert Generall, and well worthy of the chiefe command. But Peucestes, and the other Captaines, of their own much insufficiencie, were so transported with enuie, that they could now no longer contain their vile thoughts, but held com∣munication, as vpon a necessarie point, how they might finde meanes to murder him. Surely, it is great injustice to impute the mischiefe, contriued against worthy men, to their owne proud carriage, or some other ill deseruing: For, though it often happen, that small vices doe serue to counterpoyse great vertues; (the sense of euill being more quicke and lasting, than of good) yet hee shall bewray a very foolish malice, that, wanting other testimonie, will thinke it a part of wisedome, to finde good reason of the euils, done to vertuous men, which oftentimes haue no other cause than their vertue it selfe. Eumenes, among many excellent qualities, was noted to bee of singular courtesie, of a very sweet conuersation among his friends, and carefull by all gentle meanes to winne their loue, that to beare him any secret ill affection. It was his meere vertue that ouerthrew him, which euen they that sought his life acknowledged. For they concluded that hee should not be slaine, before the battaile were fought with Antigonus, wherein they confessed that it stood best with their safety, to be gouerned by his directions. Of this trea∣son, he was quickly aduertised by Eudamus, to whom he had done many pleasures, and by some others of whom he vsed to borrow money when hee needed not, to the end that they should be carefull of his good, for feare of losing their owne. Considering therefore, and discoursing with himself of the villanie intended against him, hee made his last will, and burnt all his writings that contained any matter of secret: which done, hee reuolued many things in his minde; being doubtfull what course were best to follow. All the Nobles of the Empire stood ill affected to the Royallbloud, excepting those which were with him, that were more in number, than in worth. How things at that time stood in Macedon and Greece, either he knew not, or, knowing the truth, knew nothing that might encourage him to secke their helpe, that needed his. To make his owne peace with Antigonus, had beene a∣gainst his faith to Olympias, and the Princes, that had committed this great power into his hands. For which cause also it may be thought, that hee forbare, either to lose the battaile willingly, or to flye into Cappadocia, and make shift for himselfe a∣mong his old friends. At length hee resolued to doe his best against the common enemie, and afterwards to looke to himselfe as well as he might. §. VI. The last battaile betweene ANTIGONVS and EVMENES. THe Souldiers, especially those old bands of the Siluer-shields, finding Eumenes perplexed, and not knowing the cause, entreated him not to doubt of the victorie, but onely to bring them into the field, and set them in array; for the rest, they alone would take sufficient order. The like alacritie was generally found in the common Souldiers fa∣ces; but the chiefe Commanders were so mischieuously bent against him, that they could not endure to thinke vpon being beholding to him for the victorie. Yet he ordered the battaile so well, that, without their ownegreat fault, they could hardly faile of getting the vpper hand. Before the Armies came to joyning, a horse-man from the side of Eumenes, pro∣claimed with a loud voice to the followers of Antigonus, That their wickednesse, in fighting against their owne fathers, would now bee punished, as it well deserued. This was not spoken in vaine. For the Siluer-shields were men of threescore or se∣uentie yeeres olde, strengthned more by continuall exercise, than decaied by age, and excelling in courage, as hauing passed through greater dangers, than like to be presented in that fight. Therefore Antigonus his men (who had often been bea∣ten by them, and were now to trie their last hope with these resolute warriours, the most Ancient and best regarded of all Alexanders Souldiers) grew very pen∣siue, and aduanced heauily, suspecting their owne cause, and fearing the threat∣nings vttered would proue true. Antigonus was now againe farre the stronger in horse, which gaue him cause of great hope; the ground, on which they were to fight, being a plaine leuelled field. Placing therfore himselfe and his sonne Demetrius in his right wing, and commit∣ting the left wing to Pithon, hee did set forward couragiously against the enemies, that were readie to giue him a sharpe entertainment. Eumenes tooke vnto him Peucestes, with the rest of the Lords, and stood in the wing of his battaile, in the face of Antigonus, meaning both to preuent the Trai∣tors, his Companions, of all meanes to make head against him on the sodaine, and (withall) to giue proofe of his owne valour, which perhaps he should no more , in the face of all his enemies. In the right wing, opposite vnto Pithon, hee bestowed the weakest of his horse and Elephants, vnder one Philip, an honest man, and (which was enough at such a time) obedient: commanding him to protract the fight, and make a leisurable retrait, expecting the euent of the other side. So they joyned very fiercely; Antigonus, labouring to make himselfe master of all; Eumenes, to die an honourable death, or to winne such a victorie vpon his open enemies, as might giue him leisure and opportunitie to deale with his false friends. The footmen of Antigonus, being, euen in their owne opinions, farre inferiour to those whom they must encounter, were at the first brunt presently defeated by the Siluer-shields, who slew aboue fiue thousand of them, losing of their owne, not one man. But in horse, Eumenes was so ouer-matched, that he could not repell An∣tigonus, who him very hard, but was faine to stand wholly vpon defence. Yet his courage wrought so well by example, among his followers, that the enemie could not winne one foot of ground vpon him, vntill such time as Peucestes, with one thousand fiue hundred horse, withdrew out of the battaile, leauing his companions fighting to defend his backe. Then did Eumenes desperately rush amongst his enemies, labouring to breake o∣pen the way vnto Antigonus himselfe. And though hee failed of his purpose; yet with great slaughter he did so beate vpon them, which came in his way, that the vi∣ctorie hung a long time in suspence, vncertaine which way to incline. The ground whereon they fought, being of a slight sandie mould, through the trampling of horses, men, and Elephants, did cast vp such a cloud of dust, as hin∣dered the prospect, so that no man could see what was done a little from him. Anti∣gonus finding aduantage, dispatched away some companies of horse, that passed vndiscouered beyond Eumenes his battailes, and came to his carriages, which lay a∣bout halfe a mile from the place of fight, slenderly garded, (for that the whole body of the Armie lay them and danger) and therefore easily taken. Had Peu∣cestes retired himselfe no further than vnto the carriages, hee might not onely haue defended them, but peraduenture haue surprised those which came to surprise them, and so haue done as good a piece of seruice as a better man. But he was got∣ten somewhat further, to a place, where out of danger hee might expect the euent: and Eumenes was so ouer-laboured both in body and minde, that he could not giue an eye to euery place, being not well able to continue where he was. It happened so, that the Elephants meeting together, those of Antigonus had the better hand; wherupon Eumenes, finding himself euery way ouer-charged, began to giue back, and withdrew himselfe and his companies in good order, to the other side of the battaile, where Philip (as hee was directed) had by fighting and retiring together, kept that wing from losse. The Antigonians had felt so much of Eumenes that day, that they were well contented to let him depart quietly, and wished not to see him come againe; as faine he would haue done. The losse of the carriages was reported vnto him, as soone as he had any leisure to heare how things went: whereupon hee presently ordered his men for a fresh charge, and sent for Peucestes that was not farre off, requesting him to bring in his men, and renew the fight, whereby hee trusted, not onely to recouer their owne goods, but to enrich themselues with the spoiles of the . Peucestes not only refused to joyne with him, but immediately withdrew himselfe into a safer place, where he might be further from such dangerous temptations. By this, the night grew on; and both Armies, wearied with fighting, were desirous to returne into their Campes. Yet Antigonus conceiued hope of doing somewhat more; and therefore taking halfe his horsemen, hee waited vpon Eumenes a part of his way homewards, but found no opportunitie to offend him: the other halfe hee committed to Pithon, willing him to set vpon the Siluer-shelds in their retrait; which yet he forbare to do, because it appeared too full of danger. So the battaile ended; wherein Antigonus had not so much the better in horse, as the worse in foote: but the spoile which hee got, by surprising his enemies carriages, made amends for all his other losses. §. VII. How EVMENES was betrayed to ANTIGONVS, and slaine. EVMENES, comming into his Campe, and finding the Siluer-shields extremely discontented with their , beganne to cheere them vp, and put them in hope of recouering all with aduantage. For their braue demeanor that day had so crushed the enemy, that he had no power left, wherewith to abide them in open field, and was much lesse able to draw their Carts after him, through that great Wildernesse, ouer the high mountaines. But these perswasions auailed nothing. Peucestes was gone; the other Captaines would needs returne into the high Countries; and the Soldiers had no desire either to flie or to fight, but onely to their goods. Wherefore Teutamus, one of the two Captaines of the Siluer-shields, (who had in former times readily consented vnto traiterous motions, in hope of gaine, but was letted by his partner Antigenes ) finding, as he thought, a fit occasion of making himselfe great, and winning the loue of those bands, dealt secretly with Antigonus, requesting him to restore vnto those old Souldiers their goods, which he had taken, being the onely reward of their ser∣uices, in the warres of Philip and Alexander. Antigonus, as a subtile man, knew very well, that they which requested more than they had reason to expect, would also, with a little entreatie, a great deale more than they promised; and therefore he louingly entertained the messen∣gers, filling them with hopes of greater matters than they desired, if they would put Eumenes into his hands, by whom they were seduced to make warre against him. This answere pleased them so well, that they forthwith deuised how to deli∣uer him aliue. Wherefore comming about him, as at other times, to doe their du∣tie, and protending more joy of their , than sorrow of their losse, which they said they would redeeme by another fight; in the middest of this goodly talk they leapt vpon him, caught hold of his sword, and bound fast. So they haled him away; and stopping their eares against all perswasions, would not yeeld so far, as to loosen one of his hands and let him kill himselfe, but brought him aliue (that was their owne Generall, vnder whom they had obtained many victories) as it had beene in triumph, into the Campe of their enemies. The presse of men, running out of the Campe to see him, was so great, that Antigonus was faine, to send a guard of horsemen and Elephants, to keep him from being smothered; whom he could not sodainely resolue, either to kill or saue. Very few they were that sued for his life; but of these, Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus was one; the rest were desirous to be rid of him quickly; thinking belike, that if he were saued, he would soon be the chiefe in reputation, for his great abilitie. So after long deliberation, Antigonus concluded, that it was the safest way, to put him to death; which intending to haue done by famine (perhaps because he would keep it awhile in his owne power, to reuerse the sentence, as desiring, if it might be, to haue him liue his friend) haste of other businesse made him doe it by the sword. To this end came all the trauailes of that worthy generall Eumenes; who had with great wisedome, fidelitie, and patience laboured in vaine, to vphold the family which God had purposed to cast downe. He is reckoned among the notable exam∣ples of Fortunes mutabilitie; but more notable was his gouernment of himselfe, in all her changes. Aduersitie neuer lessened his courage, nor Prosperitie his circum∣spection. But all his vertue, industrie, and wit, were cast away, in leading an Armie, without full power, to keepe it in due obedience. Therefore it was not ill answered, by Gaspar de Collignie, Admiral of France in our dayes, to one that foretold his death, which ensued soone after in the massacre of Paris; That rather than to leade againe an Armie of Voluntaries, he would die a thousand times. Antigonus himselfe gaue to the bodie of Eumenes honourable Funerall; and re∣warded the Treason, wrought against him, with deserued vengeance. One chiefe Captaine of the -shields he burnt aliue; many of the other Captaines he slue; & to the whole multitude of the Siluer-shields, that had betraied so worthy a Com∣mander, he appointed a Leader, that should carrie them into farre Countries, vnder pretence of warres; but with a priuy charge, to consume them all, as periured wret∣ches, letting none of them returne aliue vnto his friends and kindred, or so much as once behold the Seas, that beate vpon the shoares of Greece and Macedon. §. VIII. How slew PITHON, and occupied MEDIA. How he remoued Gouernours of Prouinces, and made himselfe Lord of Persia, carrying away PEVCESTES. THe two Armies being ioyned thus in one, were carried into Media, where they spent the rest of the Winter; the common Souldieridly; the principall men intentiuely bent vnto the businesse ensuing. Pi∣thon began to consider his owne deseruings; for that the whole warre had beene chiefely maintained by the strength and riches of his Pro∣uince. Besides, he thought himselfe as good a man as Antigonus, vnlesse it were in the Souldiers opinion, which he iudged easie to be purchased with gifts, and therefore spared not to assay them with great . But in following this course, hee was driuen by necessitie to trust many, of whom he stumbled vpon some, that were vnsecret, and others, bearing him no sincere affection. Thus was his purpose disco∣uered to Antigonus, who (nothing like to Pithon ) dissembled his indignation, and rebuked the informers, as breeders of dissension betweene him, and his honourable friend, vnto whom hee meant to commit the Gouernment of all those Countries: his owne businesse calling him into the lower Asia. These reports, comming daily to his eares, did finely delude Pithon. By his greatnesse with Alexander; his au∣thoritie in that Prouince where they lay, whereof he was Gouernour; and the loue of the souldiers which he had bought with money; he was strong enough to main∣taine, euen an offensiue warre. But what neede had he to vse the sword, when hee was likely without contention, to obtaine more than his owne asking? Therefore he came as soone as he was sent for, to take his farewell of Antigonus, and to diuide the Prouinces with him, that meant nothing lesse than to yeeld to any such diuisi∣on. As soone as he came, he was taken, and accused, condemned to die, and slain out of hand. For Antigonus, hauing begunne with Eumenes his ancient friend, was not afterward restrained by any consideration of old acquaintance, from cutting down indifferently all that stood in his way: but swamme carelesly through the bloud, wherein at the first he doubtfully waded. When this businesse was ended, he appointed a new Gouernour in Media, to or∣der the Prouince, and a Captaine, to suppresse all commotions: thinking belike, that the power and authoritie, so diuided, would hardly agree in one against him, from whom both were deriued. After this he marched into Persia, where he was entertained, as absolute Lord of Asia. There began he to shew how well he vnderstood his owne mightinesse. For he placed and displaced, at his pleasure, Gouernours in all Prouinces, leauing none in Office, that were not his owne creatures, excepting such as lay too farre off to be easily. Peucestes, who ruled in Persia, thought with good cheere to redeeme old offences, but was deceiued, hauing to doe with one, that could not be taken with such baites: he was caried away, and feasted with goodly words of promise, that neuer tooke ef∣fect. Thus he, that enuied the vertue of his friend, was driuen to flatter (in vaine) the fortune of his enemie, after which he liued a contemptible life, till died ob∣scurely a man forgotten. §. IX. How SELEVCVS was chased out of Babylon, by ANTIGONVS. The great riches of ANTIGONVS. SELEVCVS was the next in this visitation; one that had from time to time continued in the same tenor of good-will to Antigonus, and now gaue proofe of his heartie affection toward him, by making the Captaine of the Castle of Susa to meete him on the way, rendring vn∣to him that strong , and all the treasures therein bestowed. This offer was so great, that Antigonus (though hauing in his hands the Keeper of the place) could hardly beleeue it; but vsed him with excessiue kindnesse, for feare so good a moode should change. In that Castle he found all the treasures of Alexander, with the Iewels of the Persian Kings, which, added to his former store of money, made vp twentie fiue thousand talents. Hauing all this, he might well account him∣selfe a happy man, if riches were sufficient to happinesse. But large dominion was the marke at which hee aimed; therefore hee proceeded, with intent to leaue no Country behind his back, that should not acknowledge him for Soueraigne Lord. Comming to Babylon, hee was entertained by Seleucus with all possible demonstra∣tion of loue, and honoured with presents, beseeming the of a King. All this he accepted with great grauitie, as being due to him; and beganne to require an account of the reuenues of that Prouince. This demaund Seleucus held vnreason∣able; saying, that it was not needfull for him to render vnto any man an account of that Prouince, which was giuen vnto him, in respect of his many good seruices to the State. But whether he spake reason or no, it sufficed, that Antigonus was power∣full; who vrged him daily to come to a reckoning. Manifest it was, that neither want of money, nor any other , moued Antigonus to presse him thus, but onely the desire to picke matter of quarrell against him, whereof it was likely that hee should find such issue, as Pithon and Peucestes had done. Therefore taking with him onely fiftie horse, be conueied himselfe away, and fled into Ptolomies Domini∣ons; desiring him to protect him from the violence of such a man, as went about to oppresse all, that in former times had beene his betters, or at least his equals. An∣tigonus was glad of his flight; for now all those Countries were yeelded vnto him without battaile, whereas to fight with Seleucus for them hee wanted all pretence; and to kill him it was not his desire, hauing receiued many benefits of him, and those not intermixed, as commonly it happens, with any iniuries. Yet it is reported, that the Chaldaeans brought a strange prophesie to Antigonus, bidding him looke well to himselfe, and know, that if Seleucus did escape his hands, hee should recouer Babylon, yea, winne all Asia, and kill Antigonus in battaile. Easie beleeuers may giue credit to this tale. Had it beene true, me thinkes, Antigonus rather should haue hanged those Chaldaeans, for giuing him no warning till it was too late, than sent pursuers (as they say that hee did) after him, whom the destinies preserued for so great purposes. When he had settled things at Babylon, he tooke his journie into Cilicia, where he wintred. There hee tooke vp ten thousand talents more of the Kings treasures, and casting his accounts, found his yeerely income to amount vnto eleuen thou∣sand Talents. CHAP. V. Of the great ciuill Warre betweene ALEXANDERS Captaines: and how they assumed the name and state of Kings. §. I. The combination of PTOLOMIE, CASSANDER, and others, against ANTI∣GONVS. Their demands, and his . THIS great riches, and the rest of his power, made Antigonus dreaded, , and suspected, whereby he quickly was embarked in a new War. Ptolomie, Cas∣sander, and Lysimachus, had priuily combined them∣selues together, intending to hinder his further growth, and bring him to more reason, than of his owne accord he seemed like to yeeld vnto. Of their practices he had some notice; the good entertaine∣ment giuen vnto Seleucus, giuing him sufficient cause of mistrust. Therefore he sent Embassadors to them seuerally, entreating them to continue firme in their loue toward him, that would be readie to requite them with the like. The cold an∣swers which they made, occasioned his hasty preparation against the most forward of them, which was Ptolomie; it being likely that a good armie should more than a faire message. Therefore, as soone as the season of the yeere would permit, he tooke the way toward , and was encountred by Embassage from them all. These told him, that their Lords did much reioyce at his victorie, obtained against Eumenes their common enemie, and the honor that he had therby gotten. In which war, forasmuch as they being his Confederates, must haue endured great losse with hazzard of their whole estates, if the contrary faction had preuailed; they held it ve∣rie iust, that all should be partakers in the fruits of that voiage, wherein they had been all aduenturers. Wherefore they desired him, that making betweene them all an e∣quall diuision of the treasures that were in his hands, (a thing easie to be done) he would also take some conuenient order for enlarging their Dominions, according to the rate of his new purchases. This might best bee to euery ones liking if hee would make ouer Cappadocia, with Lycia, to Cassander; and Phrygia, bordering vpon the Hellespont, to Lysimachus; for wheras his own Dominions were so much extended Eastward by his late victorie, he might wel spare some of those westerne Prouinces, to those that were seated in the West. As for Ptolomie, he would not craue any new addition, but rest contented within his owne Territories. Prouided alwaies, that Seleucus their common friend, and partner in the late warre, might be restored to his owne, out of which he had beene driuen so iniuriously, that all of them were forced to take it deeply to heart; requiring amends, with his friendly consent vnto their demands, which otherwise they must labour to obtaine with armed hands. Antigonus knew, that after many losses receiued, hee should yet bee able to re∣deeme peace whensoeuer he listed, with these, or perhaps with easier conditions. Neither was he so weak, to giue away quietly any part of his strength into the hands of such bad friends, for feare only, lest it should bee taken from him perforce. Ra∣ther he hoped that he should be able to find them worke, more than enough to de∣fend their owne. Therefore, he roundly answered the Embassadors, that it was no part of his meaning to communicate with other men the profit of that victorie, which he alone without other mens helpe had obtained. Though indeed they had already sufficiently gained by him, if they could see it, hauing by his meanes kept their gouernments, wherof they were like to be by Polysperchon, and the counsell of estate in Macedon. But what maruaile was it, if they considered not how he had saued them, seeing one of them had forgotten the time, when comming to him as a fugitue, & begging succour, he was by his meere relieued, and ena∣bled to get all that he now held? Cassander did not (said he) in those daies command me to surrender Prouinces, and giue him his equall share of my treasures; but (for his Fathers sake) desired me to pittie him, and help him against his enemies: which I did; by lending him an Armie, and Fleet, on confidence whereof hee now pre∣sumes to threaten me. As for Seleucus, how can he complaine of wrong, that durst not stay to plead his right? I did vse him well; but his conscience told him that he had deserued ill: else he would not haue fled. Let them that so curiously search in∣to my doings, consider well their owne, which some of them can hardly iustifie. I am now in the way to Syria, meaning to examine Ptolomies proceedings; and af∣ter him to deale with others, if they continue to prouoke me. §. II. The preparations and beginnings of the Warres. WHen the Embassadors were dismissed with this answer, nothing was thought vpon but warre. Antigonus perceiuing that he should bee inuaded from Europe, as soone as hee were entred into Syria; left his Nephew Ptolomie to guard the Sea coasts, and hinder Cassander from landing in Asia: giuing him also in charge, to driue out of Cappadocia some that were already sent ouer to molest him. Likewise he dispatched Messengers into Greece and Cyprus, not vnfurnished of monie, to draw friends to his side, and raise vp troubles to his enemies. Especially, he laboured to make himselfe the stron∣gest by Sea; to which purpose he rather hastened, than foreslowed his iourney into Syria, that he might get possession of Mount Libanus, which affoorded many excel∣lent commodities for building of a Nauie. Therefore, hauing erected Beacons, and laid post horses throughout all Asia, to giue swift aduertisement of all occurrences, he inuaded Syria, that was not held against him by any power sufficient to main∣taine the field. Ptolomy lay in Aegypt, the strength and heart of his Dominion, where he was be∣loued and honoured of the people as their naturall Lord: his other Prouinces hee kept with a few Garrisons, better seruing to containe the people within obedience, than to confront a forraine enemie. So Antigonus tooke many Cities, and Places, of that Countrie, and beganne to set great numbers of Artificers on worke in making ships, which was one of his most earnest cares. In these businesses he consumed a yeere and three moneths; not idly. For he tooke Ioppe, and Gaza, which were yeel∣ded vnto his discretion, and well vsed. The strong Citie of Tyrus held out long, but was compelled in the end, by famine, to render it selfe vpon composition, that Ptolomies Souldiers might depart with their Armes; which was permitted. Ptolomie was not asleepe, whilest these things were in doing, though he kept him∣selfe within the bounds of Aegypt, as indeede it behoued him to doe. His forces were not able to stand against Antigonus in plaine field, but likely they were to in∣crease, which made him willing to protract the time. Neuerthelesse by Sea (where his enemie was as yet vnready) he sent his Fleet into all quarters, whereof Seleucus had the chiefe command. Seleucus passed with an hundred saile along the coast of Syria, in the full view of Antigonus, and his Armie, to their no little discomfort. He landed in Cyprus, which was then gouerned by many Lords; of whom the greatest adhered to , the rest were, by the Factors of Antigonus, bought for him with gold, but now redeemed by the Aegyptian with sharpe steele. The same of aide by Sea encouraged the President of Caria (called also Cassander, but not the sonne of Antipater, howsoeuer by the painefull and lear∣ned writer Reinerus Reineccius, he is by some ouersight, counted for the same) to de∣clare for Ptolomie, and his Confederates, and busily imploy in their quarrell all his forces, which he had hitherto kept in good neutralitie, and thereby enioyed rest; but now he threwe himselfe into dangerous warre, choosing rather to vndergoe trouble at hand, than to fal vnder certaine ruine, though somewhat further distant, which would haue ouerwhelmed him, if Antigonus had beaten all the rest. §. III. How each partie sought to winne the assistance of Greece. ANTIGONVS his declaration against CASSANDER. ALEXANDER the sonne of POLISPERCHON re∣uolteth from ANTIGONVS, who had set him vp. IN the meane season all care possible was taken on both sides, to assure vnto them the people of Greece, whose aide which way soeuer it in∣clined was of great importance. Herein at the first, Antigonus sped so well by large effusion of his treasure, that hee drew to him the Lace∣daemonians, and other Peloponnesians, of whom hee waged eight thou∣sand, and caused Polysperchon (who had a good while made hard shifts) to rowse himselfe againe, and taking vpon him the title of Captaine of Peloponnesus, to make head against Cassander. These hopeful beginnings encouraged him to proceed further in the same kind. Wherefore to make Cassander the more odious, hee called together both his owne Souldiers, and all the and Macedonians that were to bee found thereabouts. To these he declared, That Cassander had very cruelly slain Olympias, mother to the great Alexander; and not herewith contented, had shut vp in close prison the poore Ladie Roxane, Alexanders wife, and his sonne begotten on her bodie. That all this proceeded from a desire to make himselfe King ouer the Macedonians; which well appeared by his enforcing the Ladie Thessalonica, Daughter to King Philip, a match vnfit for a man of no greater Parentage than he, to ioyne with him in marriage. That in despight of those dead Princes, Philip, and Alexander, he had plan∣ted the Olynthians, rooted out by Philip, in a new Citie by him built, and called by his owne name Cassandria; and had reedified the Citie of Thebes, which for the great treason of the inhabitants, was leuelled with the ground by the victorious hand of Alexander. For these reasons hee required them to make a decree, that Cassander should restore to absolute libertie the Ladie Roxane, and her sonne; and should yeeld obedience to the Lord Lieutenant Generall of the Empire (by which name Antigonus himselfe was vnderstood) or else should be reputed a Traitor, and open Enemie to the State. Furthermore he propounded, that all the Cities of Greece should be restored into freedome; this he did, not because he was carefull of their good, but for the neede which he had of their assistance. These things being decreed, Antigonus was perswaded, that not only the Greekes would adhere vnto him, as to their louing Patron, and fall off from Cassander; but that the Rulers of Prouinces, who had hitherto suspected him as a man regardfull of nothing, but his owne benefit, would correct their opinion, and thinke him the most faithfull of all others to the Royall bloud. But concerning his loyaltie to the yong Prince, the world was too wise to be deceiued with vaine shewes. His vnder∣taking for the libertie of the Greekes was more effectuall, and got easie beliefe, in re∣gard of his present hatred to Cassander. Yet herein also Ptolomie stroue to be as ear∣nest as he, making the like decree, in hope to winne to himselfe that valiant Nation, which affoorded men farre more seruiceable in warre, than were to be found in any Prouince of the Empire. And this indeede was the point, at which both sides aimed. Wherein Antigonus to make all sure, deceiued himselfe, not without great cost. For he gaue to Alexander the sonne of Polysperchon fiue hundred talents, willing him to set the warre on foot in Peloponnesus, whereby it might appeare, that on his side was meant nothing , than what was openly pretended. In Peloponnesus, Cassanders men had, with much bloud-shed, afflicted the contrarie ; and he himselfe perceiuing, that they were more easily spoi∣led as enemes, than retained as friends, thought it the best way, to make what vse he could of them, that were not long like to continue his. Finally, perceiuing that Alexander came furnished with plentie of gold, wherewith he was able, not only to winne the doubtfull, but to corrupt such as might seeme best assured: hee thought it a good part of wisedome, to surrender vpon faire conditions, that which he could not assure himselfe to hold any long time by force. Therefore he sent one to deale with Alexander, about the matters in controuersie; letting him know, that Antigo∣nus was verie skilful in setting men together by the eares, not caring who preuailed, but only desiring to haue them wearythemselues, he was busied elsewhere; that so at length he might finde opportunitie to set vpon the stronger. If therefore Alexander were so wise, as to keepe in his purse the fiue hundred Talents which he had, and without stroke stricken, to receiue the whole Lordship of Peloponnesus; it should be freely put into his hands by Cassander. Prouided, that hee should from thencefoorth renounce all confederacie made with Antigonus, and enter into a sure and faithfull league with Ptolomie, Cassander, and the rest of the Confederates. O∣therwise, he might well perswade himselfe, that the Countrie which his Father could not keepe, when he was indeede the Lieutenant of the Empire, should not in haste be wonne by him, that was only the Factor of a proud iniurious man, so stiling himselfe, but not acknowledged by others. Alexander had liued a while with Antigonus since the beginning of these wars; among whose followers it was not hard to discouer the intent, (which hee did not carrie verie secret) of making himselfe absolute Lord ofall. Therefore he was soone entreated to accept so good an offer; and did not sticke to enter into that league, whereby he was to become a free Lord, and subiect vnto no mans controll. How beit this his honour continued not long, ere he lost both it and his life toge∣ther, by treason of the Sisyonians; who thinking thereby to haue made themselues free, were soone after vanquished in battaile by Cratesipolis, Alexanders wife, a dis∣creet and valiant Ladie. Shee in reuenge of her husbands death, crucified thirtie of the Citizens taken in fight; and hauing by seuerity taught them obedience, did af∣terwards containe her Armie in good order, and gouerned those places that held, with the loue and commendation of her Subiects and Neighbours. §. IIII. The Aetolians rise against CASSANDER in fauour of ANTIGONVS, and are beaten. A fleet and land-armie of ANTIGONVS, vtterly defeated by PTOLOMIES Lieutenant. In what termes the warre stood at this time. ANTIGONVS drawes neerer to . ANTIGONVS, when he found, that with so much monie he had onely bought an enemie, beganne to raise troubles to Cassander and his o∣ther aduersaries in Greece, by stirring vp the Aetolians against them; Likewise he laboured to winne to his partie the Ilands in the Greeke Seas, by whose assistance he might be the better able to deale with Ptolomie, that greatly preuailed by reason of his strong fleet. But neither of these attempts had the successe which he expected. The Aetolians, a factious Nation, and alwaies enuying the greatnesse of their Neighbours, were often in commotion, but so, that commonly their gaines equalled not their losses. Cassander wanne some of their owne Countric; fortified the against them, and compelled , King of the Illyrians, whom he vanquished in battaile, to for sake their side, and himselfe to beare no Armes against Cassanders friends. On the other side, as many pettie Ilands were drawne to ioyne with Antigonus: so the fleet of the Rhodians vnder Theodatus, who was Admirall to Antigonus, pas∣sing along the coast of Asia towards Cyprus, with an vnder conduct of Peri∣laus marching on the shore for mutuall assistance, was quite ouerthrowne by Pto∣lomies Nauic. Polyclytus, who in Ptolomies behalfe had been sent into Peloponnesus a∣gainst Alexander, finding no neede of his seruice in that Countrie, because Alexan∣der was come ouer to their side, returned homewards, and by the way heard of the course which these Antigonians held, whom he cunningly surprised. Hee rode with his Fleet behinde a Cape, which the enemies were to double, his Land-forces he placed in ambush, whereinto Perilaus falling was taken prisoner, with many of his men, and many were slaine, making little resistance. Theodatus the Admirall per∣ceiuing this, made all haste to helpe his fellowes that were on Land; but whilest he with all his Fleet were intentiue only to that businesse, Polyclytus appeared at their backs; who as soone as he perceiued their disorder, hastened about the Capc, and charging them behinde suffered not one of them to escape him. These ill tidings caused Antigonus to deale with Ptolomie about some composition. First, hee sent Embassadors; afterwards they met in person. But Antigonus would not yeeld vnto the demands of Ptolomie: so the parlie was vaine. Hitherto each part seemed to haue indifferently sped in the Warre, and thereby to haue equall cause of hope and feare. This late victorie with the good successe of his affaires in Cyprus, did seeme to make amends to Ptolomie for his losses in Syria. Likewise the reuolt of Alexander from Antigonus did equall the Confederacy, made betweene the Aetolians and him; as also those pettie skirmishes, that had beene in Asia the lesse, to Antigonus his aduantage, were sufficiently recompensed by others of like regard, but aduerse to him; and by the troubles brought vpon his estates in those parts by the two Cassanders. Contrariwise, Antigonus valued the losse of his men, monie, and ships, no other∣wise than as the paring of his nailes, that were left long enough, and would easily grow againe; but the enlargement ofhis Territorie by addition of Syria, he prized at a higher rate, as if thereby he had fed vpon a of Ptolomie his enemie, and strengthened the body of his owne Empire. Concerning other accidents, where∣of the good were hitherto sufficient to counterpoize the bad, he meant to proceed as occasion should direct, which commonly is not long wanting to them, that want no monie. That which most molested him was the attempts of his enemies vpon Asia the lesse; wherein though as yet they had gotten little, yet had he cause to feare, lest the people being tyed vnto him by no bond of allegeance, might vpon small occa∣sion reuolt from him, to men of as honourable reputation as he himselfe. To pre∣uent this, and to be to Greece, he held it expedient for him to be there in per∣son, where his affaries did seeme to prosper the worse, by reason of his absence. Therefore he left part of his in Syria, vnder his sonne Demetrius, to whom being then but two and twenty yeeres old, he appointed many ancient Captaines as assistants, or rather as Directors: the rest he carried with him into Phrygia, where he meant to winter. §. V. How LYSIMACHVS and CASSANDER vanquished some enemies, raised against them by ANTIGONVS. The good successe of ANTIGONVS in Asia and Greece: with the rebellion of many Cities against CASSANDER. THe comming of Antigonus into those parts, wrought a great alterati∣on in the procesle of his businesse thereabouts. For his enemies had short leisure to thinke vpon molesting him in Asia: they themselues were held ouer-hardly to their owne worke on Europe side. a King of the Thracians, ioyning with some Townes that rebelled a∣gainst Lysimachus, brought also the bordering into the quarrell. All these relyed vpon Antigonus, who was to helpe them with monie, and other aide. The Aetolians likewise tooke courage, and rose against Cassander, hauing Aeacides, lately restored to the Kingdome of Epirus, their assistant. But Lysimachus gaue vnto his Rebels no time to confirme themselues. Hee sodainely presented himselfe before two of the Cities that had rebelled, and compelled them by feare to returne to their dutie. He fought a battaile with the Scythians, and wilde Thracians, and draue them out of the Countrie. Finally, he ouercame Seuthes; and following the heate of his victorie, slew Pausanias in battaile, whom Antigonus had sent ouer with an Armie; and all his men he did either put to ransome, or fill vp with them his owne Bands. The like successe had Philip, Cassanders Lieutenant, against the Aetolians. For he wasted their Countrie; fought with the Epirotes, that came to helpe them; and after the victorie, fought againe with their forces ioyned in one, ouerthrowing them, and killing Aeacides that vnfortunate King. Finally, hee draue the Aetolians out of most of their Countrie, and forced them to seek their the wild Mountaines. Ofthe Epirotes he sent as prisoners to Cassander, the principall authors of the Kings restitution, and of the present Warre. Yet these actions required some time, and wearied Antigonus his aduersaries with painefull trauaile; after which they remained onely sauers. Antigonus him∣selfe at faire leisure, wanne all Caria the whilest, and sent Armies into Peloponnesus, and other parts of Greece, bestowing vpon all the Cities he tooke out of Cas∣sanders hands. The whole Countrie of Peloponnesus (excepting Sicyon and Corinth ) with the Ile of Euboea, and many places of the firme Land, were by these meanes wonne to be his in true and vehement affection, ready to do or suffer any thing for him that had made so euident a demonstration of his readinesse, to giue them the libertie indeede, which others promised in idle words. Many States desirous of the same benefit, would haue shewed their good will; but they were kept in by Garrisons, who was too wise to trust them loose. Therefore Antigonus made shew as if he would passe ouer into Macedon: by which terror he forced Cas∣sander to repaire thither in al haste, with the best of his strength, leauing many good Townes of Greece so weakely guarded, that well they might take courage to themselues, if any forraine succour appeared. The aide which they desired was not long wanting. The Lieutenants of Antigonus, taking the aduantage of Cassanders departure, entred the Countrie; draue his Garrisons out of diuers Cities; forced the Gouernour of Athens to enter into league with their Lord; wanne the Citadell of Thebes, and set the people at libertie. This last action was somewhat remarkable. For Thebes had not long before beene raised out of her old ruines by the meere power of Cassander; of which act he was accused by Antigonus, as if it had beene some hainous crime. Yet now the same Antigonus winneth the Citie, and the loue of the Inhabitants, onely by expelling him that was their Founder. So much are men readier to thanke the Increaser, than the Author of their good; and rather to looke forward vpon those hopes, which vainely they extend beyond all measure, than backward vpon their miserable nullitie, that held them vncapable of being any thing. §. VI. Victories of PTOLOMIE by Sea. A great battaile at Gaza, which PTOLOMIE and SELEVCVS wanne, against DEME∣TRIVS the Sonne of ANTICONVS. AS the presence or neerenes of Antigonus gaue life to his affaires in the lower Asia, and Greece; so the designes of his enemies, taking aduan∣tage of his absence, ruined the very foundations of those great works in the Easterne parts, wherewith in the yeere preceding he had ouer∣topped them. The Isle of Cyprus, whose Princes wauered betweene contrarie affections, inclining one while to Antigonus, another while faintly regar∣ding their couenant with Ptolomie, was visited by an Aegyptian fleet, wherewith Ptolomie, in his owne person, reduced them to a more settled order, putting some to death, carrying others away prisoners, and leauing a Lieutenant of his own appointment, Gouernour of the whole Countrie. With the same fleet he ranne a∣longst the Sea-coasts, wasting a great part of Caria and Cilicia, with the spoiles of which he enriched his followers, and returned loden to Cyprus. Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus, hearing frequent reports of the miseries, wherewith his Fathers sub∣jects were oppressed, made all haste out of Syria to the rescue, taking only his Horse and light-armed foot with him, because the businesse required expedition. But in vaine did he himselfe and his followers, in hastie of one, that by lanch∣ing out into the deepe, could in a few minutes delude the labour of so many daies, if neede had so required. Answerable to the vanitie of this expedition was the suc∣cesse. For Ptolomie was gone, before Demetrius came into . Neither was it cer∣taine, whether hauing lightened his ships of their burthen in Cyprus, hee would re∣turne vpon those maritime Countries; or make toward Syria, where his comming was expected. Hee was indeede gone into Aegypt, and there with was de∣scribing a royall Armie, which he leuied with all conuenient speed, for the recoue∣rie of Syria. This was more than Demetrius knew. Therfore hee was faine to choose out of vncertainties the most likelihood, and returne the way that hee came, with all his companies, which were fitter for seruice in the open field, than to be bestow∣ed in Garrisons among the Cilicians. He had scarce refreshed his Men and Horses in Syria, when the newes arriued of Ptolomies comming with a puissant Armie, to giue him battaile. Hereupon he called to counsaile his principall friends, who aduised him to giue way to the time, & expect some better opportunity in the future: being a young man, and weakely furnished with meanes to resist such ancient and famous Generals, as Ptolomie and Seleucus. This counsaile rather to proceede from the cold temper of those aged men that gaue it, than from any necessity growing out of the present businesse. For Demetrius considering himselfe to be the sonne of An∣tigonus, and now Generall of his Fathers Armie, thought his owne title waightie e∣nough to bee laid in ballance against the bare names of those two great Comman∣ders. Neither found he much reason that should moue him to distrust his forces, as insufficient. His men were better exercised than the enemies, and promised as much as could be required. Therefore perswading himselfe, that such oddes of number, and of great fame, would rather serue to adorne his victorie, than hinder him in ob∣taining it, he resolued to put the matter to triall, without expecting the aduantage of more help. So animating his Soldiers with hope of spoile and rewards, he abode the comming of the Enemies at Gaza, with purpose to encounter them, as soone as they had finished their wearisome journie ouer the Desarts of Arabia. Ptolomie and Seleucus issuing out of so rich a Prouince, as Aegypt, came so well prouided of all necessaries, that their Armie felt not any great gricuance of the euill way, when battaile was presented them, which confidently they vndertooke. In all things else they had the ods of Demetrius; of Elephants they were vtterly vnpro∣uided. But how to deale with those beasts they were not ignorant. They had pre∣pared a kinde of Palisado, fastened together with chaines, and sharpened in such manner, that the Elephants could not seeke to breake vpon it, without receiuing much hurt. The rest of their forces, which (besides that they had aduantage in multitude) were heartened with many fortunate seruices, by them performed that yeere, whilest the enemies had wearied themselues, either with vaine iournies, or long and dulling expectation, they disposed in such order, as best answered to the forme, wherein Demetrius was embattailed. The fight beganne, and was maintai∣ned with equall courage, for a long time, each part striuing more to winne honour, than to satisfie any other passion, as hauing little cause of hatred, or reuenge. But after some continuance, the greater number holding better out, the error of Deme∣trius, who vpon no necessitie would needs fight a battaile with disaduantage, be∣ganne to appeare by his losses. Hee had committed himselfe to Fortune, hauing more to lose by her then he could get: but in this fight shee was idle, and left all to be decided by strong hands; vnlesse it may be said, that the terror brought vpon his men, by the losse of his Elephants, was bad luck. Those beasts were in that kinde of warre hardly to be resisted on plaine ground, and therefore at the first they made great spoile amongst Ptolomies men. Afterward seeking to breake through the Pa∣lisado, they were sorely hurt, and euery one of them taken. This disaster caused the Horsemen of Demetrius to faint. They had laboured hard, and preuailed little, till now perceiuing that all must lie vpon their hands, who were ill able to make their owne places good, they beganne to shrinke, and many of them to prouide for their safetie by timely flight, which example the rest quickly followed. When Demetrius had strouen so long in vaine to make his men abide, that hee himselfe was likely to be lost; he was faine to giue place to the stronger, making a violent retrait as farre as to Azotus, which was about thirtie miles from the place of battaile. A great part of his carriages was in Gaza, whither some of his company turned aside, hoping to saue such goods, as in haste they could pack vp. This foolish couetousnes was their destruction, and the losse of the Towne. For whilest they forgetfull of the danger, had filled the streets with sumpter Horses, & cloied vp the gates, thronging, some to get in and fetch, others, to carrie out what they had alreadie loden, Ptolomies Ar∣mic brake in without resistance, taking them with their goods and the Citie alto∣gether. This victorie restored vnto Ptolomie the best part of Syria, a Prouince more easie in those times to get, than to keepe; and opened the way vnto all the greatnesse of Seleucus. For between Gaza and Phoenicia no place offered resistance. In Coelosyria and Phoenicia, some townes held out a while, but were soone taken in by Ptolomie. Among these were the great Cities of Tyrus and Sidon; of which Sidon was giuen vp by the Inhabitants; Tyrus by the Garrison, falling to mutinie against their Cap∣taine; who trusting to the strength of it, had made great vaunts, but was pardoned by Ptolomie, and honourably entertained, in respect of his fidelitie. §. VII. How SELEVCVS recouered Babylon, and made himselfe Lord of many Countries in the highest Asia. The AERA of the Kingdome of the Greekes, which beganne with the Dominion of SELEVCVS. WHile Ptolomie followed his businesse with such prosperitie, Seleucus tooke leaue of him, and went vp to Babylon, to trie his owne fortune; which hee found so fauourable, that recouering first his owne Pro∣uince, hee became at length master of the better part of Alexanders purchases. This expedition of Seleucus was very strange, and full of vnlikelihoods. Histraine consisted of no more then eight hundred foote, and two hundred horse, a number too small to haue been placed as Garrison, in some one of those maine great Cities, against which he carried it into the higher Asia. But little force is needfull, to make way into strong places, for him that alreadie stands possessed of their hearts which dwell within the walls. The name of Seleucus was enough; whom the Babylonians had found so good a Gouernour, that none of them would finde courage to resist him; but left that worke to Antigonus his owne men, wishing them ill to speede. Some of the Macedonians that were in those Countries, had the like affection; others made a countenance of warre, which by easie compulsion they left off, and follow∣ed new Ensignes. This added courage to the people, who came in apace, and sub∣mitted themselues ioyfully to Seleucus. In a defection so generall, it was not a safe course for the Antigonians, to thrust themselues into the Townes of most impor∣tance: for euery man of them should haue been troubled with daily enemies, in his owne lodging. It remained that they should issue forth into the field, and trie the matter by fight. But the treason of one principall man, who reuolted to the ene∣mie, with more then a thousand Souldiers following him, so dismaied the rest, that they did no more than seeke to make good one strong place, wherein were kept the Hostages and Prisoners, that Antigonus held for his securitie in those quarters. This Castle, belike, they had not fortified in times of leisure, against dangers, that were not then apparent. Seleucus quickly tooke it; and so got the entire possession of Me∣sopotamia and Babylon. Antigonus had bestowed in Media and Persia, forces conuenient for defence of those Prouinces, that were the vtmost of his Dominion. In the Countries about Euphrates he had not done the like: for his owne great Armie lay betweene them and all enemies. Therefore when the victorie at Gaza had opened vnto Seleucus the way into those parts; hee found little impediment in the rest of his businesse. Hauing now gotten what he sought; it behoued him to seeke how he might keepe his gettings: for his owne forces were too small, and his friends were ill able to lend him any more. That which his friends could not doe for him; his enemies did. Ni∣canor, to whom Antigonus had committed his Armie in Media, ioyning vnto him∣selfe, out of Persia and other Countries, all needfull helpe came with ten thousand foote, and seuen thousand horse, either to saue all from being lost, or to driue Se∣leucus out of that which he had wonne. Against this power, Seleucus had only foure hundred horse, and somewhat aboue three thousand foot, where with to oppose himselfe: his large conquest of vnwar∣like Nations hauing yeelded him many louing subiects, but few souldiers. There∣fore when his enemies were neere to the Riuer of Tigris, hee withdrew himselfe from the place where his resistance was expected, into certaine marishes not farre off; where he lay secretly waiting for some aduantage. Nicanor thought that hee had beene fled, and was the lesse carefull in fortifying his campe. In recompence of this vaine securitie, his campe was taken by surprise, the first night of his arriuall; the Satrapa, or Lieutenant of Persia, together with sundry of the Captaines, were slaine, he himselfe was driuen to flee for his life into the Desarts; and the whole Armie yeelded vnto Seleucus: whose gentle demeanour, after the victorie, drew all Media, Susiana, and the Neighbour Prouinces, to acknowledge him their Lord with∣out any further stroke stricken. This victorie of Seleucus gaue beginning vnto the new stile, of The Kingdome of the Greekes, an accompt much vsed by the Iewes, Chaldaeans, Syrians, and other Na∣tions in those parts. I will not make any long disputation about the first yeere of this Aera. The authoritie of that great Astrologer Ptolomie, from which there is no appeale, makes it plaine, that the fiue hundred and nineteenth yeere of NABONAS∣SAR, . Almag l. 11 c. 7. & 8. was the fourescore and two yeere of this accompt. Other inference hereupon needlesse, than that note of the learned GAVRICVS, That the first of these yeeres L. Gauric. in an∣notat. ad locum citatum. was reckoned compleat, at Babylon, together with the end of foure hundred thirtie and eight yeeres after NABONASSAR. With the obseruation of the Saturne, recorded by Ptolomie, agrees (as it ought) the calculation of Bunting; finding the same Planet to haue beene so placed in the signe of Virgo, as the Chaldaeans had obserued it, in the same yeere; which was from Nabonassar the fiue hundred and nineteenth; from Seleucus the fourescore and two yeere; and the last of the hundred thirtie and se∣uenth Olympiad. These obseruations of the Celestiall bodies, are the surest markes of time: from which he that wilfully varies, is inexcusable. As for such occurrences in Historic, and the yeeres of succeeding Princes (that are not seldome ambiguous, by reason of vnremembred fractions) if they seem to be here-against, it is not great∣ly materiall. Yet thus much is worthy of note; that these yeeres of the Greekes were not reckoned in all Countries from one beginning; as plainely appeares in the difference of one yeere, that is found betweene actions, related by the seuerall Au∣thors of the two Bookes of the Machabees, who follow diuers accompts. Hee that shall adhere to the time defined by Ptolomie, may apply the other supputations thereunto, as being no farther from it, than a yeeres distance. §. VIII. How PTOLOMIE lost all that he had wonne in Syria. What the causes were of the quiet obedience, performed vnto the Macedonians, by those that had beene subiect vnto the Persian Empire. Of diuers pettie enterprizes, taken in hand by ANTIGONVS and DEMETRIVS, with ill successe. IN a happy houre did Seleucus aduenture, to goe vp to Babylon, with so few men as his friend could then well spare: for had he staied longer vpon hope of getting more Soldiers, Ptolomie could haue spared him none at all. Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus, hauing lost the battaile at Gaza, receiued from Ptolomie all his owne goods, his Pages, and Seruants, in free gift, and there withall a courteous message, to this effect: That no personall hatred was the ground of this Warre, which hee and his Confederates held with Antigonus; but onely termes of honour, wherein they would seeke to right themselues after such manner, that other friendly Offices, without reference to the quarrell, should not be forgotten. This Noble dealing of Ptolomie, did kindle in Demetrius an earnest desire of re∣quiting him, with some as braue liberalitie. Which to effect, he gathered together the remainder of his broken troups; drew as many as could be spared, out of the Garrisons in Cilicia, or other Prouinces thereabouts, and aduertising his Father of his misfortune, besought him to send a new supply, wherewith he might redeeme his honour lost. Antigonus, vpon the first newes of this ouerthrow, had said, That the victory which Ptolomie wanne vpon a beardlesse Boy, should bee taken from him by bearded men: yet vpon desire that his sonne, whom hee tenderly lo∣ued, should amend his owne reputation. He was content to a stand in Phrygia. Ptolomie hearing of Demetrius his preparations, did neuerthelesse follow his owne businesse in ; thinking it enough, to send part of his Armie vnder Cilles his Lieutenant, against the of those, that had beene alreadie vanquished, when their forces were entire. This peraduenture would haue beene sufficient: had not Cilles too much vnderualued the power of such an Enemie. Hee thought that this yong Gallant, hauing lately saued his life by flight, would now be more carefull of hauing a faire way at his back, than aduenturous in setting further forward, then vrgent reason should prouoke him. In this confidence he passed on without al feare; as one that were already Master of the field, and should meete with none, that would issue out of their places of strength, to make resistance. When Demetrius was informed of this march; he tooke the lightest of his Armie, and made his iournie with such diligence, one whole night, that early in the morning, hee came vpon Cilles vnexpected, and was on the suddaine, without any battaile, Master of his Campe: taking him aliue, with his Souldiers, and their carriages all at once. This exploit serued not onely to repaire the credit of , which his losseat Gaza had almost ruined: but further it enabled him, to recompence the bountie of Ptolomie, with equal fauor, in restoring to him Cilles, with many of his friends, accompanied with rich presents. But neither was Ptolomie so weakned by this losse, nor Demetrius so emboldened by his victorie, that any matter of consequence ther∣vpon ensued. For feared the comming of Ptolomie; and therefore hee for∣tified in places of aduantage: Ptolomie on the other side was loth to engage himselfe in an enterprise, wherein he might perceiue, that if the comming of Anti∣gonus found him entangled, he should either bee driuen to make a shamefull retrait, or a dangerous aduenture of his whole estate, in hope of not much more than al∣readie he possessed. Antigonus, indeede, was nothing slow in his way towards Syria; whither hee made all haste, not so much to relieue his sonne, as to embrace him. For hee rejoy∣ced exceedingly, that the yong man had so well acquitted himselfe, and being left to his owne aduice, performed the office of a good Commander. Wherefore to in∣crease the reputation of this late victorie he brought such forces, as might serue to re-conquer all Syria: meaning, that the honour of all, should be referred vnto the good foundation, layed by his sonne; whom from this time forwards, he imploied in matters of greatest importance. Ptolomie had now lesse reason, to encounter with Antigonus, than before his com∣ming to haue assailed the Campe of Demetrius. Yet he made it a matter of consul∣tation; as if he had dared more than he meant. But all his Captaines aduised him to retire into Aegypt; alleaging many good arguments, to that purpose: which they might well perceiue to be agreeable to his owne intent, by his propounding that course; not without remembrance of the good successe against Perdiccas, in the like defensiue warre. So he departed out of Syria, preseruing his honour; as being rather led by mature deliberation, than any suddaine passion of feare: and hee de∣parted at faire leisure, not onely carrying his treasures along with him, but staying to dismantle some principall Cities, that he thought most likely to trouble him in the future. All the Countrie that hee lest at his back, fell presently to Antigonus, without putting him to the trouble of winning it by pieces: so easie was it in those times, for the Captaine of a strong Armie, to make himselfe Lord of a great Prouince. We wonder, that these Kingdomes of Syria, Media, Babylon, and ma∣ny other Nations, (which the victorie of Alexander had ouer-runne, with so hastie a course, as gaue him not leisure to take any good view of them) were so easily held not onely by himselfe, but by the Captaines of his Armie after him. The hot con∣tentions for superioritie betweene the King of Israel, and those of Damascus; be∣tweene Aegypt, and Babylon; Babylon, and Nineue; the Persians, and many Coun∣tries; argue a more manly temper, to haue once beene in those people; which are now so patient of a forraigne yoke, that like Sheepe or Oxen, they suffer them∣selues to be distributed, fought for, wonne, lost, and againe recouered, by contenti∣ous Masters; as if they had no title to their owne heads, but were borne to follow the fortune of the Macedonians. This will appeare the more strange, if wee shall consider, how the seuerall States of Greece (many of which had neuer possessed so large Dominion, as might cause their Spirits to swell their abilitie) did greedily embrace all occasions of libertie: and how these proud Conquerours were glad to offer it, desiring to haue them rather friends than seruants, for feare of fur∣ther inconuenience. It must therefore be noted, that most of these Countries had alwaies beene sub∣ject vnto the rule of Kings, or pettie Lords, whom the Babylonians and Persians long since had root ed out, & held them in such bōdage, that few of them knew any other Law, than the command of forraigne Masters. This had vtterly taken from them al remembrance of home-borne Princes, & incorporated them into the great body of the Persian Empire: so that wanting within themselues all soueraigne power, or high authoritie, the life & spirit of euery Estate; they lay as dead, and were bereaued of motion, when that Kingdome fell, whereof they lately had beene members. Why the Persian Satrapae, or Princes of that Empire, did not when Darius was ta∣ken from them, as the Macedonian Captaines, after the death of Alexander, to lay hold vpon those Prouinces, which had many ages beene subject vnto them, and scarce foure yeeres in quiet of their enemies; or why at least they conten∣ded not (when the terrible name of that great Conquerour did cease to affright them) to get their shares among his followers, if not wholly to dispossesse them of their new purchases: it is a question, wherein, who is not satisfied, may find no lesse reason to suspect the Historie, than authoritie to confirme it. For we seldome reade, that any small Kingdome, preuailing against a farre greater, hath made so entire a conquest, in the compasse often yeeres, as left vnto the vanquished no hope of , nor meanes to rebell; especially when such disorders, or rather vtter con∣fusion hath ensued, by the furie of ciuill warre among the Victors. The why the Macedonians held so quietly the Persian Empire, is well set downe by Machiauell; and concernes all other Kingdomes, that are subject vnto the like forme of Gouernement: the summe whereof is this. the Prince doth hold all his Subjects vnder the condition of slaues; there is the con∣quest easie, and soone assured: Where ancient Nobilitie is had in due regard, there is it hard to winne all, and to keepe that which is wonne. Examples of this are the Turkish Empire, and the Kingdome of France. If any Inuader should pre∣uaile so farre vpon Turkie, that the great Sultan and his Children (for brethren hee not to suffer aliue) were taken or slaine: the whole Empire would quickly bee wonne, and easily kept, without any danger of rebellion. For the Bassaes, how great soeuer they may seeme, are meere slaues; neither is there in all that large Domini∣on, any one man, whose personall regard could get the people to follow him in such an attempt, where in hope of priuate gaine, should not counteruaile all apparent matter of feare. Contrariwise, in France, it were not enough for him that would make a conquest, to get into his hands the King and his Children; though hee fur∣ther got the better part of the Countrie, and were by farre the strongest in the field. For, besides the Princes of the Royall bloud, there are in that Kingdome store of great men; who are mightie in their seuerall Countries, and hauing certaine Roy∣alties and Principalities of their owne; are able to raise Warre, in all quarters of the ; whereunto the remembrance of their owne ancient Families, and long continued Nobilitie, will alwaies stirre vp and inflame them, so that vntill eue∣ry one piece were wonne, and euery one (an endlesse work) of the chiefe Nobilitie, brought vnder or destroyed, the victorie were not compleat, nor well assured. It is true, that such power of the Nobilitie, doth often-times make way for an Inuader; to whom the discontentments of a few can easily make a faire entrance. But such assistants are not so easily kept, as they are gotten: for they looke to bee satisfied at , in all their demands; and hauing what they would, they soone returne to their old , vpon condition to keepe what they haue, vnlesse they be daily hired with new rewards: wherein it is hard to please one man, without offending ano∣ther as good as himselfe. The , on the other side, needes not to feare any pe∣rill, that might arise from the discontented spirits of his principall men. The grea∣test mischiefe that any of them could worke against him, were the betraying of some Towne, or the wilfull losse of a battaile: which done, the Traitor hath spent his sting, and must either flie to the enemie, whereby he loseth all that he formerly did hold, or else, in hope of doing some further harme, he must aduen∣ture to excuse himselfe vnto his Master, who seldome forgiues the Captaine, that hath not striuen by desperate valour against misfortune. As for making head, or their followers against the great Sultan, and so ioyning themselues vnto a∣ny Inuader; it is a matter not to be doubted: for none of them haue any followers or dependants at all, other than such, as are subiect vnto them, by vertue of their and Commissions. Now as this base condition of the principall men, doth leaue vnto them no , whereby to oppose themselues against the flourishing estate of their Prince; so would it weaken both their power and their courage in gi∣uing him , if should make him stand in neede of them. For there is scarce any one among the Turkes , or prouinciall Gouernours, that knowes either from whence hee was brought, or from whom descended, nor any one a∣mong them, that by the losse and vtter ruine of the Turkish Empire, can lose any foot of his proper inheritance, and it is the proper inheritance of the subiect, which is also a Kingdome vnto him, which makes him fight with an armed heart against the Conquerer, who hath no other deuice painted on his Ensigne, than the picture of . As is the Turkish Empire, so was the Persian, voide of libertie in the Subiects, and vtterly destitute of other Nobilitie, than such as depended vpon meere fauour of the Prince. Some indeede there were of Royall bloud, and others, descen∣ded from the Princes that ioyned with Darius, the Sonne of Hystaspes, in oppres∣sing the Magi: these were men of reputation in Persia; but their reputation consi∣sted only in their , and their safetie in not with affaires of State, which made them little esteemed. In what small account these Persian Princes were held, it may appeare by this, that the Vncles, Cousin Germans, and Bre∣thren, were called by the Kings, Their Slaues, and so did stile them selues, in speaking vnto these great Monarchs. That vpon euery light occasion of displeasure they were handled as Slaues; it is easie to be discerned, in that example of crueltie, pra∣ctised by Xerxes vpon his owne brother M sistes, which hath beene formerly noted, in place more conuenient. As for the Satrapae, or Gouernours of the Prouinces, it is needlesse to cite examples, prouing them to haue beene meere slaues: it may suf∣fice, that their heads were taken from them at the Kings will; that is, at the will of those Women and Eunuches, by whom the King was gouerned. To this want of Nobilitie in Persia, may be added the generall want of libertie conuenient among the people: a matter no lesse auailable, in making easie and sure the conquest of a Nation, then is the cause assigned by Machiauel. For as Ae∣sope his Asse did not care to runne from the enemies, because it was not possible, that they should loade him with heauier burthens, then his Master caused him daily to beare: so the Nations, that endure the worst vnder their owne Princes, are not greatly fearefull of a yoke; Nor will be hastie to shake it off, if by experience they finde it more light, then was that whereunto they had bee nelog accustomed. This was it that made the Gascoignes beare such faithfull affection to the Kings of England; for that they gouerned more mildly than the French: this enlarged the Venetian iurisdiction in Lumbardie; for the Townes that they wanne, they wanne out of the hands of Tyrannous oppressors: and this did cause the Macedonians, with other Nations, that had beene subiect vnto the of followers, to serue the Romans patiently, if not willingly; for that by them they were eased of many burthens, which had beene imposed vpon them by their owne Kings. So that of this tamenesse, which we finde in those that had beene subiects of the Persian Kings, the reasons are apparent. Yet some of these there were, that could not so easily be contained in good order by the Macedonians: for they had not in∣deede beene absolutely conquered by the Persian. Such were the Sogdians, Ba∣ctrians, and other Nations about the Caspian Sea. Such also were the Arabians bor∣dering vpon Syria: against whom Antigonus sent part of his Armie; thinking ther∣with to bring them vnder; or rather to get a rich bootie. The Captaine that hee sent, fell vpon the Nabathaeans, at such time as they were busied in a great Mart, wherein they traded with the more remote Arabians, for Myrrhe, Frankincense, and other such commodities. All or most of these rich wares, together with fiue hundred talents of siluer, and many prisoners, the Macedonians laid hold vpon: for their comming was suddaine, and vnexpected. But ere they could recouer Syria, the ouertooke them, and finding them wearie with long marches, made such a slaughter, that of foure thousand foote, and sixe hundred horse, onely fiftie horse . To reuenge this losse, Demetrius was set out with a greater power: yet all in vaine; for he was not resisted by any Armie, but by the naturall defence of a vast Wildernesse, lacke of water, and of all things necessarie. Therefore he was glad to make peace with them; wherein he lost not much honour: for they craued it, and gaue him presents. Returning from the Nabathaeans, hee viewed the Lake Asphaltites, whence he conceiued hope of great profit that might be raised, by ga∣thering the Sulphure. With this good husbandrie of his sonne, Antigonus was well pleased; and appointed men to the worke: but they were slaine by the Arabians, and so that hope vanished. These pettie enterprises, with the ill successe accompanying them, had much impaired the good aduantage against Ptolomie: when the newes of his vi∣ctories in the high Countries, marred all together. For neither was the losse of those great and wealthy Prouinces, a matter to be neglected, neither was it safe to trans∣port the warre into the parts beyond Euphrates, whereby Syria and the lower Asia should haue beene exposed, to the danger of ill-affected Neighbours. A middle course was thought the best; and Demetrius, with fifteene thousand foot and three thousand horse, was sent against Seleucus. These forces being sent away, did nothing, and his sonne did lesse. For Seleucus was then in Media; his Lieu∣tenants about Babylon withdrew themselues from necessitie of fight; some places they fortified and kept; Demetrius could hold nothing that he got, without setting in Garrison more men then he could spare; neither did he get much; and therefore was faine to set out the brauerie of his expedition, by burning and spoiling the Countrie; which he did thereby the more alienate, and as it were acknowledge to belong vnto his enemie, who thenceforth held it as his owne assured. Antigonus had laid vpon his sonne a peremptorie commandement, to returne vnto him at a time : reasonably thinking (as may seeme) that in such an state of things, either the Warre might bee ended, by the furie of the first brunt; or else it would bee vaine to striue against all difficulties likely to arise, where want of necessaries should the valour, that by length of time was like to become lesse terrible to the Enemie. Deme∣trius therefore leauing behind him fiue thousand foote, and a thousand horse, rather to make shew of continuing the warre, than to effect much, where himselfe, with greater forces could doe little more then nothing, forsooke the enterprise, and went backe to his Father. §. IX. A generall peace made and broken. How all the house of ALEXANDER was destroyed. THese ambitious heads, hauing thus wearied themselnes with trauaile, in seeking to get more then any one of them could hold; were contented at length to come to an agreement: wherein it was concluded, that each of them should hold quietly, that which at the present he had in possession. As no priuate hatred, but meere desire of Empire had moued them to enter into the warre; so was it no friendly reconciliation, but onely a dulnesse growing vpon the slow aduancement of their seueral hopes, that made them willing to breathe a while, till occasion might better serue to fight againe. Besides that maine point, Of retaining the Prouinces which euery one held, there were two Articles of the peace, that gaue a faire, but a false colour, to the businesse: That the sonne of ALEXANDER by ROXANE, should be made King, when hee came to full age; and, That all the Estates of Greece should be set at libertie. The aduance∣ment of yong Alexander to his Fathers Kingdome, seemes to haue beene a matter, forceably extorted from Antigonus; in whom was discouered a purpose, to make himselfe Lord of all. But this, indeede, more neerely touched Cassander. For in his custodie was the yong Prince and his Mother: neither did he keepe them in sort an∣swerable to their degree; but as close prisoners, taken in that warre, wherein they had seene the old Queene Olympias taken and murdered, that sought to haue put them in possession of the Empire. The mutuall hatred and feare betweene them, rooted in these grounds, of iniuries done, and reuenge expected; vpon this conclu∣sion of peace, grew vp faster than any time before, in the heart of Cassander: who saw the Macedonians turne their fauourable expectation, towards the sonne of their late renowned King. All this, either little concerned Antigonus; or tended greatly to his good. The yong Prince must first haue possession of Macedon: whereby Cassander should be re∣duced to his poore office, of Captaine ouer a thousand men, if not left in worse case. As for them that held Prouinces abroad, they might either doe as they had done vn∣der Aridaeus; or better, as being better acquainted with their owne strength. He in the meane time, by his readinesse to acknowledge the true Heire, had freed himself from that ill fauoured imputation, of seeking to make himselfe Lord of all that Alexander had gotten. The like aduantage had he in that Article, of restoring the Greekes to their libertie This libertie had hitherto beene the subiect of much idle discourse: but it neuer tooke effect. Antigonus held scarse any Towne of theirs, Cassander occupied most of the Countrie: which if hee should set free; hee must be a poore Prince; if not, there was matter enough of quarrell against him, as against a Disturber of the com∣mon peace. In the meane season, the Countries lying betweene Euphrates and the Greeke seas, together with a great Armie, and monie enough to entertaine a greater, might serue to hold vp the credit of Antigonus, and to raise his hopes, as high as euer they had beene. With much disaduantage doe many men contend, against one that is equall to them all in puissance, Cassanders friends had left him in an ill case; but he could not doe withall: for where euery one mans helpe is necessarie to the warre, there may any one make his owne peace; but no one can stand out alone; when all the rest are wearie. The best was, that hee knew all their affections: which tended to no such end as the becomming Subiects vnto any man; much lesse to the sonne of an A∣siatique woman, of whom they had long since refused to heare mention. Therefore he tooke a short course, and caused both the child & his Mother to be slaine: free∣ing thereby himselfe in a trice, from the dangerous necessitie of yeelding vp his go∣uernement, which he must haue done when the child had come to age. Roxane was a Ladie of singular beautie, which was perhaps the cause, why Perdiccas desired to haue her sonne, being as yet vnborne, proclaimed Heire to the great Alexander. Im∣mediatly vpon the death of Alexander, she had vsed the fauour (if it were not loue) of Perdiccas, to the satisfying of her own bloudy malice, vpon Statira, the Daugh∣ter of King Darius; whom Alexander had likewise married according to the cu∣stome of those Countries, wherein pluralitie of wiues is held no crime. For hauing by a counterfait letter, in Alexanders name, gotten this poore Lady into her hands, shee did, by assistance of Perdiccas, murder her aad her Sister, and threw their bodies into a Well, causing it to be filled vp with earth. But now, by Gods iust ven∣geance, were she and her sonne made away, in the like secret fashion; euen at such time, as the neere approaching hope of a great Empire had made her life, after a wearisome imprisonment, grow dearer vnto her than it was before. The fact of Cassander was not so much detested in outward shew; as inwardly it was pleasing vnto all the rest of the Princes. For now they held themselues free Lords, of all that they had vnder them; fearing none other change of their estates, than such as might arise by chance of warre; wherein euery one perswaded him∣selfe of successe, rather better than worse. Heereupon all of them (except Lysima∣chus and Seleucus, that had worke enough at home) beganne to rowze themselues: as if now the time were come, for each man to improue his owne stock. Antigonus his Lieutenants were busie in Peloponnesus, and about : while their Master was carefull in following other, and some greater matters that were more secretly to be handled. He pretended the libertie of Greece: yet did the same argument mi∣nister vnto Ptolomie, matter of quarrell, against both him and Cassander; Ptolomie complaining (as if he had taken the matter deeply to heart) that had put Garrisons into some Townes, which ought, in faire dealing to be set at libertie. Vn∣dercolour of redressing this enormitie, he sent an Armie into Cilicia; where he wan foure Townes, and soone after lost them, without much labour of his owne or his Enemies. After this, putting to Sea with a strong Fleet, hee ranne along the coast of Asia, winning many places: and in that voiage allured vnto him a nephew of Antigonus (a good Commander, but discontented with the ill requitall of his seruices) whom finding shortly, as false to him selfe as he had beene to his owne Vncle, he was to put to death. But in doing these things, his desire to set the Greekes at libertie, ap∣peared not so plaine, as he wished that it should: for their case was no way bettered, by his molesting Antigonus in Asia. Therefore to get the loue of that valiant Nati∣on, He made at the last an expedition into Greece it selfe: where hauing set free some little Ilands, and landed in Peloponnesus, he raised so great an expectation of finishing the long desired worke, that Cratesipolis, the Widdow of Alexander, Polysperchons sonne, gaue vp into his hands the Townes of Sicyon and Corinth. Ptolomie had conceiued a vaine beliefe, that the Greekes emboldened by his and assistance, would all of them take heart, and rise vp in armes: where∣by with little labour, their libertie be gotten; and hee be acknowledged as Author of this immortall benefit. But long seruitude had wel-neere extinguished the ancient valour of that Nation: and their ill fortune, in many likely attempts to recouer freedome, had so tired their spirits, that they would no more stirre in pur∣suit thereof; but sate idly still, as wishing it to fall into their mouthes. The , about these times, beganne to fortifie their Towne with walls; no longer in their vertue (for both it, and the discipline that vpheld it were too much impaired) that had been a wall to their Towne and Territorie. The Athenians were become as humble seruants, as they had been, in times past, insolent Masters: erecting as many statuaes in honor of Demetrius Phalereus, as there were daies in the yeere. This Demetrius was now their Gouernour; and go∣uerned them with much moderation: but in spight of their hearts, as being set o∣uer them by Cassander. By this base temper of the principall Cities, it is to ga∣ther, how the rest of the Countrie stood affected. Ptolomie could not get them, to set their helping hands, to their owne good; and to furnish him with the promised supplies of and victualls. Credible it is, that he had a true meaning to deliuer them from thraldome; as iudging the commoditie that would arise by annexing them to his partie, a matter of mote weight, than the losse that Cassander should receiue thereby, who could hardly retaine them, if once Antigonus tooke the worke in hand. But when he found such difficultie in the businesse, hee changed his pur∣pose: and renewing his former friendship with Cassander, he retained Sicyon, and Co∣rinth in his owne possession. Before the comming of Ptolomie into Greece, Cassander bad beene held occupied with very much worke. For (besides his paines taken in warres among barbarous Princes) hee found meanes to allure vnto himselfe, the Lieutenants of Antigonus, that were in Peloponnesus, and about Hellespont: making his own aduantage, of their discontentments. By the like skilfull practice, Hee freed himselfe from a greater danger: and made those murders which he had committed seeme the lesse odious, by teaching his enemies to doe the like. Old Polysperchon, that had made so great a stirre in the raigne of Aridaeus, did after the death of Roxane and her Child, enter a∣gaine vpon the Stage: leading in his hand sonne of the great Alexander, and meaning to place him in his Fathers Throne. The name of this yong Prince was Hercules: hee was begotten on Barsine, the Daughter of Artabazus a Persian; but had beene lesse esteemed than the sonne of Roxane, either for that his Mother was helde no better than a Concubine, or else perhaps, in regard of the fauour which , and after him Olympias, did beare vnto Roxane. At this time, the death of his brother had moued such compassion, and regard of his being Alexanders only liuing child, had procured vnto him such good will, that the demand which made in his befalse, was deemed ve∣ry iust and honourable. There were indeede more hearts then hands, that ioyned with this yong Prince: yet wanted he not sufficient strength of hands, if the heart of him that least ought, had not beene most false. Cassander had raised an Armie, to withstand his entrie into : but little trust could hee repose in that Armie, whose wishes he perceiued to be with Hercucles. Therefore hee assaied Polysperchon himselfe with gifts and promises; wherewith at length he preuailed so farre, that the old Vilaine was contented to murder his Pupill, choosing rather with many curses, and foule dishonour, to take the offered Lordship of Peloponnesus, and Com∣mander of an Armie; than to purchase a Noble fame with dangerous trauaile, in maintaining his faith, vnto both his dead and liuing Soueraignes. Antigonus had not all this while beene ; though his losses were hitherto the chiefe witnesses, of his hauing beene a stirrer in these commotions, He thought it enough for him at the present, to retaine his owne: and therefore tooke order for the recouerie of those places, which Ptolomie had taken paines to winne. As for the rest it no wav grieued him, to see Cassander incurre the generall hatred of men by committing those murders, of which the profit was like to redound vnto him that was the most powerfull: or to see Polysperchon and Ptolomie sweat, in a busie warre against . If they would haue continued their quarrels, he could well haue them leisure, and haue thought the timewell spent, in beholding their contentions. For hee was throughly perswaded, that when the rest had wearied themselues in vaine with long strife, his armies and treasures, wherein he exceeded them all, would bring all vnder. According to these haughtie conceipts, he demea∣ned himselfe among his followers; looking big vpon them, and like a King before his time. This was it that caused so many of them to reuolt him: but it was no great losse to be forsaken by those that looked with enuious eyes vpon that for∣tune whereon their owne should haue depended. Against this enuie of his owne men, and the malice of others, Antigonus busily sought a remedie, such as was like to giue him a goodly title to the whole Empire. , Sister vnto the great Alexander, lay for the most part in Sardes; whom he had a great desire to take to wife. This his desire was not without good hope: for shee discouered much thereunto, yet was shee in his power, and might therefore be entreated, were it onely for feare of being enforced. But it was not his purpose, to get her by compulsiue meanes: either because his fan∣cie being an old man, was not ouer-violent; or rather because his ambition, where∣vnto all his affections had reference, could haue made small vse of her, by doing such apparent wrong. Shee had beene married vnto Alexander King of Epirus, af∣ter whose death shee came to her brother in Asia; hoping, belike, to finde a new husband in his Campe. But neither any of those braue Captaines, that were, in times following, so hot in loue with her, durst then aspire vnto her mariage: nor did her brother, full of other cares, trouble himselfe with prouiding her of an husband. Shee therefore, being a lustie suffered her bloud, so farre to preuaile against her honour, that shee supplied the want of an husband by entertainment of Parra∣mours. Alexander hearing of this, turned it to a iest: saying, that shee was his si∣ster, and must be allowed this libertie, as her portion of the Empire. When by his death, the Empire lay in a manner, voide, and the portion due to her therein, grew, in mens opinion, greater than it had beene: then did many to obtaine her, while she her selfe desired only a proper man, with whom she might lead a merrie life. To this purpose did shee inuite Leonatus vnto her; who made great ; but was cut off by death, ere he came to her presence. Now at the last, after long tarrying, shee had her choise of all great Commanders: , , Lysimachus, and Cassander, being all her earnest wooers. All these ( Antigonus excep∣ted) had wiues already, had many wiues, and many Concubines, whom he respected as much as his wiues, being noted of too much dotage in that kinde. This hindred not his sute: peraduenture it aduanced it, by giuing to Cleopatra, some hope of mutuall toleration. To him therefore she her selfe, and was taking her iournic from Sardes towards him; when Antigonus his Deputie in that Citie, made her to stay, vntill his Masters further pleasure should be knowne. Anti∣gonus had now a Wolfe by the eares: he neither could well hold her, nor durst let her goe. Shee would not be his wife; he had none honest pretence to force her; and to keepe her prisoner, had beene the way by which he might haue incurred a gene∣rall hatred, lasting perhaps beyond her life; as the course taken by against Roxane (a Ladie lesse respected than Alexanders owne sister) did well testifie. There∣fore he thought it the wisest way to procure her death: for to let any other enioy the commoditie of so faire a title to the Kingdome, it was no part of his meaning. To this purpose he sent instructions to the Gouernour of Sardes; willing him in a∣ny case to doe it secretly. So the fact was committed, and certaine women about her put in trust with the murder: which women afterwards were put to death, as mischieuous conspirers against the life of that good Ladie. So was Antigonus from blame, at the least, in his owne opinion: but the world was lesse , than to be so deluded. How the murther was detected, wee not aske: for seldome is that bloudie crime vnreuealed; and neuer so ill smothered, as when great persons are the Authors. Thus was the whole race of and Alexander the Great extinguished, and it was extinguished by the hands of such as thought vpon nothing than the ex∣ecution of Gods , due vnto the of these powerfull, but mercilesse Princes. Wherefore the ambitious frames, by Tyrants, vpon so wic∣ked of innocent bloud, were soone after cast downe, ouer-whelming themselues or their children, with the ruines, as the sequele will declare. §. X. How DEMETRIVS, the sonne of ANTIGONVS, gaue libertie to Athens, the Garrisons of CASSANDER out of those parts. The im∣moderate honors decrced by the to and DEMETRIVS. NOne being left , that had any title to the Kingdome; it stood with good reason, that they which were Lords of the Prouinces, ac∣knowledging no Superior, should freely professe themselues Kings in name, as they were alreadie in substance. Yet had this name ill beseemed the weaker, while the strongest of all did forbeare it: nei∣ther seemed it in the judgement of Antigonus, to crowne his last action with such a title, as if he had attained vnto greatnesse by that foule murder, the in∣famie whereof he was carefull how to discharge from his owne head. He purposed therefore to vndertake a plausible enterprise, euen the libertie Greece: whereby it was apparent, that he might get such honour as would not onely drowne all bad reports, but make him be thought equall to any name of , whereof in see∣ming , hee was not couetous. To this purpose, hee deliuered a strong Ar∣mie, with a Nauie of two hundred and fiftie saile, and fiue thousand talents of siluer, vnto Demetrius his sonne: willing him to beginne at Athens, and thence to proceed, in setting all the Countrie free. Demetrius came to Athens before he was expected: so that without resistance he entred the Hauen; it being thought that a fleet of Ptolomie, Cassanders good friend, had beene arriued. But when it was knowne, both who he was, and what was the cause of his comming; the joy of the Citizens brake out into loud acclamations; Phalereus forsooke the Towne, and withdrew himselfe to , vnder safe conduct; onely the Garrison in Munychia stroue to make good that , which after a while was wonne vpon them by force. During the siege of Munychia, Deme∣trius went to Megara; whence he expelled the Garrison of Cassander, and so restored the Citie to libertie. I thinke it not impertinent, sometimes to relate such accidents, as may no better than meere trifles: for euen by trifles, are the qualities of great Persons as well disclosed, as by their great actions; because in matters of importance, they commonly straine themselues, to the obseruance of commended rules; in lesser things they follow the current of their owne Natures. The Ladie lay in Patras, and a great desire to see Demetrius; hoping, belike, that she might, by his meanes, better her estate, and recouer her Townes of Sycion and Corinth, de∣tained by Ptolomie, to whose Lieutenant, in those places, Demetrius before his de∣parture out of Greece, offered monie for the surrender of them. Yet the onely busi∣nesse pretended was loue. He being aduertised hereof, left his forces in the Coun∣trie of Megara, and taking a companie of his lightest armed, for guard of his per∣son, made a long journie to meete with her. This troupe also, hee caused to lodge a great way from his Tent, that none might see her when she came. As closely as the businesse was carried, some of his enemies had gotten knowledge of it; whereby they conceiued good hope, that the diligence of a very few men, might ouerthrow all great preparations of Antigonue; and bring him to any termes of reason, by taking his sonne prisoner. Their project fell but a little short of the effect. For they came so suddainly vpon him, that hee had no better shift, than to muffle him∣selfe in an old cloake, and creepe away disguised; leauing them to ransack his Tent. There was in this Prince a strange medly of conditions; especially an extreme in wanton pleasures, and a painefull industrie in matter of warre. He was of a most amiable countenance, a gentle nature, and a good wit; excellent in deui∣sing Engines of warre, and curious in working them with his own hands. He knew better how to reforme his bad fortune, then how to rule his good. For aduersitie made his valour more actiue: prosperitie him with an ouerweening, wher∣in he thought, that he might doe what he listed. His fortune was as changeable, as were his qualities: turning often round, like the picture of her wheele, till shee had wound vp the threed of his life, in such manner as followeth to be shewed. Returning to his Campe, and finishing his businesse at Megara; hee resolued no longer to attend the issue of a siege, to affaile Munychia by force, that so hee might accomplish the libertie of Athens: which, vntill it was fully wrought out, he refused to enter into the Citie. Munychia was strongly fortified: yet by continuance of the assault, the multitude without, through help of their Engines that scoured the wals, vpon the resolution of those that lay within it, and wanne the place in two daies. The walls, and all the defences of that piece against the Citie, were leuel∣led with the ground, & so was it freely put into the Citizens hands, to whom with∣all was giuen their libertie, with promise to aide them in maintaining it. The fame of this action was lowder, than of any other victory, gotten by Deme∣trius with greater skill and industrie. For the Athenians, hauing forgotten how to employ their hands, laboured to make vp that defect with their tongues: conuer∣ting to base flatterie, that of theirs, which the vertues of their Ancestors had suted vnto more manly arguments. They decreed, vnto Antigonns and Demetrius, the name of Kings; they conse∣crated the place, in which Demetrius leaped from his Chariot, when he entred their Citie, and built there an Altar, calling it of DEMETRIVS the a-lighter; they called them by the Na nes of the gods their sauiours, ordaining that euery yeere, there should be chosen a Priest of these gods; and further, that such as were employed by their State, in dealing with either of these two Princes, should not be called Embas∣sadors, but Theori, or Consulters with the gods; like as were they, whom they sent vn∣to the Oracle of Iupiter or Apollo. It were a friuolous diligence, to rehearse all their flatteries; these being so grosse. Hereby they not onely corrupted the yong Prince; but made that acclamation, which best would haue pleased the old man, to bee of no vse. For hee could not handsomely take vpon him the name of King, as imposed by the Athenians; vnlesse hee would seeme to approue their vanitie, in loading him with more than humane honors. Yet was hee so tickled, with this their fine handling him, that when their , or Consulters came shortly after, desiring him to relieue them with Corne, and Timber to build ships; he gaue them almost a hundred thousand quarters of wheat, and matter sufficient to make a hundred Gallies. So gracious was his first Oracle: or rather, so weake is great power in resisting the assaults of flatterie. §. XI. The great victorie of DEMETRIVS against PTOLOMIE in Cyprus. How AN∣TIGONVS and DEMETRIVS tooke vpon them the stile of Kings; wherein others followed their example. FRom this glorious worke, Antigonus called away Demetrius, vnto a businesse of greater difficultie: meaning to imploy his seruice against Ptolomie in Cyprus. Before his departure out of Greece, he was willed to establish a generall Counsaile, that should treat of matters, concer∣ning the common good of the Countrie. About the same time, An∣tigonus withdrew his owne Garrison out of Imbros, committing their liberty entire, into the peoples hands: whereby it might appeare, that as he would not permit a∣ny other to oppresse the Greekes, so would he be farre from doing it himselfe. This was enough, to hold his reputation high, among these new purchased friends: it followed, that hee should conuert his forces, to the winning of ground vpon his Enemies. A pittifull Tragedic had lately hapned in Cyprus; through the indiscretion of Menelaus, Ptolomies brother, and his Lieutenant in that Isle. Nicocles, King of Pa∣phos, was entred into some practice with Antigonus: yet not so farre that he thought himselfe past excuse; by which confidence, hee was perhaps, the more easily dete∣cted. To cut off this negotiation, & the false-hearted King of Paphos at one blow, Menelaus was sent thither: who surrounding Nicocles his house with Souldiers, re∣quired in Ptolomies name, to haue him yelded to the death. Nicocles offered to cleere himselfe; but Menelaus told him, that die he must, and bade him come forth quiet∣ly. This desperate necessitie caused the vnhappie King to rid himselfe of life: and his death strooke such an impression into his wife, that she not onely slew her selfe, but perswaded the wiues of her husbands brethren, to doe the like. Also those bre∣thren of Nicocles, vnto whom Ptolomie had intended no ill, being amazed with the suddainenesse of this calamitie, did shut vp the Palace, and setting it on fire, consu∣med it, with all that was in it, and themselues together. Whatsoeuer the crime objected was; Nicocles perished as a man innocent, be∣cause he was not suffered to make his answere. Of this sad accident, though Mene∣laus deserued the blame, for his rigorous proceeding: yet is it to be thought, that much dislike fell also vpon Ptolomie: as men that are grieued, cast an ill affection, e∣uen vpon those, that gaue the farthest remoued occasion. Not long after this, Demetrius came into Cyprus, with a power sufficient, against any opposition that Ptolomie was like to make. The Cypriots did little or nothing a∣gainst him: either because they had small strength, or for that they held it a matter , whom they acknowledged as their Lord, being sure that they should not themselues haue the rule of their owne Countrie. Menelaus therefore, out of his Garrisons, drew forth an , and fought with Demetrius. But hee was bea∣ten, and driuen to saue himselfe within the walls of Salamis; where he was so hard∣ly besieged, that without strong succour hee had no likelihood to make good the place, much lesse to retaine possession of the whole Iland. His greatest helpe at the present, was the of his Souldiers; whom no rewards could winne from him, nor good vsage (when any of them were taken prisoners, and inrolled in the enemies bands) keepe from returning to him, with the first opportunitie. Most of them were Mercinaries: but all their goods were in Aegypt, which was enough to keepe them faithfull. Yet could not this their resolution haue stood long, against of number, which Demetrius had of men as resolute, and against his terrible Engines of batterie, if had not hasted to the rescue. Ptolomie brought with him, a hundred and fortie Gallies, besides two hundred ships of burden, for transporting his Armie and Carriages. This flect made a terri∣ble shew, when it was descried a farre; though more than halfe of it, was vnfit for seruice, in fight at Sea. Wherfore to make the opinion of his forces the more dread∣full, Ptolomie sent vnto , a threatning message: willing him to be gone, vn∣lesse hee would bee ouer-whelmed with multitudes, and trampled to death in a throng. But this yong Gallant repaied him with words of as much brauerie, pro∣mising to let him escape, vpon condition, that hee should withdraw his Garrisons out of Sicyon and Corinth. Demetrius had no more then one hundred and eighteene Gallies; but they were, for the most part, greater than those of Ptolomie; better stored, with weapons fit for that seruice; and very well furnished with Engines in the prowes, to beat vpon the Enemie. Neuerthelesse he stood in great doubt of threescore Gallies that lay in the Hauen of Salamis, lest Menelaus with them should set vpon his back: in which case, it was likely that all should goe very ill with him. Against this mischiefe, hee bestowed ten of his owne Gallies in the mouth of that Hauen, to keepe Menelaus from issuing forth, and setting his horse-men on the shore, to giue what assistance they could, he with the rest of his fleet, puts to Sea against Ptolomie. The fight began early in the morning, and continued long, with suc∣cesse. The Generals were not ranged opposite one to the other; but held each of them the left wing of his owne . Each of them preuailed against the squadron wherewith hee encountred; but the successe of Demetrius was to better purpose. For his victorie in one part was such, as caused others to fall out of order, and final∣ly draue all to betake themselues vnto speedie flight. As for Ptolomie, he was to leaue his vpon the enemie in one part of the fight, that hee might re∣lieue and animate those of his owne which needed him in another. Wherein hee found his losse ouer-great to be repaired, by contending any longer against the for∣tune of that day; and therefore he laboured only to saue himselfe, in hope of euent, that might follow some other time. There fell out in this battaile no vnusuall accident; yet was the victorie greater then could haue beene expected. The occasions whereof were, partly the great skill in Sea-seruices, which the Greekes and Phoenicians, that were with , had, aboue those which followed Ptolomie: partly the good furniture of the Ships, wherin consisted no lesse, than in the qualitie of those with whom they were man∣ned. Further, wee may reasonably judge, that the two hundred ships of burthen, carying the strength of Ptolomies Armie, did not more encourage his owne men, and his enemies the day before the fight; than breede in each part the contrary affections, when in the beginning of the fight, they fell off, and stood aloofe. For though it were fitting, that they should so doe; yet a multitude, prepossessed with vaine conceipts, will commonly apprehend very slight occasions, to thinke abandoned. Besides all this, the expectation, that Menelaus issuing with his fleet out of Salamis, should charge the enemies in sterne, was vtterly frustrate. Hee was kept in perforce, by the ten ships appointed to barre vp the mouth of the Ha∣uen: which they manfully performed, as great necessitie required. Such disappointment of expectation, doth much abate the courage of men in fight; especially of the assailants: whereas on the contrarie, they that finde some part of their feares vaine, doe easily gather hopefull spirits, and conceiue an opinion of their owne abilitie to doe more than they had thought vpon, out of their not suffering the harme that they had imagined. Whatsoeuer the causes of this victorie were, the fruit was very great. For Ptolo∣mie had no more than eight Gallies that accompanied him in his flight: all the rest of his fleet was either taken, or sunk. Neither did Menelaus any longer striue against the violence of Fortune; but yeelded vp all that hee held in Cyprus, together with his Armie, consisting of twelue thousand foote, and a thousand and two hundred horse, and those Gallies in the Hauen of Salamis. The same of Spirit was found in the common Souldier, as well that was taken at Sea, as that had ser∣ued the Egyptian by Land: none of them reposing any more confidence in Ptolo∣mie, but willingly becomming followers of a new Lord, whose Armie they now increased. It was generally beleeued, that much more depended on the euent of this fight, than the Isle of Cyprus; for which they contended. Wherefore the common expe∣ctation was great; especially Antigonus, whom it most concerned, was deeply per∣plexed with cares, thinking euery day a yeere, till hee were aduertised of the issue. In this moode Aristodemus found him, a notable flatterer, whom had ho∣noured, with the Message of these good newes. Aristodemus had be thought him∣selfe of a trick, whereby to double the welcome of his ioyfull errand: He caused his ships to ride at Anchor, a good distance from the shore; hee himselfe landed in a Cock-boat, which he sent immediately backe to the ship; and so all alone, he went forward, looking very sadly that no part of his tidings might appeare in his counte∣nance. Report of his arriuall (for it was not knowne where he had been) came pre∣sently to Antigonus, who sent Messenger after Messenger, to meet him on the way, and bring speedie word how all went. But neither any answere, nor so much of a looke, as might intimate the purport of his errand, could bee wonne from this de∣mure Gentleman. Thus marched he faire and softly forward, with a great throng at his heeles (that serued well to set out his Pageant) vntill he came in sight of Anti∣gonus; who could not containe himselfe, but went downe to meet him at the , and heare the newes. Then did Aristodemus, vpon the suddaine, with a high voice salute Antigonus by the name of King; vttering the greatnesse of the victorie (with as much pompe, as before he had it with silence) in the hearing of all the people; who with loud acclamations, gaue that name of King, both to , and to his sonne Demetrius. Antigonus, in of the long suspence, wherein Aristodemus had held him, said that it should also be long ere receiued his re∣ward. But the title of King, together with the Diademe, which his did set on his head, he could not wish a fairer occasion to assume: wherefore he readily ac∣cepted them, and sent the like to his sonne. When it was once noised abroad, that Antigonus and Demetrius called themselues Kings; it was not long ere their fellowes were readie to follow the good example. his friends would by no meanes endure, that their Lord should be thought a man deiected for the losse of a fleet: therefore they saluted him also King. Lysi∣machus in Thrace had boldnesse enough, to put the Diademe about his owne head. Seleucus had, before this time, among the Barbarous people, taken vpon him as King: but now he vsed the stile in differently, as well among the Greekes and Mace∣donians, as in dealing with others. Onely Cassander held himselfe contented with his owne name: whereby howsoeuer he might shaddow his pride, he no way lesse∣ned the of his crueltie, against his Masters house. But the name which he for∣bore, his sonnes, after him, were bold to vsurpe, though with ill successe, as wil ap∣peare, when they shall enter vpon the Stage; whereon these old Tragedians, vnder new habits, as no longer now the same persons, beginne to play their parts, with bigger lookes, and more boisterous actions, not with greater grace and iudgement, than in the Scenes alreadie past. CHAP. VI. Of the warres betweene the Kings of Aegypt, Asia, Ma∣cedon, I , and others: vntill all ALEXAN∣DERS Princes were consumed. §. I. The Expedition of ANTIGONVS against Aegypt, with ill successe. ALL the rest of these Kings had taken that name vp∣on them, an imitation of Antigonus himselfe, as his greatnesse: which was such as gaue him hope to swallow them vp, together with their new titles. Bcing not ignorant of his owne strength, hee resolued to single out Ptolomie, and make him an ex∣ample to others: who should hardly be able to stand, when the greatest of them was fallen. To this pur∣pose hee prepared an Armie of eighteene thousand foot, and eight thousand horse, with foure-score and three Elephants: as likewise a fleet of a hundred and fistie Gallies, and a hundred ships of burden. The Land-forces hee commanded in person: of the Name was Admirall. When all was readie for the iourney, the Sea-men aduised him to stay yet eight dayes longer, and expect the setting of the Pleiades. But his hastie desire to preuent all preparations for resistance that Ptolomie should make, reiected this counsaile; imputing it rather to their feare than skill: wherefore he departed from Antigonia (a Towne which he had built in Syria, and called after his owne name, that was soone changed into , by his mortall Enemie) and came to Gaza; where hee met with his fleet. The neerer that he drew to Aegypt, the more haste hee made: thinking by celeritie to preuaile more then by his great power. He caused his Soul∣diers to carrie ten daies prouision of victuals; and had many Camels loaden with all necessaries for passing the , ouer which he marched with no small toile, though he met with no resistance. At Mount Cassius, which is neere adioyning to Nilus, he saw his Fleet, riding at Anchor, not farre from the shore; in ill case, and many ships wanting. It had beene sorely beaten with foule weather, wherein some were lost, others back to Gaza, or scattered elsewhere into such creeks as they could recouer: Demetrius himselfe, with the best and strongest vessels, did so long beat it vp against the winde, that all his fresh water was spent; in which extremitie, he and his must haue perished, had not the tempest ceased when it did, and Anti∣gonus appeared in sight, from whom these ouer-wearied, thirsty and Sea-beaten Souldiers receiued reliefe; After these painefull trauailes there followed a Warre no lesse painefull than to little purpose; for Ptolomie had so fortified all the passages vpon the Riuer of Nilus, as he assured himselfe either to ende the warre there, or if his should happen to be forst, yet could it not be done, but so much to the weakning of the Assailants, as he should afterward, with a second Armie (which he held entire) entertaine the Inuader vpon aduantage enough. All that Antigonus sought, was to come to blowes speedily: Ptolomie on the contrarie, to beat Antigonus by the belly. It is true that Nilus gaue him water enough, but wood hee had none warme it, and while Antigonus assaulted the Rampiers raised vpon the Riuer in vaine, Ptolomie assaied the faith of his Souldiers with good successe, for with great gifts, and greater promises, he ferried them ouer so , as had not Antigonus thrust some assured Regiments, vpon the passages next the enemie, and in the meane while taken a resolution to returne, Ptolomie had turned him out of Aegypt, ill at∣tended. Some of them indeede he laid hands on, in the way of their escape, and those hee put to death with extreme torments; but in all likelihood with the same ill successe that had formerly done, when he inuaded Aegypt: had he not readily re∣moued his Armie further off, from the noise of their entertainement, that had al∣readie beene wonne from him. To preuent therefore as well the present danger of his stay, as the shame following a forst retrait, hee secretly practized the aduice of his Councell, vpon whom the burden must be laid of his entrance, and leauing Aegypt. It is indeede lesse predudiciall in such like cases, that errours, dishonours, and losses, be laid on Councellours and Captaines, than on Kings, on the Directed, than on the Director: for the honour and reputation of a Prince is farre more precious, than that of a Vassall. Charles the fift, as many other Princes haue done, laide the losse and dishonour he receiued in the inuasion of France, by the way of Prouince, to Antonie de Leua, whether iustly or no, I know not; but how soeuer all the Hi∣storians of that time agree, that the sorrow therof cost that braue Captaine his life. Certainely to giue any violent aduice in doubtfull enterprises, is rather a testimonie of loue, than of wisedome, in the giuer; for the ill successe is alwaies cast vpon the Councell, the good neuer wants a Father, though a false one, to acknowledge it. Yet I haue sometime knowne it, that great commanders, who are for the present in place of Kings, haue not only beene disswaded, but held in a kinde by strong hand, from hazarding their owne persons, and yet haue those kinde of Mutiners neuer beene called to a Marshalls Court. §. II. How the Citie of Rhodes was besieged by DEMETRIVS. THis departure of Antigonus left behinde it many dead carcasses, and a great deale ofioy in Aegypt. Ptolomie held a solemne feast, and sent Messengers abroad, loaden with glad newes, to Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Cassander, his Confederates: strongly encouraging all that side with the report of this his late felicitie, though it appeared but in a defensiue warre. Antigonus on the contrarie flattered himselfe with another inter∣pretation, calling the ioyes of his enemies for witnesses of his owne greatnesse, see∣ing they arose but from so litle things: his enemies being but bare sauers by the last bargaine, and himselfe, as he supposed, hauing lost but a little time, and no part of his honour in the late retrait. How soeuer it were, yet he meant to follow his affaires henceforth in another fashion, for that which he could not cleaue a-sunder by great blowes, he purposed by little & little to pare off, by cutting off the branches first, to fell the Tree it selfe with the more facilitie. To effect which, hee resolued (lea∣uing the great ones to grow awhile) to roote vp the Dependants of his Enemies: Dependants, whom the forenamed Confederates should be forst, either to relieue, or to loose; and hereby he doubted not, to draw them into the field, where the ad∣uantage of power, and of all other warlike prouisions, promised him victorie. At this time the Cities of Rhodes was very mightie, being well gouerned, and hauing long held it selfe in good Neutralitie, it drew the better part of all the trade of those parts, and thereby a great deale of riches to it selfe, to maintaine which, and to increase it, it furnished and kept on the Seas a Fleet of well armed ships, by which it not only beat off all Pyrates and pettie Theeues, but the reputation of their strength was thereby so much increased, as all the neighbour Princes sought their alliance and confederacie. In this so dangerous a time (in which they must either refuse all that sought them, and so friendlesse and apart, or ioyne themselues to some one; and thereby forgoe the peace, by which their greatnesse had growne) their affections carried them to the Aegyptian: both because the greatest part of their trade lay that way, as also for that Antigonus his disposition, greatnes, & neighbourhood was fear∣full vnto them. This affection of theirs, with some other passages, more apparent; gaue argument of quarrel to Antigonus, who began to declare himselfe against them by iniuries, of taking some of their ships, with such other grieuances, while he made a more waightie preparation, to pursue the warre against them, openly & strongly. All things soone after ordered according to the greatnesse of the enter∣prise, hee employed his sonne Demetrius against them in their owne Iland, who brought such terrour vpon the Citizens, that laying aside all respect of friendship and honour, they offered him their assistance, and seruice against whom soeuer. De∣metrius, who knew from whence this change came, and that the alteration was per∣swaded by feare, and not by loue; raised his demands to an intolerable height, re∣quiring a hundred Hostages to be deliuered him, and libertie to lodge in their Port as many ships of warre as himselfe pleased. These conditions more properly to be imposed vpon a State alreadie conquered, then on those who as yet had heard of nothing but a constrained assistance, restored vnto the Rhodians their lost courage, and made them resolue to defend their libertie to the last man: this taught them to infranchise all their able bond-men, and wisely rather to make them their fel∣low-Citizens, than to make themselues fellow-slaues with them. Demetrius hauing refused the faire conditions offered, (as the Rhodians the feare∣full ones propounded vnto them) makes preparation for a long siege, and finding no appearance to carrie the place in furie, he set in hand with his Engines of batte∣rie; in the inuention and vse of which, he neuer shewed himselfe a greater Artisan, than in this warre. But in conclusion, after the Citizens had sustained all the as∣saults giuen them for a whole yeere, after many braue sallies out of the Towne, and the famine which they endured within the Towne, which had proued farre more extreme, if Ptolomie had not with many hazards relieued them, Demetrius by me∣diation of the Grecian Embassadors, gaue ouer the siege; a hundred Hostages they gaue him for performance of the peace made, but with exception of all the Magi∣strates and officers of the Citie. Hereunto Demetrius was brought by the vsuall policie of warre, and state: for while with the flowre of all his fathers forces, he lay before Rhodes, Cassander reco∣uered many of those places in Greece, which Demetrius had formerly taken from him, neither did Cassander make the warre as in former times, by practice and sur∣prise, but by a strong and well compounded armie, which hee himselfe led as farre as into Attica, and therewith greatly distressed and indangered Athens it selfe. On the other side (though with lesse successe) did Polysperchon inuade Peloponnesus. These dangerous vndertakings vpon Greece, aduised the and Aetolians to dispatch their towards Demetrius, and aduised Demetrius, rather to abandon the enterprise of Rhodes, than to abandon the great honour which he had formerly gotten, by setting all Greece at libertie. Demetrius was no sooner out of the Iland, then that the Rodians erected statues in honour of Lysimachus, & Cassander, but for Ptolomie, whom they most affected, and from whom they receiued their most reliefe, they cōsulted with the Oracle of Iupi∣ter, whether it were not lawfull to call him a God. The Priests which attended in the Temple of Hammon, gaue the same faire answere for Ptolomie, which they had for∣merly done for Alexander his Master, for as Alexander consulted the Oracle with an Armie at his heeles; so was Ptolomie at this time Lord of the soile: and yet was this a farre more cleanly creation, than that done by the Athenians, who Deified Anti∣gonus and Demetrius, by decree of the people. A mad age it was, when so many of Alexanders Captaines could not themselues with the stile of Kings, but that they would needes be called gods. §. III. How DEMETRIVS preuailed in Greece. CASSANDER desires peace of ANTIGONVS, and cannot obtaine it. Great preparations of warre against . DEMETRIVS comming with a strong Fleet and Armie into Greece, quickly draue Cassander out of Attica; and pursuing his fortune, cha∣sed him beyond the straits of Thermopylae. Herein his reputation did much auaile him; which was so great, that sixe of his Souldiers reuolted vnto him. So partly by the greatnesse of his name, partly by force, he recouered in short space al that Cassander held in those straits, and giuing libertie vnto the people, he bestowed vpon the Athenians those , which had beene fortified against them, to blocke them vp. Then went he into Peloponnesus, where he found the like, or more easie successe: for hee sud∣dainely tooke Argos, Corinth, Sicyon, and the most of the Countrie, bestowing li∣bertie vpon such as needed it. The Towne of hee translated by consent of the Citizens, from the old seat into another place. and called it after his own name Demetrias. This done, he betook himselfe to his pleasure: At the Islhmian games, he caused himselfe to be proclaimed Captaine Generall of Greece, as Philip and A∣lexander had been in former times: whereupon (as if he were now become as great as Alexander ) he despised all others, making it a matter of iest, that any, saue him∣selfe or his father, should vsurpe the name of King. But in his behauiour hee so farre vnlike to a King, that in all the time of his leisure, hee deserued none other name then of a drunken Palliard. Yet were the Athenians as readie as euer to deuise new honours for him: among which they made one , that whatsoeuer King Demetrius should command, ought to bee held sacred with the gods, and iust with Men. All Greece being now at the disposition of Antigonus, Cassander stood in great feare, the warre should fall heauily vpon him in Macedon: which to auoide, he knew no better way, then to make peace with his enemies . And to that purpose hee sent Embassadors; but had no better answere from Antigonus, then that he should his whole estate to his discretion. This proud demand made him looke about him, and labour hard in his friends, both to assist him, and take heede to themselues; neither found hee them slow in apprehending the common Danger: for Lysimachus knew, that if once Cassander had lost Macedon, Demetrius would soone be Master of Thrace. Neither were Ptolomie and Seleucus ignorant of that, which was like to befall them, if Antigonus were suffered to put himselfe in quiet possession of those Prouinces in Europe. Wherefore it was agreed, that with ioynt forces they should all together set vpon the common E∣nemie. Hereof Antigonus had notice: but scorned all their preparations, saying, That hee would as easily scatter them, as a flocke of Birds are driuen away with a stone. With these hee pleased himselfe, and no way hindred the pro∣ceedings of his Enemies. He lay at that time in his Towne of Antigonia (a name that it must shortly loose) where he was carefully prouiding to set out some stately game and Pageants, in of his glorie. But thither was brought vnto him the tumultuous newes of Lysimachus his victories about Hellespont. For Cassander had committed vnto Lysimachus part of his forces, wherewith to passe ouer into A∣sia, while himself with the rest should oppose Demetrius on Europe . So Lysimachus passing the Hellespont, beganne to make hot warre vpon the subiects of Antigonus; getting some of the Cities in those parts, to ioyne with him, by faire meanes; win∣ning others by force, and wasting the Countrie round about. To represse this vnexpected boldnesse, Antigonus made hastie iournies, and came soone enough to recouer his losses, but not strong enough to driue Lysimachus home, or compell him to come to battaile. Lysimachus waited for the comming of Seleucus; keeping himselfe the whilest from necessitie of fighting. But Babylon was farre off; and Seleucus his preparations were too great to be soone in a readinesse. The Winter also did hinder his iourney: which inforced them on both sides to rest in some quiet, without performing any matter of importance. This delay of debating the quarrell in open field, held all those Nations in a great suspence, and bred much expectation. Yet might all haue come to nothing, had not Antigonus beene so froward, that hee refused to yeelde vnto any peaceable conditions. At length Seleucus drew neere with a mighty Armie of his owne (for hee had gathered strength in that long time of leisure, which Antigonus had giuen him) and with great aide from Ptolomie, that was ioyned with his forces. To helpe in this needfull case, Demetrius was called ouer into Asia by his Fathers letters: which he readily obeied. Before his departrue out of Greece, he made peace with Cassander, vpon reasonable termes: to the end he might not be driuen to leaue any part of his Armie for defence of the Countrie; and that his iournie might bee without any such blemish of reputation, as if he had abandoned his Dependants: for one Article of the peace was, That all the Cities of Greece should be at libertie. Cassander was glad to be so rid of an Enemy, that was too strong for him. Yet would this league haue done him little good, if things had fallen out contrariwise then they did in Asia; seeing the ratification thereof was referred vnto Antigonus. It sufficed, that for the present, euery one found meanes to cleare himselfe of all in∣cumbrances else where, to the end that each might freely apply himselfe to the tri∣all of the maine controuersie in . §. IIII. How ANTIGONVS was slaine in a great battaile at Ipsus, neere vnto Ephesus; wherein his whole estate was lost. SELEVCVS, with his sonne Antiochus, ioyning with Lysimachus, com∣pounded a great Armie, which was (all considered) not inferiour to that of the Enemie. In greatnesse of name (that helpeth much in all warres, but especially in the Ciuill) they were rather vnanswerable, than equall to their aduersaries: for Antigonus had of long time kept them vnder with a mastering spirit, and had beene reputed a King indeede, when the rest were held but Vsurpers of the title. Likewise Demetrius was generally ac∣knowledged a braue Commander, hauing giuen proofe of his worth in many great seruices of all kinds, and inriched the Art of war with many inuentions, which euen his enemies, & particularly Lysimachus, did much admire. Seleucus, who had some∣times flattered Antigonus, and fearfully stolen away from him to saue his life; with vong Antiochus, a Prince not heard of before this iournie; and Lysimachus, that had liued long in a corner, hardly keeping his owne from the wilde Thracians; wanted much in reputation, of that which was yeelded to their opposites: yet so, that as ancient Captaines vnder Philip and Alexander, two of them were held worthie e∣nough, to receiue any benefit that fortune might giue, and the third a Prince of great hope, whereof he now came to make experience. The Souldiers, on both sides, were for the most part hardie and well exercised: many of them hauing serued vnder Alexander; though of those old Companies, the long space of two and twentie yeeres had consumed the greatest number. But concerning their affections; the followers of Seleucus were easily perswaded, that in this battaile they must either get the vpper , or put in extreme danger all that belonged vnto the Confederate Princes: whereas Antigonus his men could dis∣cerne no other necessitie of fighting, than the obstinate qualitie of their Lord, that needes would be Master of all. Antigonus had about three-score and ten thousand foot, ten thousand horse, and three-score and fifteen Elephants. His enemies were sixe thousand short of him in number of their foot; in horse they had the ods of fiue hundred; of Elephants they had foure hundred, and a hundred and armed Chariots of warre; which helps, though they little had auailed the Persians, yet were they not to be despised, in the hands of a good Captaine. Antigonus himselfe, either troubled with the vnexpected greatnesse of his ene∣mies forces, or presaging little good like to ensue, grew very pensiue, communing much in priuate with his sonne whom he commended to the as his Succes∣sor: whereas in former times he had neuer been so iocund; as towards the houre of battaile, nor had beene accustomed to make his sonne, or any other, priuie to his counsaile, before it required execution. Other tokens of bad lucke, either foregoing the fight, or afterwards deuised, I hold it needlesse to recount: Diana of Ephesus dwelt neere to the place of battaile, a busie Goddesse in many great fights, and therefore likely to haue been thrust into the fable, if any matter, neerly resembling a miracle, had chanced. It is easie to beleeue, that these two so gallant Armies, containing well-neere all the strength of Alexanders whole Empire, performed a notable fight, being led by such worthie Commanders, and whom the issue thereof did highly concerne. Yet are few of the particulars recorded: an easie losse in regard of the much variety, wherewith euery storie aboundeth in this kinde. The most memorable things in the battaile, were these: Demetrius with his best force of horse, charged valiantly vpon yong Antiochus; whom when hee had broken, and put to flight, hee was so transported with the heat of his good successe, that he neuer gaue ouer his pursuit, but left his Father naked, and lost thereby both him, and the victorie. For when Seleucus perceiued this aduantage, he enterposed his Elephants, between Demetrius and the Phalanx of Antigonus: and with many troups of horse offering to breake vp∣on the enemies battaile, wheresoeuer it lay most open, he did so terrifie the Antigo∣nians, that a great part of them rather chose to reuolt from their Lord, whilst they were fairely inuited, than to sustaine the furie of so dangerous an impression. This cowardize or rather treason of some, discouraged others; and finally, cast them all into flight; exposing their Generall to the last end of his destinies. Antigonus was then foure-score yeeres old, very fat and vnweildy, so that he was vnapt for flight, if his high spirit could haue entertained any thought thereof. Hee had about him some of his most trustie followers, and as many others as hee could hold together. When one that perceiued a great troupe making towards his person told him, Sir King, yonder companie meanes to charge you; he answered, Well may they; for who de∣fends me? but anon DEMETRIVS will relieue vs. Thus expecting, to the very last, that his sonne should come to the rescue, he receiued so many Darts into his body, as tooke away his lately ambitious, but then fearefull hopes, together with his troublesome life. His great abilitie in matter of Armes, together with his vnsatiable desire of Em∣pire, haue sufficiently appeared in the whole Volume of his action. Hee was more feared by his enemies, than loued by his friends; as one that could not moderate his fortune, but vsed insolence towards all alike, as if it had beene some vertue nee∣rest representing a Kingly Maiestie. This was the cause that so many of his fol∣lowers reuolted to his enemies; and finally, that a great part of his Armie forsooke him in his last necessitie. For those Kings and Princes that call all the carefull inde∣uours of their Vassalls, onely dutie and debt; and are more apt to punish the least offences, than to reward the greatest seruices: shall finde themselues vpon the first change of fortune, (seeing it is loue only that staies by aduersitie) not only the most friendlesse, but euen the most contemptible, and despised of all other. This Antigo∣nus found true in part, while he liued; in part he left it to be vpon his son. §. V. How DEMETRIVS forsaken by the Athenians after his ouerthrow, was reconciled to SELEVCVS and PTOLOMIE, beginning a new fortune, and shortly entring into new quarrells. FOr Demetrius, at his returne, from the idle pursuit of yong Antiochus, finding all quite lost, was glad to saue himselfe, with foure thousand horse and fiue thousand foot, by a speedy retrait vnto Ephesus, whence hee made great haste towards Athens, as to the place, that for his sake would suffer any extremity. But whilest he was in the middest of his course thither, the Athenian Embassadours met him with a decree of the people, which was, that none of the Kings should be admitted into their Citie. These were Embassadours, not Theori, or Consulters with the Oracle. It was a shamelesse ingra∣titude in the Athenians, to reward their Benefactor, in his miserie, with such a de∣cree: neither did any part of his calamitie more afflict the vnfortunate Prince, than to see his aduersitie despised by those whom he had thought his surest friends. Yet was he faine to giue good words. For he had left many of his ships in their Hauen, of which he now stood in great neede, and therefore was faine to speake them faire, that sometimes had grosly flattered him. But he shall liue to teach them their old language, and speake vnto them in another tune. When he had gotten his ships, he sailed to the Isthmus, where he found nothing but matter of discomfort. His Garri∣sons were euery where broken vp; the Souldiers hauing betaken themselues to his enemies pay. So that he was King only of a small Armie and Fleet, without monie or meanes wherewith to sustaine him and his followers any long time. All the rest or the greatest part of his Fathers large Dominion, was now in diuiding among the Conquerers, and those few places which as yet held for him (hauing not perchance heard the worst of what had happened) he no way knew how to relieue, for to put himselfe into the field on that side of the Sea, he had no power, and to inclose him∣selfe in any of them, how strong soeuer, were but to imprison his fortune, and his hopes, or therein indeede to burie himselfe and his estate: Hee therefore creeping thorow those bushes that had fewest briers, fell vpon a corner of Lysimachus his Kingdome, whereof he gaue all the spoile, that was gotten, to his Souldiers, his owne losses hauing beene too great to be repaied againe by small prizes. In the meane while the Confederate Princes had where withall to busie them∣selues, in the partition of those Prouinces, of which their late victorie had made them Lords, wherein Seleucus had a notable aduantage by being present, and Ma∣ster of the field, for neither Ptolomie, nor Cassander were at the ouerthrow giuen, hauing only sent certaine troupes to re-inforce the Armie which Seleucus led, who tooke hold of a part of Asia the lesse and all Syria, being no otherwise deuided from his owne Territorie, than by the Riuer of . For there had not any order beene taken by the Confederates, for the of all those Lands: because they did not expect so prosperous an issue of that warre, which they made onely in their owne common defence. It was therefore lawfull for , to make the best benefit that he could of the victory, at which, neuerthelesse others did repine, and though they neither could nor durst accuse him ofill dealing for the present, yet seeing the ouer-greatnesse of Seleucus brought no lesse danger to the rest of the new Kings, than that of Antigonus had done, they consulted vpon the same reason of state as before, how to oppose it in time. Neither was Seleucus ignorant of what they had determined, for he read it in the Law vniuersall of Kingdoms and States, need∣ing no other intelligence. Hereupon they forget friendship on all sides, and cure themselues of all vnprofitable passion, the hatred of each to other, and their loues being laid on the one side, against their profits on the other, were found so farre too light, as Seleucus, who had to day slaine Antigonus the father, and driuen Demetrius the sonne out of Asia, sought to morrow how to match himselfe with Stratonica, De∣metrius his daughter, and so by Demetrius to serue his turne against Lysimachus. The storie of this Stratonica, with whom young Antiochus, the sonne of Seleucus fell so passionately in loue, and so distempered, as Seleucus his father, to saue his sonnes life, gaue her (though she were his wife) vnto him, and how his passion was discouered by his pulse, is generally noted by all Writers. But neither did this aliance betweene Seleucus and Demetrius; betweene Ptolomie and Lysimachus; be∣tweene Demetrius and Cassander; betweene Demetrius and ; though for the present it brought him againe into the rancke of Kings; otherwise tye any of them to each other, than the marriages betweene Christian Kings haue done in later times, namely betweene the Austrians, the Aragonians, the French, and other Prin∣ces; neither haue the Leagues of those elder times beene found more faithfull, then those of the same later times haue beene; as in the stories of Charles the eighth of France, and of Charles the Emperour, of Francis the first, and of the Kings of Naples, Dukes of Millan and others, the Reader may obserue: betweene whom from the yeere of our Lord, One thousand, foure hundred, ninetie and fiue, when Charles the eighth vndertooke the Conquest of Naples, to the yeere one thousand fiue hundred and eight, when Henrie the second died, the Histories of those times tell vs, that all the bonds, either by the bed or by the booke, either by weddings, or Sa∣cramentall Oathes, had neither faithfull purpose nor performance. Yet did Deme∣trius reape this profit by giuing his daughter to his enemie Seleucus, that he recoue∣red Cilicia from Plistarchus, the brother of Cassander; who had gotten it as his share in the diuision of Antigonus his possessions: for the Intruder was not strong enough to holde it by his proper forces from him, that entred vpon it as a lawfull Heire, nei∣ther would Seleucus lend him any helpe, as by the rule of Confederacie he should haue done against the common enemie. So Plistarchus with very angry complaint, as well against Seleucus as Demetrius, went vnto Cassander; whither Phila, their sister, followed him shortly, to pacifie them both, and keepe all quiet; being sent for that purpose by Demetrius her husband, that was not strong enough to deale with Cas∣sander, and therefore glad to make vse of that bond of aliance betwixt them, where∣of in his owne prosperitie, he neuer tooke notice to the others good. About the same time he tooke to wife a daughter of Ptolomie (pluralitie of wiues being fami∣liar with these Macedonians, that had learned it in their Easterne conquests) and so was he by two marriages rather freed from two enemies, then strengthened with two friends, for neither of them wished him any good, otherwise then might seeme to aduance their owne ambitious desires. Seleucus and Ptolomie could both of them haue beene contented better, that De∣metrius, with helpe of their countenance, should seeke his fortune somwhat farther off, than settle his estate vnder their noses. Particularly, Seleucus thought that Cilicia lay very fitly for himselfe: and Ptolomie had a great appetite (which yet he concea∣led a while) to the Isle of Cyprus. Now whether it were so, that Seleucus would faine haue set his new father in law vpon the neck of Lysimachus; or whether hee were indeede greedie of the bargaine, he offered to buy of Demetrius for ready monie, his late purchase of Cilicia. Hereunto Demetrius would not harken, but meant to keepe as much Land as hee could, hauing already found in Cilicia twelue thousand talents of his fathers treasure, that would serue him to make sport a while. This refusall so displeased Seleucus, that in angrie termes he demanded the Citie of Tyre and Sidon, to bee surrendred vnto him; which were the only places in Syria, that had not followed the fortune of the late great battaile. In stead of giuing them vp, Demetrius tooke present order to haue them better manned; and spake it stoutly, That were hee ouer-come a thousand times, yet would hee not hire Seleucus to be∣come his sonne in law. In this quarrell Seleucus was generally reprehended, as one of a malignant disposition, that would breake friendship with his father-in-law for two Townes, from whom he had already taken more then well hee knew how to gouerne. But the fire consumed it selfe in words, which had it vpon armes, like it is that the weaker should haue found friends out of enuie to the stronger. §. VI. How DEMETRIVS wanne the Citie of Athens, and preuailed in Greece, but lost in Asia. Of troubles in Macedon following the death of CASSANDER. IN the meane while, the Athenians not knowing how to vse the liber∣tie, which Demetrius had bestowed on them, were fallen by sedition, vnder the tyrannie of Lachares. Through which alteration their di∣stempered Citie was so weakned, that it seemed ill able to keepe off the punishment due to their late ingratitude. This aduantage haste∣ned him, whom they had once called their God and Sauiour, to present himselfe vn∣to them, in the habit of a reuenging furie. Hee brought against them all the force that he could wel spare from other emploiments, which were at that time perhaps the more, because his doubtfull Easterne friends, were vnwilling to giue impedi∣ment to any businesse, that might entangle him in Greece. His first enterprise in Athens had ill successe; a great part of his fleet perishing in a tempest. But he soone repaired the losse; and (after some victories in Peloponnesus, where hee wanne di∣uers Townes that had fallen from him) returning to the enterprize, wasted the Countrie of Attica, and cut off all reliefe from the Citie, both by Land and Sea. Athens was not able to feede the great multitude within it, any long time: for it stood in a barren soile, and wanted now the command of those Ilands, and places abroad, from whence it was wont to be stored with victualls; being also destitute of meanes to keepe such a Nauie, as might bring in supply, or dare to doe any thing at Sea, against that of Demetrius. Yet was there some hope of succour from Ptolomie, who (trusting thereby to winne the loue of Greece ) had loaden a hundred and fiftie ships with corne, and sent them to releeue the hungrie Citie. But these hundred and fiftie were vnable to deale with three hundred good fighting ships, which De∣metrius had; rather they feared to become a prey to him, and therefore hasted them away , as hauing done enough, in aduenturing to come so neere, that they might be discried. This brake the heart of the people; among whom the famine was so extreme, that a Father and his Sonne did fight for a dead Mouse, which dropped downe betweene them from the house top. Wherefore they sent Embas∣sadours to yeeld vp the Towne, and craue pardon, hauing so farre offended, that out of desperation, they made it a capitall offence, to propose any motion of peace. Yet were they faine to abolish this decree: rather because they knew not what else to doe, then because they hoped to be forgiuen. Demetrius, contented with the honour of the victorie, did not only forbeare to take away the liues of these vnthankefull men; which they had submitted vnto his mercie; but out of his liberalitie gaue them foode, and placed in Office amongst them such as were most acceptable to the people. Neuerthelesse hee was growne wiser then to trust them so farre as he had done in times past. And therefore, when (among other flattering acclamations) they bade him take their Hauens, and dis∣pose of them at his pleasure; he was ready to lay hold vpon the word, and leaue a Garrison within their walls, to keepe them honest perforce. After this he went into Peloponnesus, vanquished the Lacedaemonians in two battailes, and was in very faire possibilitie to take their citie: when the dangerous news called him in all haste, of Lysimachus and Ptolomie; that preuailed vpon him elsewhere, than himselfe did vpon his enemies in Greece. Lysimachus had wonne many Townes in Asia; Pto∣lomie had gotten all the Isle of Cyprus, except the Citie of Salamis, wherein Demetrius had left his Children & Mother, that were straightly besieged. Whilest he was be∣thinking himselfe which way to turne his forces, a notable piece of businesse offe∣red it selfe, which thrust all other cares out of his head. Cassander was lately dead in Macedon, and soone after him, Philip his eldest sonne, whose two yonger brethren, Antipater and Alexander, for the Kingdome. In this quarrell Thessalonica the Daughter of King Philip, whom had mar∣ried, seemed better affected to Alexander, then to her elder sonne: who thereupon grew so enraged, that most barbarously he slew his owne Mother. The odiousnesse of this fact gaue a faire lustre to Alexanders cause: drawing the generalitie of the Ma∣cedons to take his part, as in reuenge of the Queenes death, vpon that wicked parri∣cide Antipater. But Antipater was so strongly backed by Lysimachus, whose Daugh∣ter he had married; that Alexander could not hope to make his party good without some forraigne aide. For which cause he called in both Pyrrhus and Demetrius; who how they dealt with him, it will soone appeare, in the following Tragedie, of him and his brother. Their Father Cassander had beene one that shifted well for him∣selfe, at such time as euery man sought how to get somewhat, in the ill ordered di∣uision of the Empire. Hee was cunning in practize, and a good Souldier: one of more open dealing then were his Companions, but withall more impudent, rudely killing those, whom others would more wisely haue made away. He deeply hated the memorie of Alexander, that had knocked his head against a wall, vpon some o∣pinion of contempt. With Olympias he had an hereditarie quarrell, deriued from his Father, whom shee could not abide. Her feminine malice did so exasperate him, by crueltie, that shee vsed against his friends, both aliue and dead; as it made him aduenture vpon shedding the Royall bloud; wherewith, when once hee had stained his hands, he did not care how farre he proceeded in that course of murder. His carefulnesse to destroy those women and children, whose liues hindred his pur∣pose, argues him to haue beene rather skilfull in matters of Armes, than a valiant man: such crueltie being a true marke of cowardize, which feares a-farre off the dan∣gers, that may quietly passe away: and seekes to auoide them by base and wicked meanes, as neuer thinking it selfe safe enough, vntill there be nothing left, that car∣ries likelihood of danger. Of Olympias and Roxane it may bee said, that they had well deserued the bloudy end which ouer tooke them; yet ill beseemed it Cassander to doe the office of a Hang-man. But Alexanders children had by no law of men de∣serued, to die for the tyrannie of their Father. Wherefore, though Cassander died in his bed, yet the diuine Iustice brought swords vpon his wife and children, that well reuenged the crueltie of this bloudy man, by destroying his whole house, as he had done his Masters. §. VII. PYRRHVS and his doings in Macedon. The death of CASSANDERS children. DEMETRIVS gets the Kingdome of Macedon; preuailes in against the Greeks; Looseth reputation in his warre against PYRRHVS, and in his Gouerne∣ment, and prepares to win Asia. How all conspire against DEMETRIVS. PYRRHVS and LYSIMACHVS inuade him, his Armie yeelds to PYRRHVS, who shares the Kingdome of Macedon with LYSIMACHVS. PYRRHVS, the Sonne of that vnfortunate Prince Aeacides, which pe∣rished in warre against Cassander, was hardly preserued, being a suck∣ing Infant, from the furie of his Fathers enemies. When his Foste∣rers had conueighed him to Glaucias, King of Illyria; the deadly ha∣tred of Cassander would haue bought his life with the price of two hundred talents. But no man can kill him that shall be his Heire. Glaucias was so far from betraying Pyrrhus, that hee restored him by force to his Fathers Kingdome, when he was but twelue yeeres of age. Within the compasse of sixe yeeres, either the indiscretions of his youth, or the rebellious temper of his Subjects, draue him out of his Kingdome, and left him to trie the world anew. Then went hee to De∣metrius (who married his sister) became his Page; followed him awhile in his wars; was with him in the great battaile of Ipsus, whence hee fled with him to Ephesus; and was content to be hostage for him, in his reconciliation with Ptolomie. In Ae∣gypt he so behaued himselfe, that he got the fauour of Berenice, Ptolomies principall wife; so that he married her Daughter, and was thereupon sent home, with monie and men, into Epirus; more beholding now to Ptolomie, than to Demetrius. When he had fully recouered the Kingdome of Epirus, and was settled in it, then fell out that businesse betweene the children of Cassander, which drew both him and Deme∣trius into Macedon. Antipater, the elder of Cassanders sonnes, was so farre too weake for Pyrrhus, that hee had no desire to attend the comming of Demetrius, but made an hastie agree∣ment, and diuided the Kingdome with his yonger brother Alexander; who like∣wise felt the aide of Pyrrhus so troublesome, that was more willing to send him away, than to call in such another helper. For Pyrrhus had the audacitie to request, or take as granted, by strong hand, Ambracia, Acarnania, and much more of the Countrie, as the reward of his paines: leauing the two brethren to agree as well as they could about the rest. Necessitie enforced the brethren to composition: but their composition would not satisfie Demetrius, who tooke the matter hainously, that he was for, and made a foole, to come so farre with an Armie, and no worke for it. This was a friuolous complaint; whereby it appeared, that Deme∣trius had a purpose to as Pyrrhus had done, and so much more, by how much he was stronger. Hereupon it seemed to Alexander a wise course, to remoue this ouer∣diligent friend, by murdering him vpon some aduantage. Thus Demetrius reported the storie, and it might bee true; though the greatest part, and perhaps the wisest, beleeued it not. But the issue was, that Alexander himselfe was feasted and slaine by Demetrius; who tooke his part of the Kingdome, as a reward of the murder; ex∣cusing the fact so well, by telling his owne danger, and what a naughtie man Cassan∣der had been, that all the Macedonians grew glad enough to acknowledge him their King. It fell out happily, that about the same time Lysimachus was busied in warre with a King of the wilde Thracians: for thereby he was compelled to seeke peace of Demetrius, which to obtaine, he caused the remainder of Macedon to bee giuen vp; that is, the part belonging to Antipater, his sonne in law. At this ill bargaine grieuously stormed, though he knew not how to amend it: yet stil he stormed; vntill his Father in law, to saue the labour of making many excuses, tooke away his troublesome life. Thus in haste, with a kinde of neglect, and as it were to auoide molestation, were slaine the children of Cassander: of Cassander that had slaine his owne Masters children, in a wise course of policie, with careful meditation (so much the more wicked as the more long) studying how to erect his owne house, that fell downe vpon his graue, ere the earth on it was throughly setled. It might be thought, that such an accesse of Dominion, added much to the great∣nesse of Demetrius. But indeede it shewed his infirmitie; and thereby made him neglected by many, and at length hated by all. For he had no Art of ciuill Gouerne∣ment: but thought (or shewed by his actions that he thought) the vse and fruit of a Kingdome, to be none other, than to doe what a King listed. He gaue himselfe ouer to Women and Wine, laughing openly at those that offered to trouble him with supplications, and the tedious discourse of doing justice. He had more skill in getting a Kingdome, than in ruling it: warre being his recreation, and luxurie his nature. By long rest (as sixe yeeres raigne is long to him, that knowes not how to raigne one yeere) he discouered so much of his worst condition, as made both the people wearie of his idlenesse; and the Souldiers, of his vanitie. He was freed from care of matters in Asia, by hearing that all was lost: though more especially, by hea∣ring that Ptolomie had with great honor, entertained and dismissed his mother and children. This affoorded him the better leisure, of making warre in : where he vanquished the Thebans, and wonne their Citie twice in short space, but vsed his victorie with mercie. Against Lysimachus he would faine haue done somewhat (the peace betweene them notwithstanding) at such time as he was taken by the Thra∣cians; but Lysimachus was freely dismissed, and in good case to make resistance ere Demetrius came; so as this iourney purchased nothing but enmitie. Another expe∣dition he tooke in hand against Pyrrhus, with no better, or rather with worse euent. Pyrrhus held somewhat belonging to Macedon; which hee had indeede as honestly gotten, as Demetrius the whole Kingdome; he had also made excursions into Thes∣salie. But there needed not any handsome pretence of quarrell, seeing Demetrius thought himselfe strong enough, to ouer-runne his enemies Countrie, with two great Armies. It is a common fault in men, to despise the vertue of those, whom they haue knowne raw Nouices in that facultie, wherein themselues are noted as extraordinarie. Pyrrhus was a Captaine, whom later ages, and particularly the great Hannibal, placed higher in the ranke of Generalls, than either Demetrius, or a∣ny of Alexanders followers. At this time, he missed that part of the Armie, which Demetrius led, and fell vpon the other halfe: which he ouerthrew, not with more commendations of his good conduct, than of his priuate valour, shewed in single combat against Pantauchus, Demetrius his Lieutenant; who being a strong man of body, challenged this yong Prince to fight hand to hand, and was vtterly beaten. The losse of this battaile did not so much offend the Macedonians, as the gallant be∣hauiour of Pyrrhus delighted them. For in him they seemed to behold the liuely figure of Alexander in his best qualitie. Other Kings did imitate, in a counterfeit manner, some of Alexanders graces, and had good skill in wearing Princely vestures: but (said they) none, saue Pyrrhus, is like him indeede, in performing the office of a Captaine. These rumours were not more nourished by the vertue of the Epirot, than by dislike of their owne King; whom they began to dis-esteeme, not so much in re∣gard of his vnprofitable iourney into Epirus (for he had wasted much of the Coun∣trie, and brought home his Armie in good case) as of his insolence, that grew daily more and more intolerable. His apparell seemed, in the eyes of the Macedons, not only too sumptuous and new-fangled, but very vnmanly; and seruing chiefly to be a daily witnesse, how much he contemned them and their good opinion. Of his Souldiers liues he was rechlesse: and suffered vnwisely this vn-princely sentence to escape out of his mouth; That the more of them died, the fewer he was to pay. Hee made a mockerie of iustice; and (as it were, to publish vnto all his Subiects, how little he esteemed it or them) hauing by a shew of popularitie inuited Petitioners, and with a gracious countenance entertained their Supplications, he led the poore suters after him in great hope, till comming to a bridge, hee threw all their writings into the Riuer; pleasing himselfe, in that hee could so easily and so boldly delude the cares of other men. By these courses he grew so odious, that Pyrrhus gathered audacitie, and inuading Macedon, had almost wonne it all with little resistance. De∣metrius lay then sicke in his bed: who recouering health, and taking the field, had such great oddes of strength, as made Pyrrhus glad to forsake his winnings and be gone. At length he beganne to haue some feeling of the generall hate; which to re∣dresse, he did not (for he could not) alter his owne conditions; but purposed to al∣ter their idle discourses of him, by setting them on worke in such an action, wherein his best qualities might appeare; that is, in a great warre. His intent was to inuade Asia, with a Royall Armie: wherein the fortune of one battaile might giue him as much, as the fortune of another had taken from him. To this end, hee first made peace with Pyrrhus; that so hee might leaue all safe and quiet at home. Then did he compose a mighty Armie, of almost a hundred thousand foot, and twelue thou∣sand horse: with a Nauie of fiue hundred saile, wherein were many ships, farre ex∣ceeding the greatnesse of any that had beene seene before; yet so swift and vsefull withall, that the greatnesse was least part of their commendation. The terrible fame of these preparations, made Seleucus and Ptolomie suspect their owne forces, and labour hard with Lysimachus and Pyrrhus, to joyne against this am∣bitious sonne of Antigonus; that was like to proue more dangerous to them all, than euer was his Father. It was easily discerned, that if Demetrius once preuailed in Asia, there could be no securitie for his friends in Europe; what league soeuer were of old concluded. Therefore they resolued to beginne with him betimes, and each to inuade quarter of Macedon, that lay next his owne Kingdome. Lysimachus came first, and against him went Demetrius with a great part of his Armie: but whilst he was yet on the way, newes were brought into his Campe, that Pyrrhus had won Berrhaea. The matter was not ouer-great: were it not, that mindes prepared with long discontent, are ready to lay hold vpon small occasions of dislike. All the camp was in vp-rore: some wept, others raged, few or none did forbeare to vtter seditious words, and many desired leaue of Demetrius, to goe to their owne houses, meaning indeede to haue gone to Lysimachus. When Demetrius perceiued the bad affection of his Armie, hee thought it the wi∣sest way, to lead the Macedonians further off from Lysimachus their owne Countrie∣man, against Pyrrhus that was a stranger: hoping by victorie against the Epirot, to recouer the loue of his followers, in such sort that hee might afterwards at leisure deale with the other. But herein his wisedome beguiled him. For the Souldiers were as hastie as he, to meet with Pyrrhus; not intending to hurt him, but longing to see that noble Prince, of whom they daily heard the honourable fame. Some spake of his valour; some enquired, others answered, of his person, his armor, and other tokens whereby hee might be knowne; as particularly, by a paire of Goats hornes, that he wore on his crest. It was not likely, that these men should hurt him. Diuers of them stoleaway, and ranne ouer into Pyrrhus his campe: where the newes that they brought, were better welcome than their persons. For they said, and it was true, that if the Macedonians might once get sight of Pyrrhus, they would all salute him King. To trie this, Pyrrhus rode forth, and presented himselfe bare∣headed in view of the camp, whither some were sent before to prepare his welcom. The newes of his arriuall found a generall applause, and euery one began to looke out, with desire to set eye on him. His face was not so well knowne as his helmet; therefore hee was admonished to put it on; which done, all came about him, and proffered their seruice; neither were there any, that spake for Demetrius; only some (and they the most moderate of tongue) bade him be gone betimes; and shift for himselfe. So Demetrius threw aside his maskers habit, and attiring himselfe poorly, did fearefully steale away out of his owne Campe: deseruing well this calamitie, whether it were so, that he would not hearken to the good counsaile of his friends, or whether his behauiour depriued him of such friends, as would dare to let him heare the vnpleasant sound of necessarie truth. Whilest Pyrrhus was making this triumphant entrie into the Kingdome of Ma∣cedon; Lysimachus came vpon him very vnseasonably, and would needs haue halfe: saying, that he had done as much as Pyrrhus in the warre, and therefore had reason to challenge his part of the gaines. The bargaine was quickly made, and the diui∣sion agreed vpon: each of them being rather desirous to take his part quietly, than to fight for the whole; as hoping each of them, to worke his fellow quite out of all, vpon better oportunitie. §. VIII. How DEMETRIVS gathering , enterprised many things with ill successe, in Greece and Asia. How he was driuen vpon SELEVCVS, and compelled to yeeld himselfe. His imprisonment and death. THe Athenians, were as vnthankefull to Demetrius in this his aduersitie, as they had beene in former times. For they presently forsooke his friendship, and called Pyrrhus out of Macedon to be their Patron. Demetrius, when he went against Lysimachus, had left a great part of his forces in Greece, vnder his sonne Antigonus. Therfore it is like, that he had soone gotten an Armie; though Phila his wife (who is highly commended for a wise and vertuous Ladie) did poison her selfe, vpon desperate griefe of his mis∣fortune. The first, vpon whom he attempted to shew his anger, were the Atheni∣ans, that had well deserued it. Hee beganne to lay siege to their Towne: but was pacified by Crates the Philosopher, whom they made their ; and taking faire words instead of satisfaction, passed ouer into Asia, with eleuen thousand Souldiers, meaning to trie his fortune against Lysimachus, for the Prouinces of Lydia and Caria. At his first comming into those parts, fortune seemed to smile vpon him. For many good Townes, willingly, or by compulsion, yeelded to his obedience. There were also some Captaines, that fell from Lysimachus to him, with their companies, and treasures. But it was not long, ere Agathocles the sonne of Lysimachus, came vpon him, with an Armie so strong, that it was not for Demetrius his good, to ha∣zard his last stocke against it. Wherefore, he resolued, to passe through Phrygia and Armenia, into Media, and the Prouinces of the higher Asia; trusting to finde a Kingdome somewhere in those remote quarters. The execution of this counsaile was grieuously impeached by : who pursued him close, and cut off all his prouisions, driuing him to take which waies he could, without following his in∣tended course. In many skirmishes, Demetrius vanquished this troublesome ene∣mie: neuerthelesse, hee could not be shaken off, but continued afflicting the poore titularie King, with extreme famine, At length, in passing the Riuer Lycus, so many of Demetrius his men were lost, that the rest could no longer make resistance: but were driuen to trauaile with such speede, as might well be called a plaine flight. So that with famine, pestilent diseases following famine, and other accidents of warre, eight thousand of them were consumed: the rest, with their Captaine, escaped into Cilicia. Seleucus had gotten possession of Cilicia, whilest Demetrius was occupied in Greece: yet was it no part of Demetrius his errand, to lay claime to the Countrie; but with vehement and humble letters he besought his sonne in law, to call to minde their alliance, and to pity him in his great misery. These letters at the first wrought wel with Seleucus, and he condescended to the request: yet considering further how had carried him selfe, when he recouered strength after the battaile at Ip∣sus, he changed his purpose, and went against him with an Armie. Many treaties were held betweene them; of which none tooke effect, through the jealousie of Seleucus. Therefore, meere enforced Demetrius, to fight like a mad man; and his furie got him some victories, though of small importance. At length sicknesse tooke and held him fortie dayes, in which time, a great number of his few men, ranne to the enemie. This notwithstanding hee still held out, and once had like to haue taken Seleucus in his bed, had not his comming been discoue∣red by fugitiues, that gaue the alarme. Finally, when all his Armie had forsaken him, and left him with a few of his friends to shift for himselfe, hee was compelled by the last of those adherents (for euen some of those few forsooke him) to vnto Seleucus. Seleucus hearing this, was exceeding glad and sent him very comfortable mes∣sages. But the approbation of his owne humanitie, by his followers, was such, as renewed his jealous thoughts; and hindred him from admitting Demetrius to his presence, though otherwise he vsed him with as much fauor, as any prisoner could wish. He was kept vnder sure guard in a demie iland, wherein were goodly walks, , and Parks for hunting. He had all that he asked roially, and friends al∣lowed to visit him, at his, and their pleasure. Only his libertie was reserued vnto the comming of yong Antiochus and Stratonica, out of the high Countries. In this sort he spent three yeres, liuing merrily all the while (as one that now enioyed the happinesse, which with so much trauaile and bloud-shed, he had sought in vaine) and then died, leauing to his sonne Antigonus, the same which his father had left vnto himselfe; that is, friends and hope. His ashes were honourably buried in Co∣rinth; his qualities haue appeared in his actions, and the fortune of his house will shew it selfe hereafter, in times and places conuenient. §. IX. The death of PTOLOMIE, of LYSIMACHVS, and of SELEVCVS, that was last of ALEXANDERS Captaines: with other occurrences. ABout the same time that Demetrius died, died also Ptolomie King of Ae∣gypt; a vertuous Prince, warlike, gentle, bountifull, and (which in those times was a rare commendation) regardfull of his word. Hee had, by many Wiues and Concubines, many children, out of whom he selected Ptolomie Philadelphus, and caused him to raigne together with himselfe, two or three yeares before he died, that so he might confirme him in the inheritance of the Kingdome. At this, Ptolomie Ceraunus (for all of that house assumed the name of Ptolomie ) was grieuously incensed. But no man cared for his anger. Therefore he went to Seleucus, who gaue him louing entertainment. There were now only two of Alexanders Captaines left, Seleucus and . These two needes would fight for it, who should be the longest liuer of that braue Com∣panie. The true ground of their quarrell was, their neare equalitie of strength, and want of one to part them. The pretence was the murders which Lysimachus had committed vpon many of his Nobles, together with his poisoning Agathocles his eldest sonne: whose wife and children fled vnto Seleucus for aide. The after seuen Moneths pause, hauing spent their first heat of admi∣ration, beganne to hearken so well to Lysimachus, their naturall Countrie-man, that they forsooke Pyrrhus, vpon none other ground than because hee was an Alien. This they had knowne well enough before: but they did him no great wrong in taking lightly from him, which they lightly gaue him. Lysimachus had raigned about fiue yeares alone, when the Citie of Lysimachia (built by him, and called after his name) falling by an earthquake, appeared, by euents, to haue foreshewed the fall of his house. His owne iealousie, and the instigation of a mother in law, caused him to poison his Sonne Agathocles, which drew vpon him that warre, wherein (af∣ter the losse of all his fifteene children, that were taken away by diuers accidents) he perished himselfe. Seleucus was encountred by Lysimachus on Asia side, where one battaile conclu∣ded the warre, with Lysimachus his death. It pleased Seleucus more than the victorie, that he was the last of all the great Heröes which had followed Alexander. For now he seemed to himselfe, as Lord and Heire of all the conquered world. So he passed ouer into Macedon, to take possession of Europe, where there was none to withstand him. But there he ended his daies, and within seuen moneths followed Lysimachus, and other of his fellows, by a bloudie death: being treacherously slaine by Ptolomie Ceraunus, whose friend and Patron he had beene. Seuentie and seuen yeare old he was, when hee fought with Lysimachus, and Lysimachus was seuentie and foure. With them ended the generation of old Captaines, that had seene the daies, as it were of another world vnder the Persian: yet was there left one equall to any of them, in the of warre: euen Pyrrhus the Epirot, of whom we spake before; that is now readie to enter into warre with the Romans, a more warlike people, than Alexander him selfe euer did encounter. Of which warre, and of which people, it is needfull that we here make mention, as of a storie more important, than any like∣ly to ensue in Greece, or in the great Kingdomes, that were held by Alexanders Suc∣cessors, with lesse (and still decreasing) vertue, than was that, by which they were first purchased. CHAP. VII. The growth of Rome: and setling of the Easterne Kingdomes. §. I. How the Romans enlarged their Dominion in Italie, from the death of TVLLVS HOSTILIVS, vnto such time as they were by PYRRHVS. HOw Rome was founded by Romulus; setled in good order by Numa Pompilius; and by many, though small, victories, it gathered strength; vnto such time as it became the head of Latium, by the conquest of Alba, in the raigne of Tullus Hostilius: it hath beene al∣readie noted, in due order of time. But where as now the Roman greatnesse, beginneth to encounter the power of Greece; and extending it selfe out of , to ouer whelme the Dominions of other States and Princes: I hold it conuenient (as in like cases I haue done) briefly to set downe the growth of this migh∣tie Citie, in a compendious relation, of those many actions, which could not haue been deliuered in the ages, wherein they were seuerally performed, without much interruption of the Historie, that was then occupied in matter more important. After the death of Tullus (who when hee had raigned two and thirtie yeares, was burnt together with his house by lightning) Ancus , Grand∣child to Pompilius by his daughter, and not much vnlike him in disposition, succeeded in the Kingdome of Rome. He walled the Citie about; enlarged it with the hill Auentine, which hee enclosed; built a bridge ouer Tybris, and the Citie of vpon the Sea, sixteene miles distant from Rome. Finally, hauing raigned foure and twentie yeares, he died, and by his last Will he left his children in charge with one , the sonne of Damaratus a Corinthian, who auoiding Cypselus King of Corinth his tyranny, had fled into Hetruria, and dwelt in Tarquinij, by the name of which Towne hee was afterwards called . From that Citie in Hetruria comming to Rome, and encouraged by some ominous occurents, together with his wife prophecie, hee grew a fauorite of Ancus Martius; by his Graecian wit humoring the factions of the Roman Court, in so much that after his , he be∣came not only Protector to the children, but Gouernour to the Citie. He doubled the number of Senators, and enlarged the Centuries of Horse-men: neither was he lesse eminent in warre, than in peace: for he preuailed often against the Tuscans, and from his victories, the chiefest ornaments of triumph tooke their originall. When this Lucius Tarquinius had raigned eight and thirtie yeares, he was slaine by the sonnes of Ancus Martius, to whom he had been left Guardian. But Tauaquil his wife, perceiuing what was done, enformed the people, from out of an high Turret, that her Husband was wounded, and sicke, but not dangerously. And withall sig∣nified vnto them, that in the interim of his sicknes, one Seruius Tullius, whom from his birth she alwaies prophecied to be borne to great hopes, (the sonne of P. Corni∣culanus and Ocrisia, a well descended, but captiue woman) brought vp in her house, and husband vnto her daughter, should supplie her husbands place, in gouerning the State, vntill his recouerie: which gouernment, being thus at first obtained by cunning, he afterwards vsurped as his right. He first ordained Ratements, Subsi∣dies, and valuations of the peoples wealth; among whom, at that time, fourescore thousand were mustered, of which number consisted their whole corporation; and by distinction of Dignities, Ages, Trades, and Offices, he managed the King∣dome in as good sort, as if it had beene a priuate household, At length, hauing two daughters of different natures, the one milde and gentle, the other fierce and outra∣gious: and finding also that the two sonnes of Tarquinius Priscus, Sextus and Aruus, which had been committed to his tuition, were of different dispositions, propro∣tionably answering to his daughters; he (willing to adde water, not oile, to fire) gaue the milde daughter to Sextus the hot-headed sonne; and the violent, to Aruus, the gentle, in mariage. But whether by intēded courses, or by accident, it ; the two milde ones being made away, the furious natures were readily ioyned in marriage: who soone concurring, and calling the Senate together, beganne to lay claime to the Kingdome. Vpon this tumult, Seruius Tullius hasting to the Senate, (where he thought by authoritie to haue bridled insolencie) was throwne downe the staires, and going home sore bruised, was slain by the way, when he had raigned fortie and foure yeare. Then Tullia his daughter, first proclaiming her husband Tarquinius Superbus King; returning home, enforced her Coach-man to driue his Chariot ouer her fathers corpes; whereupon the street had the denomination of wicked street. This Tarquine, exercising crueltie without justice, and tyrannie with∣out mercie, vpon the people and Senators; hauing tired himselfe and them at home, vsed the same rage of treacherie vpon his borders. He tooke Ocriculum, Suessa Po∣metia, and the Gabij. The issue of besieging Ardea, a towne eighteene miles distant from Rome, was of bad successe. In the heate of which warre, his sonne Sextus Tar∣quinius violently rauished that chaste Ladie Lucretia, his kinsman Collatines wife: who in way of expiation for so a deed, thought good to wash out those spots of infamie with her owne bloud; so (hauing first bequeathed the reuenge vnto her father Sp. Tricipitinus, her husband Collatine, and Iunius Brutus ) she killed her selfe: whereupon (chiefly by Iunius Brutus his resolution) Tarqui∣nius Superbus, with his wife and children, was deposed and banished; and fled to Porsenna King of Hetruria for succour, in the fiue and twentieth yeare of his raigne, and the two hundred fortie and fourth from the building of their Citie: in which space Rome had scarce gotten full possession of miles round a∣bout her. Brutus by the helpe of Collatine, hauing expelled Tarquine, and freed his Countrey from that heauie yoake of bondage, inforced the people by solemne oath, neuer to admit any gouernment by Kings amongst them: whereupon they ransacked their Kings goods, consecrated their fields to Mars, and conferred the gouernment of the State vpon Brutus and Collatine. But because the name of King was odious in their eares, they changed the manner of their gouernment, from per∣petuall to annuall, and from a single gouernour to a double; lest perpetuall or sole dominion might be some motiue to vsurpation; and in stead of Kings they called them Consuls, signifying, as it may be interpreted, Prouiders: that their titles might remember them of their place, which was to be alwaies mindefull of their Citizens welfare. And yet was it so hard setling of troubled waters, that the people, after this innouation of State, scarce daring to assure themselues of their owne securitie, enforced Tarquinius Collatine to resigne authoritie, fearing that tyrannie would be , and supposing that the very name & affinity with the house of Tarquin, sauoured alreadie of their condition. In his roome was substituted Va∣lerius Publicola, who that he might (as his name reporteth) be gratious in the peo∣ples , gaue liberty, in matters of controuersie, to appeale from the to the people: and that he might as well in goods as in person, auoyde occasion of suspiti∣on, caused his owne house to be pulled downe, because it was built in a place de∣fensible, as if it had beene a Citadell. Neither was Brutus any wayes deficient in matter of greater moment; which concerned as well the peoples safetie, as their : for hauing got intelligence, that some greener wits, and in the first ranke his owne sonnes, were itching after innouations, hoping to restore the banished Kings; he caused them, publikely in the Market-place, to be whipt, and then to be brought all vnpartially to the blocke. Hitherto the Romanes, hauing by the vnblemished integritie of Brutus, well ap∣peased all inbred quarrels at home, now hereafter imploy their designe∣ments, against Forrainers; first, for their libertie; secondly, for inlarging of their possessions; and lastly, for defending their confederate Prouinces, and extending their Empire. For Rome, situated as it were in the mid-way betweene Latium and the Tuscans, hauing as yet but narrow bounds, being in her minoritie, could not but giue occasion of offence to her neighbours; vntill by maine opposition, hauing pre∣uailed against her borderers, shee vsed them as instruments, whereby to obtaine the rest. Their first warre, in the first yeare of Consuls, was against Porsenna King of He∣truria: who being ouer-perswaded by Tarquines lamentation, came to Rome, toge∣ther with the banished King, and with great forces, to him againe in his Kingdome. In the first conflict, Horatius Cocles, hauing long time borne the maine brunt of his enemies, on the bridge ouer Tibris; at length, feeling himselfe too faint to stand a∣gainst so many, caused the bridge behinde him to be broken downe, and with his armour, leaping into the Riuer, like a hunted Stagge, refreshed his hote spirits, and returned safe to his fellowes, with the like resolution to sustaine a new charge. Por∣senna, although by this he had well-nigh won the hill Ianiculus, which is the verie entrance vnto the Citie, and found the victorie, in a manner, assuredly his own: yet admiring their valour, and terrified by the constant resolution of Mutius (who hauing by errour slaine Porsenna his Secretarie, instead of the King himselfe, did in scorne of torments threatned, burne off his owne hand) hee thought it not any prejudiciall, either to his , or credite, to enter league with them at the worst hand. And yet the edge of Tarquinius his spleene, was not quite abated, though Aruns his , and Brutus his enemie, in single combat, had slaine each o∣ther. And here the Romans, although they lost Brutus, got the field; and their La∣dies, whose Champion hee was, for chastitie, not for beautie, mourned the losse of him one whole yeare. Into his place, for the residue of his yeare, was sub∣rogated Sp. Lucretius , father to Lucretia: and in his roome ( naturally before the yeare expired) Horatius Puluillus. Tarquine, vpon his ouerthrow, feeling the fates disastrous, thought it no boot to striue against the streame, and spent the residue of his time; which was about four∣teene yeares, priuately at Tusculum. Yet his sonne-in-law Mamilius Tusculanus, sto∣maching afresh at those old repulses, because Porsenna had made peace with the Ro∣mans, and denied further succour vnto the Tarquines, mustered vp his Latines, and gaue battaile to the Romans, at the Lake ; where the conflict was fierce, and the issue vncertaine, vntill Aulus , the Roman Dictator, (for they had created this Magistracy greater than Consulls, purposely for this Warre, when first it was expected) to his Souldiers courage, threw their owne Ensignes a∣midst the Enemies; and Cossus or Spurius Cassius (master of the Horse men, an assi∣stant Officer to the Dictator ) commanded to take off their bridles, that they might runne with free violence, to recouer againe their Ensignes. This fight was so well performed, that a report went current of Castor and Pollux, two Gods, who came on -white Steeds, to be eye-witnesses of their valour, and fellow helpers of their victorie; for the Generall consecrated a Temple to them, as a stipend for their paines. After this the Romans fierce spirits, hauing no object of valour abroad, re∣flected vpon themselues at home; and the sixteenth yere after the Kings expulsion, vpon instigation of some desperate banckrouts, thinking themselues wrongfully oppressed by the Senate and Consulls, they made an vproare in the holy Mount; vntill by Meuenius Agrippa, his discreet allusion, of the inconuenience in the head and bellies discord, to that present occasion, they were reconciled to the Senate: with condition, that they might haue some new Magistrates created, to whome they might appeale in cases of variance, and make them Solicitors in their contro∣uersies, the Consuls authori ie notwithstanding. This was enacted; and they were called the Tribunes of the people. After this attonement amongst themselues, they had continuall Warre with the Latines, concerning their bounds and limits, and with other neighbouring States. Amongst these, the Volsci and Aequi held them longest; who made warre, of themselues, vpon the Romans: whereby they lost the best Citie in their whole jurisdiction, Corioli. In this conquest, T. Martius got the sirname of Coriolanus: a name honorable then, as deriued from a great victorie: although, by reason of the pouertie of the Towne, a Roman Generall, in after times, would haue beene ashamed of that title. But yet these graces had beene no occasion of disparagement, had hee not afterwards, in a great time of dearth, aduised to sell corne, which they procured from Sicil, at too high a rate, to the people: whereupon, Decius Mus, their Tribune, in their behalfe, accused him, and after judgement, banished him. Coriolanus flying to the Volsci, whom lately beforehe had vanquished, incensed them to renue their forces againe; which being committed vnto him, and to Attius Tullus, he preuailed in field, so farre forth, that he was come within foure or fiue miles of the Citie. Incamping there hee made so sharpe warre, and was at such defiance, with his Countrie, that hee would not relent by any supplications of Embassadours, vntill his Mother Veturia, and Volumnia his wife, with a pittifull tune of deprecation, shewing themselues bet∣ter Subjects to their Countrie, than friends to their sonne and husband, were more auaileable to Rome, then was any force of armes. Hereupon Coriolanus dismissing his Armie, was after put to death among the Volsci, as a Traitor, for neglecting such opportunitie: or (as others surmise) liuing with them vntill old age, hee died natu∣rally. Not long after this, the Veij in Hetruria, prouoked the Romans; against whom the Fabij, three hundred and sixe in number, all of one Familie, intreated and obtained, that they only might be imploied, as it had been in a priuate quarrell. These Fabij, after some good seruices, lying incamped at Cremera, were circumuented and all slaine: one only of that whole house, had beene left, by reason of insancie, at home; from whom afterward sprang Fabius Maximus, who vanquished Hannibal. In processe of time, the Romans were also troubled with the Volsci, at the hill Al∣gidum, two miles from Rome; where Lucius their Consull, with his whole Armie, had beene discomfited, had not L. Quintius chosen Dictator, and taken from the plough to the highest honour in Rome, with successe answerable to his expedition, dispersed his enemies, and freed his Countrie in the space of sixteen dayes. In the continuance of this Volscian warre it was, that Appius Claudius, one of the ten men, whom they had two yeares before chosen Gouernours of the State, and inactors of Solons lawes amongst them, procured from Athens (abrogating in the meane while the Consuls, all other Magistrates) would haue Vir∣ginia, the daughter of T. Virginius, Captain of a Companie, and lying then in campe at . Hereupon the people, in an vproare, tooke the Hill , and after much variance, enforced the ten men, to resigne vp their authoritie againe, to new Consuls. After this, either new quarrels, or desire to reuenge old losses, drew the Romans into a new , against the , and their adherents, vpon whom hauing tried their forces, with of Captains, and varietie of euent, they vanquished the , and the Fidenates, and subdued the Veientes. In conquering the Fa∣lisci, shewed no lesse then fortitude. For when a Schoole∣master, by trayning forth into the Roman campe, many children of the principall Citizens, thought to betray the Towne, yeelding them all vp as Hostages: Camil∣lus deliuered this Traitor bound vnto his Schollers, willing them to whip him back into the Citie; which forthwith yeelded vnto him in of his justice. The siege of Veij was tenne yeares, and so troublesome that the Romans were there first enforced to winter abroad vnder beasts skinnes (to which they were the more ea∣sily induced, because then first they receiued pay) and to make vowes neuer to re∣turne without victorie. At length winning the Citie by a Mine, they got so large spoiles, that they con∣secrated their tenths to Apollo Pythius: and the whole people in generall, were cal∣led to the ransacking of the Citie. But yet they were no lesse vnthankefull to Ca∣millus for his seruice, then before they had beene to ; For they banished him the Citie, vpon some occasion of inequalitie in diuiding the spoiles: yet he re∣quited their vnkindnesse with a new peece of seruice, against the furie of the : who being a populous Countrie, and verie healthfull, the fathers (as sometimes now) liued so long, that the sonnes, destitute of meanes, were enforced to roaue a∣broad, seeking some place, where to set vp their rest: and withall being a Nation vast in body, rude by nature, and barbarous in conditions, wandred as Rouersouer many Countries. Some of them lighting on Italie, set vpon Clusium, a Towne in Hetruria; whereof Rome hauing information (and being carefull of her Confede∣rate Townes) sent Embassadours, warning them to desist from such iniurious en∣terprises. But the barbarous people, not regarding the message, vpon some injurie offered by the Roman Embassadours, conuerted their forces from Clusium towards Rome; and giuing a great ouerthrow to the Romans, by the Riuer Allia, vpon the sixteenth day before the Calends of August (which day was after branded for vn∣luckie, and called Alliensis in the Roman Kalendar ) they hastened towards the Citie. Then was Rome the true map of miserie and desolation. For some leauing the citie; some creeping into holes; Priests hiding their reliques; and euery one shifting for himselfe, ere the enemie came; Rome was abandoned, as indefensible. The Vestall Virgins, in this tumult, were safely conuaied away; the Ancients of the Citie, ga∣thering out of desperate feare, did put on their Robes, and taking their leaue the world, did seate themselues in Thrones, in their seuerall houses, houre∣ly expecting the messengers of death, and meaning to die, as they had liued, in State. The younger sort, with M. Manlius their Captaine, tooke vpon them to make good the Capitoll. By this, the Gaules were entred the Citie, who seeing all quiet, at first suspected some ambush; afterward finding all secure, they fell to the spoile, committing all to the fire and sword. As for the old Senators, that sate in their Majestie, with a graue resolution: hauing first reuerenced them as Gods, anon they tryed whether they would die like men. When the Citie was throughly rifled, they attempted the Capitoll: which held them worke for the space of seuen Moneths. Once they were like to haue surprised it by night, but being descried by the gagling of Geese, M. Manltus did awaken, and kept them from entrance. At length a composition was agreed vpon: the Gaules being wearie, and the Romans hungrie. The bargaine was, that the Gaules should take a thousand pound waight in gold, to desist from their siege. Whilest the gold was in waighing, the Gaules, with open insolencie, made their waights too heauie: Brennus, their Captaine, casting his sword into the ballance, and, with a proud exprobration, saying, that the vanquished must bee pa∣tient . But in the midst of this cauilling, came Furius Camillus, with an Ar∣mie, from Ardea, (where he had liued in his banishment) and fell vpon the Gaules, with violence, that hee dispersed their troups, quenched the fire of the Citie bloud, them to restore the spoiles with aduantage, and forbeare the gold, in accepting which, they had lately beene so nice. Further, hauing rid the Citie of them, he so hotly pursued them, through a great part of Italie, that the re∣mainder of their Armie, which escaped from him, was very small. Other Armies of the Gaules, which followed this first, had the like ill successe. They were often beaten by the Romans; especially the victories of M. Torquatus, and of M. Valerius (each of which in single fight, slew a Champion of the Gaules ) abated their presumption, and restored courage to the Romans, Camillus, for his notable seruice, was afterwards accompted a second Romulus: The people, after this destruction of their Citie, were earnestly bent to goe to the Veij to inhabite; but Camillus disswaded them. About the same time, somewhat before the siege of Veij, they changed their go∣uernment from to militarie Tribunes. The gouernment of these also, after some yeares, was by dissension interrupted: so that one while Consulls ruled: another while there was an Anarchie: Then the Tribunes were restored and againe, till after many yeares expired, the Consular authoritie was esta∣blished; it being enacted, that one of the Consulls should al waies bee a Plebeian. This was after the building of the Citie, three hundred sixtie fiue yeares. And now Rome by suppression of her neighbour Countries, crceping well forward out of her Minoritie, dares set forth against the warlike Samnites, who dwelt almost one hun∣dred and thirtie miles off: situated betweene Campania and Apulia. These did so strongly inuade the Campanians their Neighbours, that they forced them to yeeld themselues subiects to Rome, and vndergoe any conditions of Tribute, or what∣soeuer else to obtaine protection: which the Romans, although both Countries had beene their Confederates, yet not willing that the greater, like fish, should deuour the lesse, easily allowed off; aiming themselues at the good situation of Campania, the aboundance of Corne and Wine, pleasant Cities and , but especially Capua it selfe, the fairest Citie then in all Italie. The Families the Papyrij and Fabij were most imployed in the managing of this warre, which indured the space of fiftie yeares. And in this season were the Romans oftentimes dangerously encountred by the Samnites, as when T. Veturius, and Sp. Posthumius were Consulls, and discomfited by Pontius at Caudium, with no small ignominie: and when Q. Fabius Gurges lost the field with three thousand men. But for these losses, many great victories made large amends: The greatest where∣of were gotten by L. Papyrius, and by Quintus Fabius Maximus. The Samnites drew the Hetrurians into their quarrell. But the force of the Sam∣nites was well broken, ere the Hetrurians (the greater and richer, but lesse warlike Nation) beganne to stirre. So the one and the other of these two Countries, be∣came at length, tributarie to Rome. In the continuance of this long warre it was, (though in time of truce betweene the Romans and Samnites ) that the Latines beganne to challenge equal freedome in the Corporation of Rome, and right in bearing Office, so that they required to haue one of the Consuls yearely chosen out of them. This demand, of the Latines, was not vnreasonable. For the Romans themselues were a Latine Colonie; besides all which, they made offer, to change their name, and to be all called Romans. But the Romans were too proud, to admit any such capi∣tulation. So a great battaile was fought betweene them: wherein the fortune of Rome preuailed, by the vertue of the Consulls. Manlius Torquatus, and the elder Decius, were then Consulls, whom the Sooth∣sayers aduertised, that the side should be victorious, which lost the General in fight. Hereupon, Decius the Consull, exposed his life to the Enemie, and purchased victo∣rie (as was beleeued) by his death. In which kind of deuoting himselfe for his Ar∣mie, the sonne of this Decius, being after Consull, did his father, in the He∣trurian warre. But (as Tullie well notes) it was rather the desperate resolution of these Decij, that purchased victorie, by rushing into the midst of the enemies, wher∣in their Souldiers followed them, than any great commendation of such a religion, as required the of so worthie Citizens, to be sacrificed for their Countrie. The discipline of Manlius was no lesse resolute, than the valour of Decius. He forbad any one to forsake his place, and fight single with an enemie. For breach of which or∣der, he caused his owne sonne to be put to death, who had slaine a Captaine of the Latines, being challenged in single fight. When the Latines, the Aequi, Volsci, Hernici, Campani, Samnites, and , with some other people, were brought vnder obedience; it was a vaine labour for any people of Italie, to contend against the Romans. Yet the Sabines aduentured to trie their fortune; and found it bad. For Curius Dentatus, the Consull, wasting all their Countrie with fire and sword, from the Riuer Nar and Velia, to the Adriatique Sea, brought them into quiet subjection. The last of the Italians, that made triall of the Roman Armes, were the Tarentines, and their adherents. These had interposed themselues as Mediatours, betweene the Romans and Samnites; with a peremptorie denunciation of warre, vnto that partie, which should dare to refuse the peace by them tendred. These threats, which discouered their bad affection to Rome, ended in words; but when the Sam∣nites were vtterly subdued, matter enough of quarrell was found, to examine their abilitie of performance. The Romans complained, that certaine ships of theirs were robbed; and sent Em∣bassadours vnto Tarentum, to require amends. Vpon some wrong done to these Embassadours, was laid the foundation of that Warre; wherein the Lucans, Messa∣pians, Brutians, and Appulians, joyning with the Tarentines, procured the Samnites, and other Subjects of Rome, to rebell, and take their part. But some experience of the Roman strength, taught all these people to know their owne weaknesse. Where∣fore they agreed to send for Pyrrhus, by whose aide (being a Grecian, as the Taren∣tines also were) great hope was conceiued, that the Dominion of Rome should bee confined, vnto more narrow bounds, than all Italie, which alreadie, in a manner it did ouer-spread. §. II. How PYRRHVS warred vpon the Romans, and vanquished them in two battailes. PYRRHVS, forsaken by the Macedonians, and vnable to deale with Ly∣simachus, was compelled a while to in rest: which he abhorred no lesse than a wifer Prince would haue desired. He had a strong Armie, and a good Fleet, which in that vnsetled estate of things, was enough to purchase a Kingdome: but the fall of Demetrius had so encreased the power of Lysimachus, that it was no point of wisedome, to make an offensiue warre vpon him, without farre greater forces. Antigonus, the sonne of Demetrius, held Corinth, at the same time, and some other Townes, with the remainder of his fathers Armie and treasures, left in his hand. Vpon him it is like that Pyrrhus might haue wonne; but it was better to let him alone, that hee might serue to giue some hinderance to Lysimachus. In this want of imploiment, and couetous desire of finding it, the Tarentine Em∣bassadours came very fitly to Pyrrhus: and they came with braue offers, as needing none other aide then his good conduct, which to obtaine, they would cast them∣selues vnder his protection. They had in their companie, some of the Samnites, Lucanians, Messapians, and others; which promised, in behalfe of their seuerall Na∣tions, as much as could be desired. This encouraged Pyrrhus, and filled him with hopes of goodly conquests; that he might enlarge his Empire to the West, as farre as Alexander had gotten Eastward; and still by one victorie open the gate vnto an∣other. To which effect it is said, that once he answered Cyneas his chiefe Counsai∣lour, asking what he meant to doe after euery of the victories which hee hoped to get: that, hauing wonne Rome, he would soone be Master of all Italie; that, after Italie he would quickly get the Isle of Sicil; that, out of Sicil hee would passe ouer into Africk, and winne Carthage, with all the rest of the Countrie, & being strength∣ned with the force of all these Prouinces, hee would be too hard, for any of those, that were now so proud and troublesome. But Cyneas enquired yet further, what they should doe, when they were Lords of all: Whereunto Pyrrhus (finding his drift) answered pleasantly, that they would liue merrily; a thing (as Cyneas then told him) that they presently might doe, without any trouble, if he could be con∣tented with his owne. Neuerthelesse, this Italian expedition seemed vnto Pyrrhus, a matter of such con∣sequence, as was not to bee omitted, in regard of any scholasticall . Wherefore he prepared his Armie; of almost thirtie thousand men, well sorted, and well trained Souldiers: part of which he sent ouer before him vnder Cyneas, with the rest he followed in person. At his cōming, he found the very prompt of tongue, but in matter of execution, vtterly carelesse to prouide for the Warre. Wherefore he was faine to shut vp their Theater, and other places of pleasure and resort; enforcing them to take Armes, and making such a strickt muster, as was to them very vnpleasing, though greatly behoouing to their estate. Whilest he was occupied with these cares, the Roman Consul drew near, and beganne to wast Lucania, a Prouince confederate with the Tarentines in this Warre. The Lucanians were not readie to defend their owne Countrie; the were carelesse of the harme, that fell not (as yet) vpon themselues; the Tarentines were prepared than they would haue beene, but their valour was little: all of these had beene accustomed to shrinke, for feare of the Roman : and therefore it fell out happily, that Pyrrhus relied more vpon his owne forces, than the issue of their vaunting promises. Hee was now driuen, either to set forward, with those that himselfe had brought into Italy, and the assistance of the Tarentines, wherein little was to be reposed; or else to weaken the reputation of his owne suf∣ficiencie, which by all meanes he was carefull to vp-hold. In good time a great part of his forces, that had beene scattered by foule weather at Sea, were safely come to him: with which he resolued to assay the valour of the Romans, against whom hee proudly marched. Laeuinus the Consull was not affrighted, with the terrible name of a great King; but came on confidently to meet him, and giue him battaile, ere all his adherents should be ready to ioyne with him. This boldnesse of the Roman, and the slack∣nesse of the Messapians, Lucanians, Saemnites, and others, whom the danger most concerned, caused Pyrrhus to offer a treatie of peace: requiring to haue the quarrel, betweene the Romans and his friends, referred to his arbitrement. Whether he did this to winne time, that the Samnites and their fellowes might arriue at his Campe; or whether, considering better at neare distance, the weight of the busi∣nesse, which he had taken in hand, he were desirous to quit it with his honour; the short answere, that was returned to his , gaue him no meanes of either the one or the other: for the Romans sent him this word, that they had neither chosen him their Iudge, nor feared him their enemie. Hereupon, both Armies hastened their march vnto the Riuer of Siris: intending to fight, before the arriuall of the Samnites; Pyrrhus, to hinder him from passing that Riuer, vntill his owne Armie were full. Vpon the first view of the Ro∣man Campe, it was readily conceiued by Pyrrhus, that he had not now to with barbarous people, but with men well trained in a braue discipline of warre: which caused him to set a strong Corps de garde, vpon the passage of the riuer, that he might not be compelled to fight, vntill he saw his best aduantage. But he quickly found, that this new enemie was not only skilfull in the Art of war, but couragious in ex∣ecution. For the Roman Armie entred the Foord, in face of his Corps de garde; and their horse, at the same time, beganne to passe the Riuer, in sundrie places: which caused the Greekes to forlake the defence of their banke, and speedily retire vnto their Campe. This audacitie forced Pyrrhus to battaile; wherewith he thought it best to pre∣sent them, ere their whole Armie had recouered firme footing, and were in order. So his Captaines how to marshall his battailes; him selfe with the horse, charged vpon the Romans: who stoutly receiued him, as men well exercised in su∣staining furious impressions. In this fight, neither did his courage him beyond the dutie of a carefull Generall; his prouidence in directing others, the manifestation of his personall valour. It behooued indeede to doe his best; for he neuer met with better opposers. Once, and shortly after the fight be∣gan, his horse was slaine vnder him: afterwards, he changed armour with a ; but that friend paid his life for the vse of his Kings armour, which was torne from his backe. This accident had almost lost him the battaile: but he perceiuing it, dis∣couered his face, and thereby restored courage to his men, and tooke from the Ro∣mans their vaine ioy. The fight was obstinate, and with the greater losse (at least of more eminent men) on Pyrrhus his side, as long as only speare and sword were vsed. But when the Elephants were brought into the wings, whose vnvsuall for me and terrible aspect, the horses of the Romans (vnaccustomed to the like) were not able to sustaine; then was the victorie quickly gotten. For the Roman battailes, perceiuing their horse put to rout, and driuen out of the field; finding also them∣selues both charged in flanke, and ouer-borne, by the force, and huge bulke, of these strange beasts; gaue way to necessitie, and saued themselues, as well as they could, by hastie flight: in which consternation, they were so forgetfull of their dis∣cipline, that they tarried not to defend their Campe, but ranne quite beyond it, leauing both it, and the honour of the day, entirely to Pyrrhus. The fame of this victorie was soone spread ouer Italie; and the reputation was no lesse than the fame. For it was a matter very rare to bee heard, that a Roman Consull, with a select Armie, should loose in plaine battaile, not only the field, but the Campe it selfe, being so notably fortified, as they alwaies were. And this ho∣nour was the more brauely wonne by Pyrrhus, for that hee had with him none of his Italian friends, saue the vnwarlike . Neither could he well dissemble his content that he tooke, in hauing the glory of this action peculiarly his owne, at such time as he blamed the Lucans and Samnites, for comming (as we say) a day af∣ter the faire. Neuerthelesse, he wisely considered the strength of the Romans, which was such, as would better endure many such losses, than he could many such victo∣ries. Therefore he thought it good to compound with them, whilest with his ho∣nour he might; and to that purpose hee sent vnto them Cyneas his Embassadour; demaunding only to haue the Tarentines permitted to liue at rest, and himselfe ac∣cepted as their especiall friend. This did Cyneas, with all his cunning, and with li∣berall gifts, labour to effect: but neither man nor woman could be found in Rome, that would take any bribe of him; neither did their desire of recouering their cap∣tiues, or their danger, by the rising of many States in Italie against them, so incline them to peace, as the vehement exhortation of Appius Claudius, an old and blinde Senator, did stirre them vp to make good their honour by warre. So they returned answere, that whilest Pyrrhus abode in Italie, they would come to no agreement with him. Such was the report, that Cyneas made, at his returne, of the Roman puissance and vertue; as kindled in Pyrrhus, a great desire of confederacie, with that gallant Citie. Hereupon many kinde Offices passed betweene them: but still when hee vrged his motion of peace, the answere was, He must first depart out of Italie, and then treat of peace. In the meane season, each part made prouision for warre; the Romans leauing a more mightie armie than the former; and Pyrrhus being strengthned with accesse vnto his forces, of all the East parts of . So they came to triall of a second battaile, wherein (though after long and cruell fight) the boisterous violence of the Elephants, gaue to Pyrrhus a second victorie. But this was not altogether so joy∣full as the former had beene: rather it gaue him cause to say, that such another vi∣ctorie would be his vtter vndoing. For he had lost the flower of his Armie in this battaile: and though he draue the Romans into their Campe, yet he could not force them out of it, nor saw any likelihood of preuailing against them, that were like to be relieued with daily supplies, whilest he should be driuen to spend vpon his old stock. Neither could hee expect, that his Elephants should alwaies stand him in stead. A little knowledge of their manner in fight, would soone teach the Romans, that were apt Scholers in such learning, how to make them vnseruiccable. Where∣fore hee desired nothing more, than how to carrie his honour safe out of Italie: which to doe (seeing the Romans would not helpe him, by offering or accepting a∣nie faire conditions of peace, or of truce) he tooke a slight occasion, presented by fortune, that followeth to be related. §. III. The great troubles in Macedon and Sicill. How PYRRHVS, being inuited into Sicill, for sooke Italie; wanne the most of the Isle; and lost it in short space. PYRRHVS returnes into Italy; where he is beaten by the Romans, and so goes backe to his owne Kingdome. WHen Ptolomie Ceraunus had traiterously murdered his Benefactor and Patron Seleucus, he presently seized vpon all the Dominions of in Europe, as if they had beene the due reward, vnto him, that had slaine the Conquerour. The houses of Cassander and Lysimachus were then fallen to the ground: neither was there in Macedon any man of strength and reputation enough, to aduance himselfe against Ceraunus. The friends of Lysimachus were rather pleased to haue him their King, that had (as hee professed) reuenged their Lords death; than any way offended with the odiousnes of his fact, by which they were freed from subiection, to one, against whom they had stood in opposition. Many there were, that vpon remembrance of his Fathers great vertue, gathered hope of finding the like in Ceraunus: perswading themsclues that his raigne might proue good, though his entrance had beene wicked. These affections of the Macedonians did serue to defeate Antigonus the sonne of Demetrius, that made an attempt vpon the Kingdome. As for Antigonus, the sonne of Selencus, he was farre off, and might be questioned about some part of Asia, ere he should be able to bring an Armie neare vnto Europe. Yet hee made great shew of meaning to reuenge his fathers death: but being stronger in monie then in armes, he was con∣tent, after a while, to take faire words, and make peace with the murtherer. While these three stroue about the Kingdome, Pyrrhus, who thought his claime as good as any of theirs, made vse of their dissention: threatning warre, or promising his as∣sistance, to euery one of them. By these meanes he strengthned himselfe, and great∣ly aduantaged his Italian voiage, which he had then in hand: requesting monie of Antiochus, ships of Antigonus, and souldiers of Ptolomie, who gaue him his daugh∣ter in marriage, and lent him a strong power of Macedonian Souldiers, and of Ele∣phants (couenanting to haue them restored at two yeeres end) more for feare than for loue: that so he might free himselfe from trouble, & quietly enjoy his Kingdom. Thus Ptolomie grew mightie on the suddaine; and the power that by wic∣ked meanes he had gotten, by meanes as wicked he increased. All Macedon and Thrace being his, the strong Citie of Cassandria was held by Ar∣sinoe his sister, the widow of Lysimachus, who lay therin with her yong children. Her hee circumuented by making loue to her, and (according to the fashion of those times, wherein Princes regarded no degree of consanguinitie) taking her to wife, with promise to adopt her children: a promise that he meant not to performe; for it was not long, ere he slew them, and draue her into exile. In the pride of this good successe, which his villanie found; vengeance came vpon him from a farre, by the furie of a Nation, that hee had neuer heard of. Belgius a Captaine of the Gaules, hauing forced his passage through many Countries, vnto the confines of Macedon, sent a proud message to Ceraunus, commanding him to buy peace with monie, or otherwise, to looke for all the miseries of warre. These Gaules were the race of those, that issued out of their Countrie, to seeke new seates in that great expedition, where in Brennus tooke and burnt the Citie of Rome. They had di∣uided themselues, at their setting forth, into two Companies; of which the one fell vpon Italie; the other passing through the Countries that lie on the Northerne side of the Adriatick Sea, made long aboade in Pannonia, and the Regions adjoyning, where they forced all the neighbour Princes to redeeme peace with tribute, as now they would haue compelled Ceraunus to doe; vnto whose borders they came about an hundred and eight yeares after such time as their fellowes had taken Rome. When their Embassadors came to Ptolomie, asking what he would giue: His answere was, that he would be contented to giue them peace, but it must bee with condition, that they should put into their hands their Princes as hostages, and yeeld vp their armes; for otherwise, he would neither pardon their boldnesse, nor giue any credit to their words. At this answere, when it was returned, the Gaules did laugh, saying, that they would soone confute with decdes, the vanitie of such proud words. It may seeme strange, that he, who had giuen away part of his Armie vnto Pyrrhus, for very feare; should bee so confident in vndertaking more mightie ene∣mies. The King of the Dardanians offred to lend him twenty thousand men against the Gaules; but hee scorned the offer; saying, that hee had the children of those, which vnder the conduct of Alexander, had subdued all the East. Thus hee issued forth against the barbarous people, with his famous Macedonians, as if the victorie must needs haue followed the reputation of a great name. But he sonne found his great errour, when it was too late. For the enemies were not only equal in strength of body, and fiercenesse of courage, but so farre superiour to the Macedonians in numbers, that few or none escaped their furie. Ptolomie himselfe grieuously woun∣ded, fell into their hands, whilest the battell continued; and they presently strooke off his head, which they shewed to his men, on the top of a Lance, to their vtter astonishment. The report of this great ouerthrow filled al Macedon with such desperation, that the people fled into walled Townes, and abandoned the whole Countrie as lost. Only Sosthenes, a valiant Captaine, animating as many as he could, gathered a small Armie, with which he many times got the vpper hand, and hindred Belgius from vsing the victorie at his whole pleasure. In regard of this his vertue, the Souldiers would haue made him King; which title he refused, & was content with the name of a Generall. But (as mischiefs doe seldome come alone) the good successe of Bel∣gius, drew into , Brennus, another Captaine of the Gaules, with an hundred and fiftie thousand foot, and fifteene thousand horse; against which mightie Ar∣mie, when Sosthenes with his weake troups made opposition, he was easily beaten, and the Macedonians againe compelled to hide themselues within their walls, lea∣uing all their Countrie to the spoile of the Barbarians. Thus were the Macedonians destitute of a King, and troden downe by a Nation, that they had not heard of; in lesse then fiftie yeares after the death of Alexander, who sought to discouer and subdue vnknowne Countries, as if all Greece, and the Empire of Persia had beene too little for a King of Macedon. Very seasonably had these newes beene carried to Pyrrhus in Italie, who sought a faire pretext of relinquishing his warre with the Romans; had not other tidings out of Sicil distracted him, and carried him away in pursute of nearer hopes. For after the death of Agathocles, who ragined ouer the whole Iland, the Carthaginians sent an Armic to conquer Sicil, out of which, by him, they had beene expelled. This Armie did so fast preuaile, that the Sicilians had no other hope to auoide slauerie, than in submitting themselues to the rule of Pyrrhus; whom, being a Grecian, and a noble Prince, they thought it more for their good to obey, then to liue vnder the well knowne heauie yoake of Carthage. To him therefore, the Syracusans, Leon∣tines, and Agragentines, principall Estates of the Isle, sent Embassadors, desiring him to take them into his protection. It grieued Pyrrhus exceedingly, that two such notable occasions, of enlarging his Dominions, should fall out so vnluckily, both at one time. Yet whether hee thought the businesse of Sicil more important, or more full of likelihood; or whe∣ther perhaps he beleeued (as came after to passe) that his aduantage vpon Macedon would not so hastily passe away, but that he might finde some occasion to lay hold on it, at better leisure, ouer into Sicil he transported his Armie, leauing the Taren∣tines to shift for themselues; yet not leauing them free as he found them, but with a Garrison in their Towne, to hold them in subiection. As his departure out of Italie, was rather grounded on head-long passion, than mature aduice; so were his actions following, vntill his returne vnto Epirus, rather many and tumultuous, then well ordered, or note-worthie. The Armie which he carried into that Isle, consisted of thirtie thousand foot and two thousand fiue hun∣dred horse: with which, soone after his descent in Sicill, he forc't the , out of all, in effect, that they held therein. He also wonne the strong Citie of Eryx, and hauing beaten the Mamertines in battaile, hee beganne to change condition, and turne Tyrant. For he draue Sostratus (to whom his crueltie was suspect) out of the Iland, and put Thenon of Syracuse to death, being jealous of his greatnesse; which two persons had faithfully serued him, and deliuered the great and rich Ci∣tie of Syracuse into his hands. After this, his fortunes declined so fast, as hee serued himselfe, and salued the dis-reputation of his leauing Sicill, by an Embassage sent him from the Tarentines, and Samnites, imploring his present helpe against the Romans, who since his leauing Italie, had well-neare dispossest them of all that they had. Taking this faire occasion, hee imbarked for Italie; but was first beaten by the Carthaginian Gallies, in his passage, and secondly assailed in Italie it selfe, by eigh∣teene hundred Mamertines, that attended him in the straits of the Countrie. Last∣ly, after he had recouered Tarentum, hee fought a third battaile with the Romans, led by M. Curius, who was victorious ouer him, and forc't him out of Italie, into his owne Epirus. A Prince he was farre more valiant then constant, and had hee been but a Gene∣rall of an Armie, for some other great King or State, and had been directed to haue conquered any one Country or Kingdome, it is to be thought, that he would haue purchased no lesse honour than any man of warre, either preceding or succeeding him; for a greater Captaine, or a valianter man, hath beene no where found. But he neuer staid vpon any enterprise; which was, indeede, the disease hee had, whereof not long after he died in Argos. §. IIII. How ANTIGONVS, the sonne of DEMETRIVS, deliuered Macedon from the Gaules. How PYRRHVS wonne the Kingdome of Macedon from ANTIGONVS. THe vertue of Sosthenes being too weake, to defend the Kingdome of Macedon; and the fortune which had accompanied him against Bel∣gius, failing him in his attempts against Brennus: the Macedonians were no lesse glad to submit themselues vnto the gouernmēt of Antigonus, than they had formerly beene desirous to free themselues from the impotent rule of his father Demetrius. His comming into the Countrie, with an Armie, Nauie, and treasure beseeming a King, did rather breed good hope in the people, than fill them with much confidence: for he was driuen to vse against the Barbarians, only those forces, which he brought with him, hauing none other than good wishes of the Macedons, to take his part. Brennus, with the maine strength of his Armie, was gone to spoile the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, hauing left no more behinde him, than he thought necessarie to guard the borders of Macedon, and Pan∣nonia; which were about fifteene thousand foot, and three thousand horse. These could not be idle, but thought to get somewhat for themselues, in the absence of their fellowes: and therefore sent vnto Antigonus, offering to sel him peace, if hee would pay well for it; which by the example of Ceraunus, hee had learnt (as they thought) not to refuse. Antigonus was vnwilling to weaken his reputation by con∣descending to their proud demāds: yet he judged it vnfit to exasperat their furious choler, by vncurteous words or vsage, as Ceraunus had ouer-fondly done. Wherfore he entertained their Embassadors in very louing and sumptuous maner, with a roi∣all feast: wherein he exposed to their view, such aboundance of massie gold and sil∣uer, that they were not so much delighted with the meat, as with sight of the ves∣sells, wherein it was serued. He thought hereby, to make them vnderstand, how great a Prince he was, and how able, if need required, to wage a mighty Armie. To which end, he likewise did shew vnto them, his Camp and Nauie, but espe∣cially his Elephants. But all this brauerie serued only to kindle their greedie appe∣tites; who seeing his ships heauy loaden, his Campe full of wealth, and ill fortified, himselfe (as it seemed) secure, and his men, both in strength and courage inferiour vnto the Gaules, thought all time lost, wherein they suffered the present possessors, to spend the riches which they accompted assuredly their owne. They returned therefore to their Companions, with none other newes in their mouthes, than of spoile and purchase: which tale, carried the Gaules head-long, to Antigonus his camp, where they expected a greater bootie, then the victorie ouer Ceraunus had giuen to Belgius. Their comming was terrible and suddaine; yet not so suddaine, but that Antigonus had notice of it, who distrusting the courage of his owne men, dislodged somewhat before their arriual, and conueighed himselfe, with his whole armie and carriage, into certaine woods adjoyning, where he lay close. The Gaules, finding his Camp forsaken, were not hastie to pursue him, but fell to ransacking the emptie Cabbines of the Souldiers; in hope of finding all that was either lost or hidden. At length, when they had searched euery place in vaine, an∣grie at their lost labour, they marched with all speed toward the Sea-side; that they might fall vpon him, whilest he was busie in getting his men and carriages a ship-board. But the successe was no way answerable to their expectation. For be∣ing proud of the terrour which they had brought vpon Antigonus, they were so carelesse of the Sea-men, that without all order, they fell to the spoile of what they found on the shore, and in such ships as lay on ground. Part of the Armie left Antigonus, where he lay in couert; and had saued it self by getting aboard the fleet: in which number were some well experienced men of warre: who discouering the much aduantage offred vnto them, by the desperate presumption of their enemies, tooke courage, and encouraged others, to lay manlie hold vpon the opportunitie. So the whole number, both of Souldiers and Mari∣ners, landing together, with great resolution, gaue so braue a charge vpon the dis∣ordered , that their contemptuous boldnesse was thereby changed into sud∣daine feare, and they, after a great slaughter, driuen to cast themselues into the ser∣uice of Antigonus. The fame of this victorie, caused all the barbarous Nations in those quarters, to re-entertaine their ancient beliefe of the Macedonian valour: by which, the terrible and resistlesse oppressors of so many Countries, were ouerthrowne. To speake more of the Gaules, in this place; and to shew how, about these times, three Tribes of them passed ouer into Asia the lesse, with their warres and con∣quests there; I hold it needlesse: the victorious armes of the Romans, taming them hereafter, in the Countries which now they wanne, shall giue better occasion, to re∣hearse these matters briefly. Howsoeuer the good successe of Antigonus got him reputation, among the bar∣barous people, yet his owne Souldiers, that without his leading, had wonne this victorie, could not thereupon be perswaded to thinke him a good man of warre: knowing that he had no interest in the honour of the seruice, wherein his conduct was no better, then creeping into a wood. This (as presently will appeare) was greatly helpfull vnto Pyrrhus: though as yet he knew not so much. For Pyrrhus, when his affaires in Italie stood vpon hard termes, had sent vnto Antigonus for helpe: not without threats, in case it were de∣nied. So was he sure to get, either a supply, wherewith to continue his war against the Romans, or some seeming honourable pretence, to forsake Italie, vnder colour of making his word good, in seeking reuenge. The threats which he had vsed in bra∣uerie, meere necessitie forced him, at his returne into , to put in practise. He brought home with him, eight thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse: an ar∣mie too little to be employed, by his restlesse nature, in any action of importance; yet greater then he had meanes to keepe in pay: Therefore he fell vpon Macedon; intending to take what spoile he could get, and make Antigonus compound with him, to be freed from trouble. At his first entrance into this businesse, two thou∣sand of Antigonus his Soudiers, reuolted vnto ; and many Cities, either willingly or perforce, receiued him. Such faire beginnings, easily perswaded the courage of this daring Prince, to set vpon Antigonus himselfe, and to hazard his for∣tune, in triall of a battaile, for the whole Kingdome of Macedon. It appeares, that Antigonus had no desire to fight with this hot warriour; but thought it the wisest way, by protracting of time, to wearie him out of the Coun∣trie. For Pyrrhus ouertooke him in a straight passage, and charged him in the reare; wherein were the Gaules, and the Elephants, which were thought the best of his strength: a manifest proofe that he was in retrait. The Gaules very brauely sustay∣ned Pyrrhus his impression; yet were broken at length (when most of them were slaine) after a sharpe fight: wherein it seemes, that Antigonus keeping his Macedo∣nian Phalanx within the streight, and not aduancing to their succour, tooke away their courage, by deceiuing their expectation. The Captaines of the Elephants were taken soone after; who finding themselues exposed to the same violence that had consumed so many of the Gaules, yeelded themselues and the beasts. All this was done in full view of Antigonus, and his Macedonians, to their great discomfort: which emboldened Pyrrhus, to charge them where they lay in their strength. Where the Phalanx could be charged only in a front, it was a matter of extreme difficultie (if not impossible) to force it. But the Macedonians had seene so much, that they had no desire to fight against Pyrrhus; who discouered so well their affe∣ctions, that hee aduentured to draw neare in person, and exhort them to yeeld. Neither the common Souldier, nor any Leader, refused to become his follower. All forsooke Antigonus, a few horse-men excepted, that along with him to Thessalonica; where he had some small forces left, and monie enough to entertaine a greater power, had he known where to leauie it. But whilest he was thinking how to allure a sufficient number of the Gaules into his seruice; whereby hee might re∣paire his losse: Ptolomie, the sonne of Pyrrhus, came vpon him, and easily defeating his weake forces, draue him to flie from the parts about Macedon, to those Townes a farre off in Peloponnesus, in which hee had formerly lurked, before such time as he looked abroad into the world, and made himselfe a King. This good successe reuiued the spirits of the Epirot, and caused him to forget all sorrow, of his late mis-fortunes in the Roman warre: so that he sent for his sonne He∣lenus (whom he had left with a Garrison, in the Castle of Tarentum ) willing him to come ouer into Greece, where was more matter of conquest, and let the Italians shift for themselues. §. V. How PYRRHVS assailed Sparta without successe. His enterprise vpon Argos, and his death. PYYRRHVS had now conceiued a great hope, that nothing should bee able to withstand him; seeing, that in open fight, he had vanquished the Gaules, beaten Antigonus, and won the Kingdome of Macedon; There was not in all Greece, nor, indeede, in all the Lands that Alex∣ander had wonne, any Leader of such name and worth, as deserued to be set vp against him: which filled him with the opinion that he might do what he pleased. He raised therefore an Armie, consisting of fiue and twenty thousand foot, two thousand horse, and foure and twentie Elephants; pretending warre a∣gainst Antigonus, and the giuing libertie to those Towns in Peloponnesus, which the same Antigonus held in subiection; though it was easily discouered, that such great preparations were made, for accomplishment of some designe more important, then warre against a Prince alreadie vanquished, and almost vterly dejected. Espe∣cially the Lacedaemonians feared this expedition, as made against their State. For Cleonymus, one of their Kings, being expelled out of his Countrie, had betaken him∣selfe to Pyrrhus: who readily entertained him, and promised to restore him to his Kingdome. This promise was made in secret; neither would Pyrrhus make shew of any displeasure that he bare vnto Sparta; but contrariwise professed, that it was his intent, to haue two of his owne yonger sonnes trained vp in that Citie, as in a place of noble discipline. With such colours he deluded men, euen till he entred vpon Laconia; where presently he demeaned himselfe as an open enemie: excusing himselfe and his former dissembling words, with a jeast; That he followed herein the Lacedaemonian custome, of concealing what was truly purposed. It had been, indeed, the manner of the Lacedaemonians, to deale in like sort with others, whom, in the time of their greatnesse, they sought to oppresse: but now they complained of that, as false∣hood, in Pyrrhus, which they alwaies practised as wisdome, till it made them distru∣sted, forsaken, and almost contemptible. Neuerthelesse, they were not wanting to themselues in this dangerous extremitie. For the old men and women laboured in fortifying the Towne; causing such as could beare armes, to reserue themselues fresh against the assault: which Pyrrhus had vnwisely deferred, vpon assurance of preuailing. Sparta was neuer fortified, before this time, otherwise then with armed Citizens: soone after this (it being built vpon vneuen ground, and for the most part, hard to approach) the lower and more accessible places, were fenced with walls; at the pre∣sent, only trenches were cast, and barricadoes made with Carts, where the entrance seemed most easy. Three daies together it was assailed by Pyrrhus, exceeding fierce∣ly; and no stoutly defended. The desperate courage of the Citizens preserued the Towne the first day, wherinto the violence of Pyrrhus had forced entrance the second day, but that his wounded horse threw him to the ground, which made his Souldiers more mindfull of sauing the person of their King, than of breaking into the Citie, though alreadie they had torne in sunder the barricadoes. Presently after this, one of Antigonus his Captaines got into Sparta with a good strength of men; and Areus the King returned out of Crete (where he had been helping his friends in warre) with two thousand men, little knowing the danger, in which his owne coun∣trie stood vntill he was almost at home. These succours did not more animate the Spartans, then kindle in Pyrrhus a desire to preuaile against all impediments. But the third daies worke shewed, how great his error had beene, in forbearing to assault the Towne at his first comming. For he was so manfully repelled, that he saw no likelihood of getting the place, otherwise than by a long siege: in which tedious course he had no desire to spend his time. Antigonus had now raised an Armie, though not strong enough to meet the e∣nemie in plaine field, yet able to hinder all his purposes. This made Pyrrhus doubt∣full what way to take; being diuersly affected, by the difficultie of his enterprise in hand, and the shame of taking a repulse in his first attempt. Whilest hee was thus perplexed, letters came from Argos, inuiting him thither; with promise, to deliuer that Citie into his hands. Ciuill dissension raging then hotly in Argos, caused the heads of seuerall facti∣ons to call in Pyrrhus and Antigonus; but the comming of these two Princes, taught the Citizens wit, and made them desirous to rid their hand of such powerfull As∣sistants, as each of the two Kings pretended himselfe to be. Antigonus told the Ar∣giues, that he came to saue them from the tyrannie of Pyrrhus; and that hee would be gone if they needed not his helpe. On the other side, Pyrrhus would needes per∣swade them, that he had none other errand, than to make them safe from Antigo∣nus; offering in like manner, to depart if they so desired. The Argiues tooke small pleasure, in hearing the Foxe and Kite at strife, which of them should keepe the Chickins from his enemie: and therefore prayed them both, to diuert their powers some other way. Hereunto Antigonus readily condes∣cended, and gaue to assure his word: for he was the weaker, and stood in neede of good-will. But Pyrrhus thought it enough to promise: Hostages he would giue none, to his inferiours: especially, meaning deceipt. This made them suspect his purpose to be such, as, indeede, it was. Yet he lesse regarded their opinions, than to hold them worthie of assurance, by giuing such a bond, as hee intended to breake ere the next morning. It was concluded, that a Gate of the Citie should be opened by night vnto Pyr∣rhus, by his Complices within Argos: which was accordingly performed. So his Armie, without any tumult, entred the Citie: till the Elephants, with Towers on their backs, cloyed the way, being too high to passe the Gate. The taking off, and setting on againe, of those Towers, with the trouble thereto belonging, did both giue alarme to the Citie, and some leisure to take order for defence, before so many were entred, as could fully master it. Argos was full of ditches, which greatly hin∣dred the Gaules (that had the Vantgarde ) being ignorant of the waies, in the darke night. The Citizens, on the other side, had much aduantage, by their knowledge of euery by-passage: and setting vpon the enemies on all sides, did put them to great losse, and more trouble. Pyrrhus therefore, vnderstanding by the confused noise, and vnequall shoutings of his owne men, that they were in distresse, entred the Citie in person, to take or∣der for their reliefe, and assurance of the place. But the darkenesse, the throng, and many other impediments, kept him from doing any thing of moment, vntill breake of day. Then beganne he to make his passage by force, and so farre preuailed, that he got into the Market-place. It is said, that seeing in that place, the Image of a Wolfe and a Bull, in such posture as if they had beene combattant, hee called to minde an Oracle, which threatned him with death, when he should behold a Bull fighting with a Wolfe: and that hereupon he made retrait. Indeede, the comming of Antigonus to the rescue, the disorder and confusion of his owne men; with diuers ill accidents, gaue him reasonable cause to haue retired out of the Citie, though the Wolfe and Bull had beene away. The tumult was such, that no directions could be heard; but as some gaue back, so did others thrust forward, and the Argiues pressing hard vpon him, forced Pyrrhus to make good his retrait, with his owne sword. The tops of the houses were couered with women, that stood looking on the fight. Among these was one, that saw her owne sonne in dangerous case, fighting with Pyrrhus. Wherefore, shee tooke a tile-stone, or slate, and threw it so violently downe on the head of Pyrrhus, that hee fell to ground a∣stonished with the blow; and lying in that case, had his head cut off. Thus ended the restlesse ambition of Pyrrhus, together with his life: and thus returned the Kingdome of Macedon to Antigonus; who forthwith possessed the armie, the bodie, and the children of his enemie. The bodie of Pyrrhus had ho∣nourable funerall, and was giuen by Antigonus vnto Helenus his sonne; which yong Prince he graciously sent home, into his Fathers Kingdome of Epirus. From this time forwards, the race of Antigonus held the Kingdome of Macedon; the po∣steritie of Seleucus raigned ouer Asia and Syria; and the house of Ptolomie had quiet possession of Aegypt: vntill such time, as the Citie of Rome, swallowing all vp, dige∣sted these, among other Countries, into the bodie of her owne Empire. Finis Libri Quarti. THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORIE OF THE WORLD: INTREATING OF THE TIMES FROM the setled rule of ALEXANDERS Successors in the East, vntill the ROMANS, preuailing ouer all, made Conquest of ASIA and MACEDON. THE FIFT BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of the first Punicke Warre. §. I. A discussion of that probleme of LIVIE; Whether the Romans could haue resisted the great ALEXANDER. That neither the Macedonian nor the Roman Souldier, was of equall valour to the English. THAT question handled by LIVIE, Whether the great ALEXANDER could haue preuailed against the Romans, if after his Easterne conquest, he had bent all his forces against them, hath beene, and is, the subject of much dispute; which (as it seemes to me) the arguments on both sides do not so well explane, as doth the experience that Pyrrhus hath giuen, of the Roman power, in his daies. For, if he, a Commander (in Han∣nibals judgement) inferior to Alexander, though to none else, could with small strength of men, and little store of monie, or of other needfull helps in warre, vanquish them in two battailes, and endanger their estate, when it was well setled, and held the best part of Italie, vnder a confirmed obedience: what would Alexander haue done, that was aboundantly prouided of all which is need∣full to a Conquerour, wanting only matter of emploiment, comming vpon them before their Dominion was halfe so well setled. It is easie to say, that Alexander had no more, than thirty thousand foot, and foure thousand horse (as indeede, at his first passage into Asia, he carried ouer, not many more) and that the rest of his followers were no better than base effeminate Asiatiques. But he that considers the Armies of Perdiccas, Antipater, Craterus, Eumenes, Ptolomie, Antigonus, & Lysimachus, with the actions by them performed, euery one of which (to omit others) com∣manded only some fragment of this dead Emperours power; shall easily finde, that such a reckoning is farre short of the truth. It were needlesse to speake of Treasure, Horses, Elephants, Engines of batterie, and the like: of all which, the Macedonian had aboundance; the Roman hauing nought, saue men and armes. As for Sea-forces; he that shall consider after what sort the Romans, in their first Punick warre, were trained, in the rudiments of Naui∣gation; sitting vpon the shoare, and beating the sand with poles, to practise the stroke of the Oare, as not daring to lanch their ill-built vessels into the Sea; will ea∣sily conceiue, how farre too weake they would haue proued in such seruices. Now for helpers in warre; I doe not see, why all Greece and Macedon, being ab∣solutely commanded by Alexander, might not well deserue to be laid in ballance, against those parts of Italie, which the Romans held in ill-assured subiection. To o∣mit therefore all benefit, that the Easterne world, more wealthie, indeede, than valiant, could haue affoorded vnto the Macedonian: let vs only conjecture, how the States of Sicill and Carthage, nearest neighbours to such a quarrell (had it happened) would haue stood affected. The Sicilians were, for the most part, Graecians; neither is it to bee doubted, that they would readily haue submitted themselues vnto him, that ruled all Greece besides them. In what termes they commonly stood, and how ill they were able to defend themselues, it shal appeare on. Sure it is, that Alexan∣ders comming into those parts, would haue brought excessiue joy, to them that were faine to get the helpe of Pyrrhus, by offering to become his subjects. As for the Carthaginians; if Agathocles, the Tyrant of Syracuse, hated of his people, and ill able to defend his owne besieged Citie, could, by aduenturing to saile into Asrick, put their Dominion, yea and Carthage it selfe, in extreme hazard; shall wee thinke that they would haue beene able to withstand Alexander? But, why doe I question their abilitie, seeing that they sent Embassadours, with their submission, as farre as Babylon, ere the warre drew neare them? Wherefore it is manifest, that the Romans must, without other succour, than perhaps of some few Italian friends (of which yet there were none, that forsooke them not, at some time, both before and after this) haue opposed their valour, and good militarie discipline, against the power of all Countries, to them knowne, if they would haue made resistance. How they could haue sped well, in vndertaking such a match; it is vneasie to finde in discourse of humane reason. It is true; that vertue and fortune worke wonders: but it is a∣gainst cowardly fooles, and the vnfortunate: for whosoeuer contends with one too mightie for him; either must excell in these, as much as his enemie goes beyond him in power; or else must looke, both to be ouer-come, and to be cast downe so much the lower, by how much the opinion of his fortune and vertue renders him suspected, as likely to make head another time against the vanquisher. Whether the Roman, or the Macedonian, were in those daies the better Souldier, I will not take vpon me to determine: though I might, without partialitie, deliuer mine owne opinion, and preferre that Armie, which followed not onely Philip and Alexander, but also Alexanders Princes after him, in the greatest dangers of all sorts of warre; before any, that Rome either had, or in long time after did send forth. Concerning fortune; who can giue a rule that shall alwaies hold? Alexander was victorious in euery battaile that he fought: and the Romans in the issue of euery warre. But for∣asmuch as Liuie hath judged this a matter worthie of consideration; I thinke it a great part of Romes good fortune, that Alexander came not into Italie: where in three yeares after his death, the two Roman Consulls, together with all the power of that State, were surprized by the Samnites, and enforced to yeeld vp their armes. We may therefore permit Liuie to admire his owne Romans, and to compare with Alexander those Captaines of theirs, which honoured sufficiently, in being thought equal to his followers: that the same conceit should blind our judgement, we cannot permit without much vanitie. Now in deciding such a controuersie, me thinks it were not amisse, for an En∣glishman, to giue such a sentence betweene the Macedonians and Romans, as the Ro∣mans once did (being chosen Arbitrators) betweene the Ardeates and Aricini, that Dec. . stroue about a piece of land; saying, that it belonged vnto neither of them, but vn∣to the Romans themselues. If therefore it be demanded, whether the Macedonian, or the Roman, were the best VVarriour? I will answere: The Englishmen. For it will soone appeare, to any that shall examine the noble acts of our Nation in warre, that they were performed by no aduantage of weapon; against no sauage or vnmanlie people; the enemie be∣ing farre superiour vnto vs in numbers, and all needfull prouisions, yea as well trai∣ned as we, or commonly better, in the exercise of warre. In what sort Philip wanne his Dominion in Greece; what manner of men the and Indians were; whom Alexander vanquished; as likewise of what force the Macedonian Phalanx was, and how well appointed, against such armes as it com∣monly encountred: any man, that hath taken paines to reade the foregoing of them, doth sufficiently vnderstand. Yet was this Phalanx neuer, or very seldome, able to stand, against the Roman Armies: which were embattailed in so excellent a forme, as I know not, whether any Nation besides them haue vsed, either before or since. The Roman weapons likewise, both offensiue and defensiue, were of greater vse, than those with which other Nation hath serued, before the fierie instru∣ments of Gunne-powder were knowne. As for the enemies, with which Rome had to doe: we finde, that they, which did ouer-match her in numbers, were as farre ouer-matched by her, in weapons; and that they, of whom she had little ad∣uantage in armes, had as little aduantage of her in multitude. This also (as Plutarch well obserueth) was a part of her happinesse; that shee was neuer ouer-laied with too great warres at once. Hereby it came to passe, that hauing at first increased her strength, by accession of the Sabines; hauing wonne the State of Alba, against which shee aduentured her owne selfe, as it were in wager, vpon the heads of three Champions: and hauing thereby made her selfe Princesse of Latium: shee did afterwards, by long warre, in many ages, extend her Dominion ouer all Italie. The Carthaginians had well-neare oppressed her: but their Souldiers were Mercinarie; so that for want of proper strength, they were easily beaten at their owne doores. The Aetolians, and with them all, or the most of Greece, assisted her against Philip the Macedonian: being beaten, did lend her his helpe, to beat the same Aetolians. The warres against An∣tiochus, and other Asiatiques, were such as gaue to Rome small cause of boast, though much of joy: for those opposites were as base of courage, as the lands which they held were aboundant of riches. Sicil, Spaine, and all Greece, fell into her hands by v∣sing her aide, to protect them against the Carthaginians and Macedonians. I shall not neede to speake of her other conquests: it was easie to get more when shee had gotten all this. It is not my purpose to disgrace the Roman valour (which was very noble) or to blemish the reputation of so many famous victories: I am not so idle. This I say; that among all their warres, I finde not any, wherein their valour hath appeared, comparable to the English. my judgement seeme ouer∣partiall; our warres in France may helpe to make it good. First, therefore it is well knowne; that Rome (or perhaps all the world besides) had neuer any so braue a Commander in warre, as Iulius Caesar: and that no Roman armie was comparable vnto that, which serued vnder the same Caesar, Likewise, it is apparent, that this gallant Armie, which had giuen faire proofe of the Roman courage, in good performance of the Heluetian warre, when it first entred into Gaule; was neuerthelesse vtterly disheartned, when Caesar led it against the Germans. So that we may justly impute, all that was extraordinarie in the valour of Caesars men, to their long exercise, vnder so good a Leader, in so great a warre. Now let vs in ge∣nerall, compare with the deeds done by these best of Roman Souldiers, in their prin∣cipall seruice; the things performed in the same Countrie, by our common English Souldiers, leauied in haste, from following the Cart, or sitting on the shop-stall: so shall we see the difference. Herein will we deale fairely, and beleeue Caesar, in rela∣ting the acts of the Romans: but will call the French Historians to witnesse, what a∣ctions were performed by the English. In Caesars time, France was inhabited by the Gaules, a stout people, but inferiour to the French, by whom they were subdued; e∣uen when the Romans gaue them assistance. The Countrie of Gaule was rent in sun∣der (as Caesar witnesseth) into many Lordships: some of which were gouerned by pettie Kings, others by the multitude, none ordered in such sort as might make it appliable to the nearest Neighbour. The factions were many, and violent: not on∣ly in generall through the whole Countrie, but betweene the pettie States, yea in euery Citie, and almost in euery house. What greater aduantage could a Conque∣rour desire? Yet there was a greater. Ariouistus, with his Germans, had ouer-runne the Countrie, and held much part of it in a subjection, little different from meere slauerie: yea, so often had the Germans preuailed in warre vpon the Gaules, that the Gaules (who had sometimes beene the better Souldiers) did hold themselues no way equall to those daily Inuaders. Had France beene so prepared vnto our English Kings, Rome it selfe, by this time, and long ere this time, would haue beene ours. But when King Edward the third beganne his warre vpon France, hee found the whole Countrie setled in obedience to one mightie ; a King whose reputation abroade, was no lesse than his puissance at home; vnder whose Ensigne, the King of did serue in person; at whose call, the Genowayes, and other Neighbour States, were readie to take armes: finally, a King, vnto whom one The Dol∣phin of Vien∣nois. Prince gaue a∣way his Dominion, for loue; The King of Majorca. another sold away a goodly Citie and Territorie for monie. The Countrie lying so open to the Roman, and being so well fenced a∣gainst the English; it is note-worthy, not who preuailed most therein (for it were meere vanitie, to match the English purchases, with the Roman conquest) but whether of the two gaue the greater proofe of militarie vertue. Caesar himselfe doth witnesse, that the Gaules complained of their owne ignorance in the Art of warre, and that their owne hardinesse was ouer-mastered, by the skill of their ene∣mies. Poore men, they admired the Roman Towers, and Engines of batterie, rai∣sed and planted against their walls, as more than humane workes. What greater wonder is it, that such a people was beaten by the Roman; than that the Caribes, a naked people, but valiant, as any vnder the skie, are commonly put to the worse, by small numbers of Spaniards? Besides all this, we are to haue regard, of the great difficultie that was found, in drawing all the Gaules, or any great part of them, to one head, that with joynt forces they might oppose their assailants: as also the much more difficultie, of holding them long together. For hereby it came to passe, that they were neuer able to make vse of : but sometimes compelled to stay for their fellowes; and sometimes driuen, to giue or take battaile, vpon ex∣treme disaduantages, for feare, least their Companies should fall asunder: as in∣deede, vpon any little disaster, they were readie to breake, and returne euery one to the defence of his owne. All this, and (which was little lesse than all this) great oddes in weapon, gaue to the Romans, the honour of many gallant victories. What such helpe? or what other worldly help, than the golden metall of their Souldiers, had our English Kings against the French? Were not the French as well experienced in feats of VVarre? Yea, did they not thinke themselues therein our superiours? VVere they not in armes, in horse, and in all prouision, exceedingly beyond vs? Let vs heare, what a French writer saith, of the inequalitie that was betweene the Iohn de Serres. French and English, when their King Iohn was readie to giue the -set, vpon the IEAN auoit tout l'auantage par dessus EDO∣VARD, le num∣bre, la force, le , le pays, le prciuge (qui n'est pas commu∣nement vne con∣sideration de peu d'importāce aux affaires du mon∣de) & auee soi l'elite de sa Ca∣uallerie, Iors e∣stimee la meil∣leure de tout son Royaume. Blacke Prince, at the battaile of Poitiers. IOHN had all aduantages ouer EDWARD, both of number, force, shew, Countrie, and conceit (the which is commonly a consideration of no small importance in worldly affaires) and withall, the choise of all his horse-men (estee∣med then the best in Europe) with the greatest and wisest Captaines of his whole Realme. And what could he wish more? I thinke, it would trouble a Roman antiquarie, to finde the like example in their Histories; the example, I say, of a King, brought prisoner to Rome, by an Armie of eight thousand, which he had surrounded with fortie thousand, better appoin∣ted, and no lesse expert warriours. This I am sure of; that neither Syphax the Nu∣midian, followed by a rabble of halfe Scullions, as Liuie rightly tearmes them, nor those cowardly Kings Perseus and Gentius, are worthie patternes. All that haue read of Cressie and Agincourt, will beare me witnesse, that I doe not alleage the bat∣taile of Poitiers, for lacke of other, as good examples of the English vertue: the proof whereof hath left many a hundred better marks, in all quarters of France, than euer did the valour of the Romans. If any man impute these victories of ours to the long Bow, as carrying farther, piercing more strongly, and quicker of discharge than the French Crosse-bow: my answere is readie; that in all these respects, it is also (being drawne with a strong arme) superiour to the Musket; yet is the Musket a weapon of more vse. The Gunne, and the Crosse-bow, are of like force, when discharged by a Boy or Woman, as when by a strong Man: weakenesse, or sickenesse, or a sore finger, makes the Long-Bow vnseruiceable. More particularly, I say, that it was the custome of our Ancestors, to shoot, for the most part, point blanck: and so shall he perceiue, that will note the circumstances of almost any one battaile. This takes away all objection: for when Armies are within the distance of a Butts length, one flight of arrowes, or two at the most can be deliuered before they close. Nei∣ther is it in generall true, that the long Bow reacheth farther, or that it pierceth more strongly than the Crosse-bow: But this is the rare effect of an extraordinarie arme; whereupon can be grounded no common rule. If any man shall aske, How then came it to passe, that the English wanne so many great battailes, hauing no ad∣uantage to helpe him? I may, with best commendation of modestie, referre him to the French Historian: who relating the victorie of our men at Creuant, where they passed a bridge, in face of the enemie, vseth these words; The English comes with a Iohn de Serres. conquering brauerie, as he, that was accustomed to gaine euery where, without any stay: hee forceth our garde, placed vpon the bridge, to keepe the passage. Or I may cite another place of the same Authour, where hee tells, how the Britons, being inuaded by Charles the eighth, King of France, thought it good policie, to apparel a thousand and two hundred of their owne men in English Cassocks; hoping that the very sight of the English red Crosse, would be enough to terrifie the French. But I will not stand to borrow of the French Historians (all which, excepting De Serres, and Paulus Ae∣mylius; report wonders of our Nation) the proposition which first I vndertooke to maintaine; That the militarie vertue of the English, preuailing against all manner of diffi∣culties, ought to be preferred before that of Romans, which was assisted with all aduantages that could be desired. If it be demanded; why then did not our Kings finish the con∣quest, as Caesar had done? my answere may bee (I hope without offence) that our Kings were like to the race of the Aeacidae, of whom the old Poet Ennius gaue this note; Belli potentes sunt magè quam sapienti potentes; They were more warlike than po∣litique. Who so notes their proceedings, may finde that none of them went to worke like a Conquerour: saue only King Henrie the fift, the course of whose victo∣ries, it pleased God to interrupt by his death. But this question is the more easily answered, if another be first made. Why did not the Romans attempt the conquest of Gaule, before the time of Caesar? why not after the Macedonian warre? why not af∣ter the third Punick, or after the Numantian? At all these times they had good lei∣sure: and then especially had they both leisure, and fit oportunitie, when vnder the conduct of Marius, they had newly vanquished the Cimbri, and Teutones, by whom the Countrie of Gaule had beene pittiously wasted. Surely, the words of Tullie were true; that with other Nations, the Romans fought for Dominion; with the Gaules, for preseruation of their owne safetie. Therefore they attempted not the conquest of Gaule, vntill they were Lords of al other Countries, to them knowne. We on the other side, held only the one halfe of our owne Iland; the other halfe being inhabited by a Nation (vnlesse perhaps in wealth and numbers of men somewhat inferiour) euery way equal to our selues; a Nation anciently & strongly allied to our enemies the French, and in that regard, enemie to vs. So that our danger lay both before and behinde vs: and the greater danger at our backs; where commonly we felt, alwaies we feared, a stronger inuasion by land, than we could make vpon France, transporting our forces ouer Sea. It is vsual, with men, that haue pleased themselues, in admiring the matters which they finde in ancient Histories; to hold it a great injurie done to their judgement; if any take vpon him, by way of comparison, to extoll the things of later ages. But I am well perswaded, that as the diuided vertue of this our Iland, hath giuen more noble proofe of it selfe; than vnder so worthie a Leader, that Roman Armie could doe, which afterwards could win Rome, and al her Empire, making Caesar a Monarch; so hereafter, by Gods blessing, who hath conuerted our greatest hindrance, into our greatest helpe, the enemie that shall dare to trie our forces, will finde cause to wish, that auoiding vs, he had rather encountred as great a puissance, as was that of the Roman Empire. But it is now high time, that laying a-side comparisons, we returne to the rehearsal of deeds done: wherein we shall finde, how Rome began, after Pyr∣rhus had left Italie, to striue with Carthage for Dominion, in the first Punick warre. §. II. The estate of Carthage, before it entred into warre with Rome. THe Citie of Carthage had stood aboue sixe hundred yeares, when first it beganne to contend with Rome, for the mastrie of Sicil. It forewent Rome one hundred and fifty yeares in antiquity of foundation: but in the honour of great atchiuements, it excelled farre beyond this ad∣uantage of time. For Carthage had extended her Dominion in Africa it selfe, from the west part of Cyrene, to the streights of Hercules, about one thousand and fiue hundred miles in length, wherein stood three hundred Cities. It had sub∣iected all Spaine, euen to the Pyrenaean Mountaines, together with all the Ilands in the Mediterran Sea, to the west of Sicil; and of Sicil, the better part. It flourished a∣bout seuen hundred and thirtie yeare, before the destruction thereof by Scipio: who besides other spoiles, and all that the Souldiers reserued, carried thence foure hun∣dred & seuentie thousand weight of siluer, which make of our monie (if our pounds differ not) fourteene hundred and ten thousand pound sterling. So as this glorious Citie ranne the same fortune, which many other great ones haue done, both and since. The ruine of the goodliest pieces of the world, fore-shewes the dissolution of the whole. About one hundred yeares after such time as it was cast downe, the Senate of Rome caused it to be rebuilt: and by Gracchus it was called Iunonia: it was againe and againe abandoned and , taken and retaken; by Gensericus the Vandal, by Bellisarius vnder Iustinian, by the Persians, by the Aegyptians, & by the . It is now nothing. The seat thereof was exceeding strong: and, while the Cartha∣ginians commanded the Sea, inuincible. For the Sea compassed it about, sauing that it was tied to the maine by a necke of land; which passage had two mile and more of breadth ( Appian saith, three mile, and one furlong) by which we may be induced, to beleeue the common report, that the Citie it selfe was aboue twentie mile in compasse; if not that of Strabo, affirming the circuit to haue beene twice as great. It had three walls, without the wall of the Citie; and betweene each of those, three or foure streets, with vaults vnder ground, of thirty foot deepe, in which they had place for three hundred Elephants, and all their food: ouer these they had sta∣bles for foure thousand horse, and Granaries for all their prouender. They had also lodging in these streets, betweene these out-walles for foure thousand horse-men and twentie thousand foot-men, which (according to the discipline vsed now by those of China ) neuer pestered the Citie. It had towards the South part, the Castle of Byrsa; to which Seruius giues two and twentie furlongs in compasse, that make two mile and a halfe. This was the same piece of ground, which Dido obtained of the Libyans, when shee got leaue to buy only so much land of them, as shee could compasse with an Oxe hide. On the west side it had also the salt Sea, but in the na∣ture of a standing poole; for a certaine arme of Land, fastned to the ground, on which the Citie stood, stretched it selfe towards the west continent, and left but se∣uentie foot open for the Sea to enter. Ouer this standing Sea was built a most sumptuous Arsenall, hauing their ships and gallies riding vnder it. The forme of their Common-weale resembled that of Sparta; for they had titu∣larie Kings, and the Aristocraticall power of Senators. But (as Regius well obser∣ueth) the people in later times vsurped too great authoritie in their Councells. This confusion in gouernement, together with the trust that they reposed in hi∣red Souldiers, were helping causes of their destruction in the end. Two other more forcible causes of their ruine, were their auarice and their crueltie. In Pol. Arist. l. 2. c. 9. Their auarice was shewed both in exacting from their Vassals (besides ordinarie tributes) the one The Turkes, at this day, doe also take the one half of the mans corne, la∣bours the earth; yea, they take tribut of the bodies, and of the soules of the their Vassals, by bereauing them of their ablest children, & bringing them vp in the Re∣ligion. The Irish take the fourth ; & were wont cate vp with their , footemen, and , what they , of the other three parts remaining. The hus∣bandman & the yeo∣man of England, are the freest of all the World: And reason good; for of them haue the bodies of our victorious beene compounded. And it is the freeman, & not the that hath courage, & the sense of shame deier∣ued by cowardise. halfe of the fruits of the earth; and in conferring of great Offices, not vpon gentle and mercifull persons, but vpon those who could best tyrannize ouer the people, to augment their treasures. Their crueltie appeared, in putting them to death without mercie, that had offended through ignorance: the one of these rendred them odi∣ous to their , whom it made readie, vpon all occasions, to reuolt from them: the other did breake the spirits of their Generalls, by presenting in the heat of their actions abroade, the feare of a cruell death at home. Hereby it came to passe, that many good Cōmanders of the Carthaginian forces, after some great losse receiued, haue desperatly cast themselues with all that remained vnder their charge, into the How free yeomen haue beene, in times, not long since past, hath shewed in his praise of our Coun∣tries lawes. But I may say, that they are more free now than euer: and our Nobi∣litie & Gentric more seruile. For since the excessiue brauerie, and vaine expence of our Grandes, hath taught them to raise their Rents, since by Inclosures, and dis∣membring of Man∣nours, the Court Ba∣ron, and the Court Leet, the Principali∣ties of the Gentrie of England, haue dissolued, the Te∣nants, hauing paied vnto their Lords their Rent, owe them now no seruice at all, and (perhance) little loue. throat of destruction; holding it necessarie, either to repaire their losses quickly, or to ruine all together: and of them haue dared, to manage their owne best pro∣jects, after that good forme, wherein they first conceiued them, for feare the maner of their proceeding should be misinterpreted: It being the rule, to crucifie, not only the vnhappie , but euen him, whose bad counsaile had prosperous euent. The faults, wherewith, in generall, they of Carthage are taxed, by Roman Historians, I find to bee these; lust, crueltie, auarice, craft, vnfaithfulnesse, and periurie. Whether the Romans themselues were free from the same crimes, let the triall be referred vnto their actions. The first league betweene Carthage and Rome, was very ancient: hauing beene made, the yeare following the expulsion of Tarquine. In that league, the Carthaginians had the superioritie, as imposing vpon the Romans, the more strict conditions. For it was agreed, that the Romans should not so much as haue trade, in some part of Africk, nor suffer any ship of theirs to passe be∣yond the headland, or cape, then called the faire , vnlesse it by force oftempest: whereas on the other side, no Hauen in was forbidden to the Car∣thaginians. A second league was made long after, which (howsoeuer it hath pleased Dec. 1. l. 7. Liuie to say, that the Romans granted it, at the Carthaginians intreatie) was more strict than the former: prohibiting the Romans to haue trade in any part of Africa, or in the Iland of Sardinia. By these two treaties it may appeare, that the Carthaginians had an intent not only to keep the Romans (as perhaps they did other people) from getting any knowledge of the state of Africk; but to countenance & vphold them, in their troubling al Italie, whereby they themselues might haue the better meanes to occupie all Sicil, whilst that Iland should be destitute of Italian succours. Hereupon we finde good cause, of the joy that was in Carthage, and of the Crowne of gold, weighing twenty & fiue pound, sent from thence to Rome, when the Samnites were ouerthrowne. But the little state of Rome preuailed faster in Italie, than the great power of Carthage did in Sicill. For that mightie Armie, of three hundred thousand men, which Hannibal Xenoph Graec. bist. l. 1. conducted out of Africk into Sicill, wanne only two Cities therein; many great fleets were deuoured by tempests; and howsoeuer the Carthaginians preuailed at one time, the Sicilians, either by their owne valour, or by assistance of their good friends out of Greece, did at some other time repaire their owne losses, and take reuenge vp∣on these Inuadours. But neuer were the people of Carthage in better hope, of get∣ting al Sicil, than when the death of Agathocles the Tyrant, had left the whole Iland in combustion; the estate of Greece being such, at the same time, that it seemed im∣possible, for any succour to be sent from thence. But whilest the Carthaginians were busie, in making their aduantage, of this good opportunitie; Pyrrhus, inuited by the Tarentines, and their fellowes, came into Italie, where hee made sharpe warre vpon the Romans. These newes were vnpleasing to the Carthaginians, who, being a sub∣tile Nation, easily foresaw, that the same busie disposition, which had brought this Prince, out of Greece into Italie, would as easily transport him ouer into Sicil, as soone as he could finish his Roman warre. To preuent this danger, they sent Mago Em∣bassadour to Rome; who declared in their name, that they were sorry to heare, what misaduenture had befallen the Romans, their good friends, in this warre with Pyr∣rbus; and that the people of Carthage were very willing to assist the state of Rome, by an Armie into Italie; if their helpe were thought needfull, against the Epirots. It was, indeede, the maine desire of the Carthaginians, to hold so hardly to his worke in Italie, that they might, at good leisure, pursue their businesse in Si∣cil: which caused them to make such a goodly offer. But the Romans were too high∣minded: and refused to accept any such aide of their friends, left it should blemish their reputation, and make them seeme vnable to stand by their owne strength. Yet the message was taken louingly, as it ought; and the former league betweene Rome and Carthage renued, with couenants added, concerning the present businesse; That if either of the two Cities made peace with Pyrrhus, it should be, with reser∣uation of libertie, to assist the other, in case that Pyrrhus should inuade either of their Dominions. All this notwithstanding, and notwithstanding that the same Mago went and treated with Pyrrhus, vsing all meanes to sound his intentions (a matter very difficult, where one vpon euery new occasion changeth his owne pur∣poses) yet Pyrrhus found leisure to make a step into Sicill: where, though in fine he was neither getter nor sauer, yet hee cleane defeated the purposes of Carthage, lea∣uing them at his departure thence, as farre from any end, as when they first be∣ganne. So many disasters, in an enterprise, that from the first vndertaking, had beene so strongly pursued, through the length of many generations, might well haue indu∣ced the Carthaginians to beleeue, that an higher prouidence resisted their intend∣ment. But their desire, of winning that fruitfull Iland, was so inueterate; that with vnwearied patience, they still continued in hope, of so much the greater an haruest, by how much their cost and paynes therein buried had beene the more. Wherefore they re-continued their former courses; and by force or practice, reco∣uered in few yeeres, all their old possessions: making peace with Syracuse, the chiefe Citie of the Iland, that so they might the better enable themselues to deale with the rest. Somewhat before this time, a troupe of Campanian Souldiers, that had serued vnder Agathocles, being intertained within Messana as friends, and finding them∣selues too strong for the Citizens, tooke aduantage of the power that they had to doe wrong; and with perfidious , slew those that had trusted them; which done, they occupied the Citie, Lands, Goods, and Wiues, of those, whom they had murdered. These Mercinaries called themselues . Good Souldiers they were: and like enough it is, that meere desperation, of finding any that would approue their barbarous treacherie, added rage vnto their . there∣fore none other colour of their proceedings, than the law of the stronger, they ouer∣ranne the Countrie round about them. In this course, at first, they sped so wel, that they did not onely defend Messena against the Cities of Sicil Confederate; to wit, against the Syracusians, and others, but they rather wan vpon them, yea, and vpon the Carthaginians, exacting tribute from many Neighbour places. But it was not long, ere fortune turning her back to these Mamertines, the Syracusians wan fast them, and finally, confining them with∣in the walls of Messana, they also with a powerfull Armie besieged the Citie. It happened ill, that about the same time, a contention began, betweene the Syra∣cusian Souldiers, then lying at Megara, and the Citizens of Syracuse, and Gouernours of the Common-wealth; which proceeded so farre, that the Armie elected two Gouernours, among themselues; to wit, Artemidorus, and , that was after∣ward King. Hieron, being for his yeares excellently adorned with many vertues, although it was contrarie to the policy of that State, to approue any election made by the Souldiers, yet for the great clemencie hee vsed at his first entrance, was by generall consent established and made . This Office, hee rather vsed as a Scale, thereby to clime to some higher degree, than rested content with his pre∣sent preferment. In briefe, there was somewhat wanting, whereby to strengthen himselfe within the Citie; and somewhat without it, that gaue impediment, to his obtayning, and safe keeping, of the place he sought; to wit, a powerfull partie within the Towne, and mutinous troups of Souldiers without, often and easily moued to sedi∣tion and tumult. For the first, whereby to strengthen himselfe, hee tooke to wife the daughter of Leptines, a man of the greatest estimation and authoritie among the . For the second, leading out the Armie to besiege Messana, he quartered all those Companies, which he held suspected, on the one side of the Citie, and lea∣ding the rest of his horse and foot vnto the other side, as if he would haue assaulted it in two seueral parts, he marched away vnder the couert of the Towne walls, and left the Mutiners to be cut in pieces by the assieged: So returning home, and leauy∣ing an Armie of his owne Citizens, well trayned and obedient, he hasted againe to∣wards Messana, and was by the Mamertines (growne proud by their former victo∣rie ouer the Mutiners) incountred in the plaines of Mylaeum, where hee obtained a most signall victorie, and leading with him their Commander into Syra∣cuse, himselfe by common consent was elected and saluted King. Hereupon the Mamertines, finding themselues vtterly infeebled, some of them resolued to giue themselues to the Carthaginians, others to craue assistance of the Romans: to each of whom, the seuerall factions dispatched Embassadours for the same purpose. The Carthaginians were soone readie to lay hold vpon the good offer: so that a Captaine of theirs got into the Castle of Messana, wherof they that had sent for him gaue him possession. But within a little while, they that were more inclinable to the Romans, had brought their Companions to so good agreement, that this Cap∣taine, either by force, or by cunning, was turned out of dores, and the Towne re∣serued for other Masters. These did much offend the people of Carthage; who crucified their Cap∣taine, as both a Traitour and Coward; and sent a Fleet and Armie to besiege Mes∣sana, as a Towne that rebelled, hauing once beene theirs. Hieron, the new made King of Syracuse (to gratifie his people, incensed with the smart of lately re∣ceiued) added his forces to the Carthaginians, with whom hee entred into a league, for exterminating the out of Sicil. So the Mamertines on all sides were closed vp within Messana: the Carthaginians lying with a Nauie at Sea, and with an Armie on the one side of the Towne, whil est Hieron with his Syracusians, lay before it on the other side. In this their great danger, came Appius Claudius the Roman Consull, with an Armie to the streights of Sicil: which passing by night with notable audacitie, hee put himselfe into the Towne, and sending Messengers to the Carthaginians, and to Hieron, required them to depart; signifying vnto them, that the Mamertines were now become with the people of Rome, and that therefore hee was come to giue them protection, euen by force of warre, if reason would not preuaile. This was vtterly neglected; And so beganne the warre betweene Rome and ; , it will then be time to shew, on which part was the justice of the quarrell, when some actions of the Romans lately foregoing this, haue beene first considered. §. III. The beginning of the fist Punick warre. That it was vndertaken by the Romans. WHen Pyrrhus beganne his warres in Italie, the Citie of Rhegium, being well affected to Rome, and not onely fearing to be taken by the Epirot, but much more distrusting the Carthaginians, as likely to seize vpon it in that busie time, sought aide from the Romans, and obtained from them a Legion, consisting of foure thousand Souldiers, the conduct of Decius Campanus, a Roman Prefect; by whom they were defended and assured for the present. But after a while, this Roman Garrison, considering at good leisure, the fact of the Mamertines, committed in Messana, (a Citie in Sicil, situate al∣most opposite to Rhegium, and no otherwise diuided than by a narrow Sea, which seuereth it from Italie ) and rather weighing the greatnesse of the bootie, than the odiousnesse of the villanie, by which it was gotten; resolued finally, to make the like purchace, by taking the like wicked course. Confederating therefore themselues with the Mamertines, they entertained their Hosts of Rhegium, after the same man∣ner; diuiding the spoile, and all which that State had among themselues. When complaint was made to the Senate & people of Rome, of this outrage; they finding their honour thereby greatly stained (for no Nation in the world made a more seuere profession of justice, than they did, during all the time of their grow∣ing greatnesse) resolued, after a while, to take reuenge vpon the offenders. And this they performed shortly after, when they had quenched the fires, kindled in I∣talie, by Pyrrhus. For, notwithstanding that those Romans in Rhegium (as men for the foulenesse of their fact, hopelesse of pardon) defended themselues with an ob∣stinate resolution: yet in the end, the assailants forced them; and those which e∣scaped the present furie, were brought bound to Rome, where after the vsuall tor∣ments by whipping inflicted, according to the custome of the Countrie, they had their heads stricken from their shoulders; and the people of Rhegium were againe restored to their former liberties and estates. This execution of justice being newly performed, and the fame thereof soun∣ding honourably through all quarters of Italie: messengers came to Rome, from Messana, desiring help against the Carthaginians, and Syracusians, that were in a rea∣dinesse to inflict the like punishment vpon the Mamertines, for the like offence. An impudent request it was, which they made: who hauing both giuen example of that vilanie to the Roman Souldiers, and holpen them with joynt forces to make it good, intreate the Iudges to giue them that assistance, which they were wont to receiue from their fellow-theeues. The Romans could not suddenly resolue, whether the way of honestie, or of profit, were to be followed; they euermore pretended the one, but they many times wal∣ked in the other. They considered, how contrarie the course of succouring the Mamertines was, to their former counsells, and actions: seeing for the same offences they had lately put to torment, and to the sword, their owne Souldiers, and resto∣red the oppressed to their libertie. Yet when they beheld the description of the Carthaginian Dominion, and that they were already Lords of the best parts of , of the Mediterran Ilands, of a great part of Spaine, and some part of Sicil it ; whilest also they feared, that Syracuse therein seated (a Citie in beautie and riches, little, at that time, inferiour to Carthage, and farre superiour to Rome it selfe) might become theirs; the safetie of their owne estate spake for these Mamertines: who, if they (driuen to despaire by the Romans ) should deliuer vp Messana, with those other holds, that they had, into the hands of the Carthaginians, then would nothing stand betweene Carthage, and the Lordship of all Sicil: for Syracuse it selfe could not, for want of succour, any long time subsist, if once the Carthaginians, that were Masters of the Sea, did fasten vpon that passage from the maine Land. It was further consi∣dered; that the oportunitie of Messana was such, as would not only debarre, all suc∣cours out of the continent, from arriuall in Sicil; but would serue as a bridge, wher∣by the Carthaginians might haue entrance into Italie, at their owne pleasure. These considerations, of profit at hand, and of preuenting dangers, that threat∣ned from a-farre, did so preuaile, aboue all regard of honestie, that the Mamertines were admitted into Confederacie with the Romans, and Ap. Claudius the Consull, presently dispatcht away for Messana: into which he entred, and vnder-tooke the protection of it, as is shewed before. The befiegers were little troubled with his arriuall; and lesse moued, with his requiring them, to desist from their attempt. For they did farre exceede him in number of men; The whole Iland was readie to re∣lieue them in their wants; and they were strong enough at Sea, to hinder any sup∣ply from getting into the Towne. All this Appius himselfe well vnderstood: and against all this, he thought the stiffe metall of his Roman Souldier, a sufficient reme∣die. Therefore, he resolued to issue out into the field, and to let the enemies know, that his comming was to send them away from the Towne; not to be besieged by them within it. In executing this determination, it was very beneficiall to him, that the enemie lay encamped in such sort, as one quarter was not well able to relieue another in distresse. Hieron was now exposed to the same danger, whereinto hee had wilfully cast his owne mutinous followers, not long before: only he was strong enough (or thought so) to make good his owne quarter, without helpe of others. Against him Ap. Claudius issued forth, and (not attempting, by vnexpected sallie, to surprize his trenches) arranged his men in order of battaile, wherewith hee presented him. The Syracusian wanted not courage to fight; but surely, hee wanted good aduice: else would he not haue hazarded all his power against an enemie, of whom he had made no triall; when it had beene easie, and as much as was requisite, to defend his owne Campe. It may be, that he thought to get honour, wherewith to adorne the beginning of his raigne. But he was well beaten; and driuen to saue himselfe with∣in his Trenches: by which losse, he learned a point of wisedome, that stood him and his Kingdome in good stead, all the daies of his life. It was a foolish desire of reuenge, that had made the Syracusians so busie, in helping those of Carthage, against the Mamertines. Had Messana beene taken by the Carthaginians, Syracuse it selfe must haue sought helpe from Rome, against those friends which it now so diligently assisted. Hieron had (in respect of those two mightie Cities) but a small stock, which it behooued him to gouerne well: such another losse would haue made him almost bankrupt. Therefore he quietly brake vp his Camp, and retired home: intending to let them stand to their aduentures, that had hope to bee gainers by the bargaine. The next day, Claudius perceiuing the Sicilian Armie gone, did with great courage, and with much alacritie of his souldiers, giue charge vpon the Carthaginians: wherein he sped so well, that the enemie forsooke both field and campe, leauing all the Countrie o∣pen to the Romans; who hauing spoiled all round, without resistance, intended to lay siege vnto the great Citie of Syracuse. These prosperous beginnings, howsoeuer they animated the Romans, and filled them with hopes, of attaining to greater matters, than at first they had expected: Yet did they not imprint any forme of terrour in the Citie of Carthage, that had wel enough repaired greater losses than this; in which no more was lost, than what had beene prepared against the Mamertines alone, without any suspition of warre from Rome. Now in this place I hold it seasonable, to consider of those grounds, whereupon the Romans entred into this warre; not how profitable they were, nor how agree∣able to rules of honestie (for questionlesse the enterprize was much to their benefit, though as much to their shame) but how allowable in strict termes of lawfulnesse; whereupon they built all their allegations in maintenance thereof. That the Ma∣mertines did yeeld themselues, and all that they had, into the Romans hands (as the Campanes, distressed by the Samnites, had done) I cannot finde: neither can I finde, how the messengers of those folke, wherof one part had alreadie admitted the Car∣thaginians, could be enabled to make any such surrendrie, in the publike name of all their Companie. If therefore the Mamertines, by no lawfull surrendrie of themselues and their possessions, were become subject vnto Rome, by what better title could the Romans assist the Mamertines, against their most ancient friends the Carthaginians, than they might haue aided the Campanes, against the Samnites, without the same condition? which was (as they themselues confessed) by none at all. But let it be supposed, that some point seruing to cleare this doubt, is lost in all Histories. Doubtlesse it is, that no companie, of Pirates, Theeues, Outlawes, Murderers, or such other male∣factours, can by any good successe of their vilanie, obtaine the priuiledge of ciuill so∣cieties, to make league or truce, yea, or to require faire warre: but are by all meanes, as most pernicious vermine, to be rooted out of the world. I will not take vpon me, to maintaine that opinion of some Ciuilians, that a Prince is not bound to hold his faith, with one of these; it were a Position of ill consequence: This I hold; that no one Prince, or State, can giue protection to such as these, as long as any other is vsing the sword of vengeance against them, without becomming accessarie to their crimes. Wherefore, we may esteeme this action of the Romans, so farre from being justifiable, by any pretence of Confederacie made with them; as that contrariwise, by admitting this nest of Murderers and Theeues, into their protection, they justly deserued to be warred vpon themselues, by the people of Sicil; yea, although Mes∣sana had beene taken, and the Mamertines all slaine, ere any newes of the Confede∣racie had beene brought vnto the besiegers. The great Alexander was so farre per∣swaded herein; that he did put to sword all the Branchiadae (a people in Sogdiana ) and razed their Citie, notwithstanding that they joyfully entertained him as their Lord and King; because they were descended from a Companie of Milesians, who to gratifie King Xerxes, had robbed a Temple, and were by him rewarded with the Towne and Countrie, which these of their posteritie enjoyed. Neuerthelesse, in course of humane justice, long and peaceable possession giues ius acquisitum, a kinde of right by prescription, vnto that which was at first obtained by wicked meanes: and doth free the descendants, from the crime of their Ancestors, whose vilanies they doe not exercise. But that the same generation of Theeues, which by a dete∣stable fact hath purchased a rich Towne, should be acknowledged a lawfull compa∣nie of Citizens, there is no shew of right. For euen the Conquerour, that by open warre obtaineth a Kingdome, doth not confirme his title, by those victories which gaue him first possession: but length of time is requisite, to establish him, vnlesse by some alliance with the ancient inheritors, he can better the violence of his claime; as did our King Henrie the first, by his marriage with Maude, that was daughter of Malcolme, King of the Scots, by Margaret, the Neece of Edmund Ironside. Where∣fore I conclude, that the Romans had no better ground (if they had so good) of ju∣stice, in this quarrell, than had the Gothes, Hunnes, Vandalls, and other Nations, of the warres that they made vpon the Roman Empire, wherein Rome her selfe, in the time of her visitation, was burnt to ground. §. IIII. Of the Iland of Sicil. †. I. The qualitie of the Iland: and the first Inhabitants thereof. THe defence of the Mamertines, or the possession of Messana, being now no longer, since the first victories of Appius Claudius, the objects of the Roman hopes; but the Dominion of all Sicil being the prize, for which Rome and Carthage, are about to contend: it will bee agreeable vnto the order, which in the like cases we haue obserued, to make a briefe collection, of things, concerning that noble Iland, which hath beene the stage of many great acts, performed, as well before and after, as in this present Warre. That Sicil was sometimes a Peninsula, or Demie-Isle, adjoyned to Italie, as a part of Brutium in Calabria, neare vnto Rhegium, and afterward by violence of tempest se∣uered from the same: it is a generall opinion of all antiquitie. But at what certaine time this diuision happened, there is no memoriall remayning, in any ancient wri∣ter. Strabo, Plinie, and Dionysius, affirme, that it was caused by an earthquake; Si∣lius, Plin. l. 2 c. Sil. l. and Cassiodorus, doe thinke it to haue beene done by the rage and violence of the tide, and surges of the Sea. Either of these opinions may be true; for so was Euboea from Boeotia; Atalante and Macris, from Euboea; Sillie here in England, from the of Cornewall; and Britaine it selfe (as may seeme by argu∣ments) from the opposite continent of Gaule. But for Sicil, they which lend their eares to fables, do attribute the cause of it to Neptune (as Eustathius witnesseth) who with his three-forked Mace, in fauour of Iocastus, the sonne of Aeolus, diuided it from the maine land, and so made it an Iland, which before was but a Demie-Isle; that by that meanes, hee might the more safely , and possesse the same. Diodorus Siculus, moued by the authoritie of Hesiodus, ascribeth the labour of sun∣dring Orion. l. 4. . 14. Diod. l. . it from Italie, to Orion: who, that he might be compared to Hercules (cutting . de Fast. through the rocks and mountaines) first opened the Sicilian streights, as Hercules did those of Gibralter. They which value the Ilands of the mid-land Sea, according to their quantitie and content, doe make this the greatest, as Eustathius and Strabo, who affirme this, not only to excell the rest for bignesse, but also for goodnesse of . As concer∣ning the of this Iland, Pomponius Mela saith, it is like that Capitall letter of the Greeks, which they call Delta, namely, that it hath the figure of a triangle; which is generally knowne to be true. That the whole Iland was consecrated to and , all old writers with one consent affirme. To Ceres it was dedicated, be∣cause it first taught the rules of setting and sowing of Corne: to Proserpina, not so much, for that shee was from hence violently taken by Pluto, as because (which Plu∣tarch and Diodorus doe report for truth) that Pluto, as soone as shee, vncouering her selfe, first shewed her selfe to be seene of him, gaue her the Dominion thereof. Of the fertilitie and riches of this Countrie, there is a famous testimonie written by Cicero, in his second Oration against Verres, where he saith, that Marcus Cato did call it the Granarie, and Store-house of the Common-wealth, and the Nurse of the vulgar sort. The same Cicero doth adde in that place; that it was not only the store-house of the people of Rome: but also that it was accounted for a well furnished treasurie. For without any cost or charge of ours (saith he) it hath vsually cloathed, maintai∣ned, l. 6. and furnished, our greatest Armies, with leather, apparell, and corne. Strabo reporteth almost the same thing of it. Whatsoeuer Sicilie doth yeeld (saith Solinus ) whether by the Sunne, and temperature of the aire, or by the and labour of man, it is accounted next vnto those things that are of best estimation: were it not, that such things, as the earth first putteth forth, are extremely ouer-growne with saffron. Diodorus Siculus saith, that in the fields, neere vnto Leontium, and in other places of this Iland, wheat doth grow of it selfe, without any labour, or looking to, of the husbandman. Martianus sheweth, that there were in it sixe Colonies, and sixtie Cities: there are that reckon more, whereof the names are found scatteringly in many good Authours. Now besides many famous acts, done by the people of this Iland, as well in peace as warre; there be many other things, which haue made it very renowned, as the birth of Ceres; the rauishing of Proserpina; the Giant Enceladus; the mount Aetna, Scylla and Charibdis, with other antiquities, and rarities; besides those learned men, the noble Mathematician Archimedes; the famous Geometrician Euclides; the painfull Historian Diodorus; and Empedocles the deepe Philosopher. That Sicil was at first possessed and inhabited by Giants Laestriogones, and Cyclo∣pes, barbarous people, and vnciuill; all histories and fables doe joyntly with one consent auerre. Yet Thucydides saith, that these sauage people dwelt onely in one part of the Iland. Afterward the Sicani, a people of Spaine, possessed it. That these Sicani were not bred in the Isle (although some doe so thinke,) Thucydides and Dio∣dorus doe constantly auouch. Of these it was named Sicania. These Sicani were inuaded by the Siculi; who, inhabiting that part of Latium, Rome was afterward built, were driuen by the Pelasgi from their owne seates, and finding no place vpon the continent, which they were able to master and inhabite, passed ouer into this Iland, three hundred yeares before the Greekes sent any Colonies thither: and (saith Philistus ) eightie yeares before the fall of Troy. These Siculi gaue the name of Sicilia, to the Iland; and making warre vpon the Sicani, draue them from the East and Northerne part thereof, into the West and South. At their landing, they first built the Citie Zancle, afterward called Messena; and after that, Catana, Leontium, and Syracuse it selfe, bea∣ting from thence the Aetolians, who long before had set vp a Towne in that place. As for the name of Syracuse, it was not knowne, till such time as Archias of Corinth (long after) wonne that part of the Iland from the Siculi; Neither did the Siculi at their first arriuall dispossesse the Aetolians thereof, but some hundred yeares after their descent, and after such time as they had founded the Cities before named, with Neae, Hybla, Trinacia, and diuers others. After these Siculi came another Nation out of Italy, called Morgetes; who were thence driuen by the Oenotrians. These sate downe in that part of Sicil, where they afterward raised the Cities of Morgentum, and Leontium. For at this time the Siculi were diuided, and by a ciuill warre greatly . Among these ancient stories, we finde the last voiage, and the death of Minos, King of Creet. Thucydides, an Historian of vnquestionable sinceritie, reports of Minos, that he made conquest of many Ilands: and some such businesse, perhaps, drew him into Sicil. But the common report is, that he came thither in pursuit of Daedalus. The tale goes thus: Daedalus the reuenge of , came into Sicil to Cocalus, King of the Sicani, and during his aboade there, he built a place of great strength, neere vnto , for Cocalus, to lay vp his treasure in; together with many notable works, for which he was greatly admired and honoured. Among the rest, he cast a Ramme in gold, that was set vp in the Temple of Ve∣nus Erycina; which he did with so great arte, as those that beheld it, thought it ra∣ther to be liuing, than counterfait. Now Minos, hearing that Cocalus had entertained Daedalus, prepares to inuade the Territorie of Cocalus; but when he was arriued, Cocalus doubting his own strength, promiseth to deliuer Daedalus. This he performes not, but in the meane while, kills Minos by treason, and perswades the Cretans, Minos his followers, to inhabite a part of Sicil; the better (as it seemes) to strengthen himselfe against the Siculi. Hereunto the Cretans (their King being dead) gaue their consent, and builded for themselues the Citie of Minoa, after the name of their King Minos. After, they likewise built the Towne of Engyum, now called Gange: and these were the first Cities, built by the Greeks in Sicil, about two ages before the warre of Troy; for the grand children of Minos serued with the Greeks at the siege thereof. But after such time as the Cretans vnderstood, that their King had by treason beene made away; they gathered together a great Armie, to inuade Cocalus: and landing neere vnto Camicus, they besieged the same fiue yeares, but in vaine. In the end (being forced to returne, without any reuenge taken) they were wrackt on the coast of Italie; and hauing no meanes to repaire their ships, nor the honor they had lost, they made good the place whereon they fell, and built Hyria, or Hyrium, be∣tweene the two famous Ports of Brundusium, and Tarentum. Of these Cretans came those Nations, afterward called Iapyges, and Messapij. After the taking of Troy, Aegestus and Elymus, brought with them certaine troups into Sicil, and seated themselues among the Sicani; where they built the Cities of Aegesta and Elyma. It is said, that Aeneas visited these places in his passage into Italie: and that some of the Troianes, his followers, were left behinde him, in these Townes of Sicil: whereof there want not good Authours, that make Aeneas himselfe the founder. About the same time, the Phoenicians seised vpon the Promontories of Pachinus, and Lilybaeum, and vpon certaine small Isles adjoyning to the maine Iland: which they fortified, to secure the trades that they had with the Sicilians; like as the Por∣tugals haue done in the East India, at Goa, Ormus, and other places. But the Phoenicians staied not there; for they had once assured their descents, they built the goodly Citie of Panormus, now called Palerma. These we finde, were the Nations, that inhabited the Isle of Sicil, before the warre of Troy, and the Greeks in any numbers began to straggle in those parts. It may perchance seeme strange to the Reader, that in all ancient storie, he findes one and the same beginning of Nations, after the floud; and that the first planters of all parts of the World, were said to bee mightie and Giantlike men; and that, as Phoenicia, Aegypt, Lybia, and Greece, had Hercules, Orestes, Antaeus, Typhon, and the . . like; as Denmarke had Starchaterus, remembred by Saxo Grammaticus; as Scythia, Britanie, and other Regions, had Giants for their first Inhabitants; so this Isle of Sicil had her Lestrigones and Cyclopes. This discourse I could also reject for fained and fabulous; did not Moses make vs know, that the , Emims, Ana∣kims, and Og of Basan, with others, which sometime inhabited the Mountaines and Desarts of ; Ammon, and Mount Seir, were men of exceeding strength and sta∣ture, Tertul. de Re∣surr. and of the races of Giants: and were it not, that Tertullian, S t . Augustine, Ni∣cephorus, Procopius, Isidore, Plinie, Diodore, Herodotus, Solinus, Plutarch, and many o∣ther Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 15. Et . in Gen. Authours, haue confirmed the opinion. Yea, Vesputius, in his second Nauiga∣tion into America, hath reported, that himselfe hath seene the like men in those Niceph. l. 2. c. 37. Procop. l. 2. de Bello . Plin. l. 7. c. . parts. Againe, whereas the selfe-same is written of all Nations, that is written of any one; as touching their simplicitie of life, their meane fare, their feeding on a∣cornes and roots, their poore cottages, the couering of their bodies, with the skins of beasts, their hunting, their armes, and weapons, and their warfare, their first pas∣sages ouer great Riuers, and armes of the Sea, vpon rafts of trees tied together; and afterward, their making boats, first, of twigs and leather, then of wood; first, with Oares, and then with saile; that they esteemed as Gods, the first finders out of Arts; as of Husbandrie, of Lawes, and of Policie: it is a matter, that makes me neither to wonder at, nor to doubt of it. For they all liued in the same newnesse of time, which we call Old time, and had all the same want of his instruction, which (after the Crea∣tor of all things) hath by degrees taught all Mankinde. For other teaching had they none, that were remoued far off from the Hebrewes, who inherited the knowledge of the first Patriarchs, than that from variable effects they beganne, by time and de∣grees to finde out the causes: from whence came Philosophie Naturall; as the Mo∣rall did from disorder and confusion; and the Law from crueltie and oppression. But it is certaine, that the Age of Time hath brought stranger and more in∣credible things, than the Infancie. For we haue now greater Giants, for vice and in∣justice, than the World had in those daies, for bodily strength; for cottages and houses of clay and timber, we haue raised Palaces of stone; we carue them, we paint them, and adorne them with gold; insomuch as men are rather knowne by their houses, than their houses by them; we are fallen from two dishes, to two hundred; from water, to wine and drunkennesse; from the couering of our bodies with the skinnes of beasts, not only to silke and gold, but to the very skinnes of men. But to conclude this digression, Time will also take reuenge of the excesse, which it hath brought forth; Quam long a dies peperit, auxit, longissima subruit; Long time brought forth, longer time increased it, and a time, longer than the rest, shall ouerthrow it. †. II. The plantation of the Greeks in Sicil. WHen the first inhabitants had contended long enough about the Domi∣nion of all Sicil: it happened, that one Theocles, a Greeke, being driuen vpon that coast by an Easterly winde; and finding true the commendations thereof, which had beene thought fabulous, being deliuered onely by Poets; gaue infor∣mation to the Athenians of this his discouerie, and proposed vnto them the be∣nefit of this easie conquest, offering to become their guide. But Theocles was as little regarded by the Athenians, as Columbus, in our Grand-fathers times, was by the English. Wherefore hee tooke the same course, that Columbus afterwards did. Hee ouer-laboured not himselfe in perswading the Noble Athenians (who thought themselues to bee well enough alreadie) to their owne profit; but went to the Chalcidians, that were needie and industrious, by whom his project was gladly entertained. By these was built the Citie of Naxus, and a Colony planted of Euboeans. But the rest of the Greeks were wiser than our westerne Princes of Europe: for they had no Pope, that should forbid them, to occupie the voide places of the World. Archias of Corinth followed the Euboeans, and landed in Sicil, neare vnto that Citie, called afterward Syracuse, as Cicero relates, was the grea∣test, and most goodly Citie of all that the Greekes possest. For the situation is both strong, and of an excellent prospect, from euery entrance, by Land, or Sea. The Port was (for the most part) enuironed with beautifull building: and that part which was without the Citie, was on both sides bankt vp, and sustained with beautifull walls of Marble. The Citie it selfe was one of the greatest of the World: for it had in compasse (as Sirabo reporteth) without the treble wall thereof, 180. furlongs; which made of our miles about 18. It was compounded of foure Cities, ( saith, of fiue) to wit, Insula, , Tycha, and Neapolis: of which greatnesse, the ruines and foundations of the walls doe yet witnesse. Syracuse: of which, that part onely was then compassed with a wall, which the Aetolians called Homothermon; the Greeks, Nasos; the Latines, In∣sula. After such tim∣as the Dores of had driuen out the Sicilians, this goodly Citie, for a long time became the seat of Tytants The first wher∣of was : The second, Hiero, the el∣der: The third, Thrasybulus: The fourth, and fift, Diony∣sius, the elder, and yonger: The sixt, Dion: The seuenth Agathocles: The eight, : The ninth, Hiero the yon∣ger: The tenth and last, : who be∣ing slaine at Leontium, at length the Ro∣mans conque∣red it vnder the conduct of Marcellus. He with his Corinthians hauing ouer-come the Siculi, draue them vp into the Countrie; and after a few yeares, their multitudes increasing, they added vnto the Citie of the Iland, that of Acradina, Tycha, and Neapolis. So as well by the com∣modity of the double Port, capable of as many ships, as any Hauen of that part of Europe, as by the fertilitie of the soyle; Syracuse grew vp in great haste, to be one of the goodliest Townes of the World. In short time the Greekes did possesse the bet∣ter part of all the Sea-coast; forcing the Sicilians to withdraw themselues into the fast and mountainous parts of the Iland, making their Royall residence in Trinacia. Some seuen yeares after the arriuall of Archias; the Chalcidians, encouraged by the successe of the Corinthians, did assaile, and obtaine the Citie of Leontium, built and possest by the Siculi. In briefe, the Greekes winne from the , and their Associates, the Cities of Catana, and Hybla, which, in honour of the Megarians that forc't it, they called Megara. About fiue and fortie yeares after Archias had taken Syracuse; Antiphemus and Entimus, the one from Rhodes, the other from Crete, brought an Armie into Sicil, and built Gela; whose Citizens, one hundred and eight yeares after, did erect that magnificent and renowned Citie of Agrigentum, gouerned according to the Lawes of the Dorians. The Syracusians also, in the seuentieth yeare after their plantation, did set vp the Citie of Acra, in the Mountaines; and in the ninetieth yeare Casmena, in the Playnes adjoyning; and againe, in the hundred and thirtieth yeare of their dwelling in Syracuse, they built Camerina; and soone after that, Enna, in the very Center of the Iland. So did the Cumani, about the same time, recouer from the Siculi the Citie of Zancle, which they had founded in the streight betweene Sicil and Italie. They of Zancle had beene founders of Himera. Not long after this Doriaeus the Lacedaemonian built Heraclia; which the Phoeni∣cians, and Carthaginians, fearing the Neighbourhood of the Spartans, soone after in∣uaded and ruined, though the same were againe ere long re-edified. Selinus also was built by a Colonie of Megara: and Zancle was taken by the Messenians; who hauing lost their owne Countrie, gaue the name thereof vnto this their new purchase. Such were the beginnings of the greatest Cities in this Iland. †. II. Of the gouernement and affaires of Sicil, before DIONYSIVS his Tyrannie. THe most part of the Cities in Sicil, were gouerned by the rule of the people, till such time as Phalaris began to vsurpe the state of Agrigentum, and to exercise all manner of tyrannie therein. This was that Phalaris, to whom Perillus, the cunning Artificer of a detestable Engine, gaue an hollow Bull of brasse, wherein to enclose men, and scortch them to death: praysing the deuice with this commendation; That the noise of one tor∣mented therein, should bee like vnto the bellowing of a Bull. The Tyrane gaue a due reward to the Inuentour; by causing the first triall to be made vpon himselfe∣Hee raigned one and thirtie yeares, saith Eusebius; others giue him but sixteene: Howsoeuer it were, one Telemachus, in the end, fell vpon him with the whole mul∣titude of Agrigentum, and stoned him to death; being thereto animated by Zeno, whilest the Tyrant was tormenting the same Zeno, to make him confesse some matter of conspiracie. After the death of Phalaris, the Citizens recouered their libertie, and enjoyed it long, till Thero vsurped the gouernement of the Common-weale: at which time al∣so Panaetius made himselfe Lord of Leontium; and Cleander, of Gela: but Cleander, hauing ruled seuen yeares, was slaine by one of the Citizens. Cleander being dead, his brother Hippocrates succeeded in his roome, and greatly afflicted the people of Naxos, of Zancle or Messena, and of Leontium; whom with diuers other of the an∣cient inhabitants, he forced to acknowledge him their Lord. Hee also made warre with the Syracusians, and, in the end, got from them, by composition, the Citie of Camerina. But when he had raigned seuen yeares, he was slaine in a battell against the Siculi, before Hybla. At this time did the Syracusians change their forme of Gouernement, from Po∣pular to Aristocraticall; a preparation towards a Principalitie, whereinto it was soone after changed. After the death of Hippocrates, Gelon (descended from the Rhodians, which together with the Cretans had long before, among other of the Greeks, sea∣ted themselues in Sicil ) that had commanded the forces of Hippocrates, in the former warre, with notable successe, became Lord of Gela. Hee, after his Masters death, breaking the trust committed vnto him by Hippocrates ouer his children, and being in possession of Gela, took the occasion and aduantage of a contention in Syracuse, betweene the Magistrates and the People. For comming with a strong to the succour of the Gouernours, driuen out by the multitude, they elected him their Prince, being the first, and (indeede) the most famous, that euer gouerned the Syra∣cusians. Pausan l. 6. This change hapned in the second yeare of the threescore and twelfth O∣lympiad; wherein the better to establish himselfe, he tooke to wife the Daughter of Thero, who had also vsurped the state of Agrigentum. Now this Gelon, the sonne of Dinomenes, had three brethren; Hiero, Polyzelus, and Thrasibulus: to the first of which hee gaue vp the Citie of Gela, when hee had obtayned the Principalitie of Syracuse. For, after that time, all his thoughts tra∣uelled in the strengthning, beautifying, and amplifying of Syracuse. He defaced Camerina, that a little before was fallen from the obedience of the Syracusians who built it, and brought the Citizens to Syracuse. The Megarians that had moued a warre against him, he ouer-came; the richer sort he brought to Syracuse; and the people he sold for slaues. In like manner dealt he with other places vpon like occa∣sion. Not long after this, Thero, a Prince of the Agrigentines, hauing dispossest Terillus, of his Citie Himera; the Carthaginians were drawne into the quarrell by Anaxilus, Lord of Messena, Father-in-law to Terillus: and Gelon was also sollicited by his Father-in-law, Thero. Gelon was content, and in fine, after diuers conflicts, the Carthaginians, and other Africans, led by Amilcar, were ouerthrowne by Ge∣lon: and an hundred and fiftie thousand of them left their bodies in Sicil. Herod. & Diod. This Gelon it was, to whom the Athenians and Lacedaemonians sent for succour, when Xerxes with his huge Armie past the Hellespont. Hee, for their reliefe hauing armed thirtie thousand Souldiers, and two hundred ships, refused neuerthelesse to send them into Greece, because they refused him the commandement of one of their Armies, either by Sea, or by Land. So he vsed to their Embassadors onely this saying, That their Spring was withered; accompting the Armie, by him prepa∣red, to be the flower of the Greeke Nations. The Carthaginians, after this great losse receiued, fearing the inuasion of their owne Countrie, sent to Gelon by their Embassadors, to desire peace; who grants it them on these conditions; That from thenceforth they should not sacrifice their children to Saturne; That they should pay him two thousand talents of siluer; and present him with two armed ships, in signe of amitie. These conditions the Carthaginians, not only willingly accepted, but with the two thousands talents, and the ships for warre, they sent vnto Demarata; Gelon's wife, a crowne, valued at an hundred talents of gold, with other presents. Whereby we see, that some Nations, and some Natures, are much the better for being well beaten. The warres ended; and Sicil in peace; Gelon beautified the Temples of the gods, and erected others in honour of them. So being exceedingly beloued and honoured of his Subiects, he left the World, and left for his Successour his brother Hiero. Philistus and Plinie report, That, when his body was burnt, according to the custome of that Age, a Dogge of his, which alwaies waited on him, ranne into the fire, and suffered him∣selfe to be burnt with him. To Gelon, Hiero his brother succeeded, a man rude, cruell, couetous, and so su∣spicious of his brethren Polyzelus, and Thrasybulus, as hee sought by all meanes to destroy them. Notwithstanding all this; by the conuersation which hee had with Simonides, he became of better condition, and greatly delighted with the studie of good Arts. Diuers quarrells he had, as well with Theron of Agrigentum, as with o∣ther Cities: all which he shortly after compounded, and gaue a notable ouerthrow to the Carthaginians, whom Xerxes had incited to inuade Sicil, fearing the succours which Gelon had prepared, to aide the Graecians, against him. Hee also ouerthrew in battaile Thrasydaeus, the sonne of Theron, and thereby restored the Agrigentines, to their former libertie. But in the end, hee lost the loue of the Syracusians; and after he had raigned eleuen yeares, he left the Kingdome to his brother Thrasybulus, who became a most vnjust and bloudie Tyrant. Thrasybulus enioyed his Principalitie no longer then ten moneths. For, notwithstanding the force of mercinarie Souldiers, which he entertained for his guards, he was beaten out of Syracuse by the Citizens; to whom, being besieged in Acradina, restored the gouernement, and was ba∣nished the Iland. From whence he sailed into Greece, where he died a priuate man, among the Locrians. And now had the Syracusians recouered againe their former libertie, as all the rest of the Cities did, after which they had neuer sought, had the Successours of Gelon inherited his vertue, as they did the Principalitie of Syracuse. For in all changes of Estates, the preseruation ought to answere the acquisition. Where a liberall, valiant, and aduised Prince, hath obtained any new Signiorie, and added it to that of his owne or exalted himselfe from being a priuate man, to the dignitie of a Prince; it behoueth the Successour to maintaine it by the same way and arte, by which it was gotten. To conclude, Syracuse (though not without blowes, ere shee could clense her selfe of the creatures and louers of Gelon ) was now againe become Mistresse of her selfe, and held her selfe free, well-neare threescore yeares, to the time of Dionysius; though she were in the meane while greatly endangered by a Citizen of her owne, called Tindario. Now, to preuent the greatnesse of any one among them, for the future, they deuised a kind of banishment of such among them, as were suspected; taking pat∣terne from the Athenian Ostracisme. They called this their new deuised judgement of exile, Petalismus, wherein euery one wrote vpon an Oliue leafe (as at Athens they wrote vpon shells) the name of him, whom hee would haue expelled the Citie. Hee that had most suffrages against him, was banished for fiue yeares. Hereby, in a short time, it came to passe, that those of judgement, and best able to go∣uerne the Common-weale, were by the worst able, either supprest, or thrust out of the Citie. Yea, such as feared this Law, though they had not yet felt it, with∣drew themselues as secretly as they could; seeking some place of more secu∣ritie, wherein to maintaine themselues. And good reason they had so to doe; seeing there is nothing so terrible in any State, as a powerfull and authorized ignorance. But this Law lasted not long. For their necessitie taught them to a∣bolish it, and restore againe the wiser sort to the Gouernment; from which, the Nobilitie hauing practised to banish one another, the State became altoge∣ther Popular. But after a while, being inuaded by Ducetius, King of the Sicilians, thatinhabited the inner part of the Iland (who had alreadie taken Enna, and some other of the Cities, and ouerthrowne the Armie of the Agregentines ) the Syracusians sent forces against him, commanded by an vnworthy Citizen of theirs called Bolcon. This their Captaine made nothing so much haste to finde Ducetius, against whom he was imployed, as he did to flee from the Armie he led, as soone as Ducetius presented him battaile. So for want of conduct, the greatest num∣ber of the Syracusians perished. But making better choice among those, whom they had banished, they leuie other troups: by whom, in conclusion, Ducetius being beaten, submitteth him∣selfe, and is constrained to leaue the Iland for a time. Yet it was not long, ere hee returned againe, and built the Citie Collatina on the Sea-side. Ducetius being dead; all the Greeke Cities did in a sort acknowledge Syracuse: Trinacia excepted; which also by force of armes, in the fourescore and fift Olympiad, they brought to reason. But they doe not long enioy this their Superintendencie. For the Citizens of Leontium, being opprest by them, seeke aide from the Athenians, about the sixt yeare of the Peloponnesian Warre. In this suite they preuailed by the eloquence of Gor∣gias their Orator; and got an hundred Athenian Gallies to succour them, vnder the leading of Laches, and Charoeades. To this fleet, the Leontines, and their Part∣ners, added one hundred more; with which forces, and with some supplies brought by Sophocles, Pythodorus, Eurymedon, and other Athenian Captaines, they inuaded the Territories of the Syracusians, and their Partisans; wanne and lost diuers places; tooke Messana; and, in the seuenth yeare of the Peloponnesian Warre, lost it againe. They also at the same time, attempted Himera, but in vaine. The fire of this quar∣rell tooke hold vpon many Cities, which inuaded each others Territorie with great violence. But when they had wearied themselues on all hands, and yet could see none issue of the warre; the Leontines, without the aduice of the Athenians, came to an accord with the Syracusians, and were admitted into their societie, with equall freedome. So the Athenians, who hoped to haue greatned themselues in Sicil, by the diuision and ciuill warre, were disappointed of their expectation, by the good agreement of the Sicilians, and faine to bee gone with the broken remain∣der of their fleet. This they knew not how to amend; but (according to the cu∣stome of popular Estates) by taking reuenge vpon their owne Commanders. So they banished Pythodorus, and Sophocles, and layd an heauy fine vpon Eurymedon. Shortly after this, followed the most memorable Warre, that euer was made by the Greekes in Sicil: which was that of the Athenians, against the Selinuntines, and Syracusians, in fauour of the Cities of Egesta, Leontium, and Catana. They of Selinus had opprest the Egestans; and they of Syracuse, the Leontines, and the Catanians: which was the ground of the warre. For, the Athenians vndertooke the protection of their old friends: And, in of the Athenians, aide from Lacedaemon was sent to the Syracusians. The Lacedaemonians dealt plainely, hauing none other end, than that which they pretended, namely, to helpe a people of their owne Tribe, that craued their succour, being in distresse. The Athenians scarce knew what to pre∣tend: for their preparations were so great, as discouered their intent to be none o∣ther, then the conquest of the whole Iland. Yet they which had called them in, were so blinded with their owne passions, that they would not beleeue their owne eies; which presented vnto them a Fleet, and Armie, farre greater, than the terri∣ble report of fame had made it. In this expedition, the Citie of Athens had engaged all her power; as regarding, not only the greatnesse of the enterprise, but the necessitie of finishing it in a short space of time. For the Lacedaemonians (as hath alreadie beene shewed in due place) stood at that time in such broken termes of peace with Athens, as differed not much from open warre. Wherefore it was thought necessarie, either to spare cost in this great expeditio, or altogether to forbear it: which was likely to be hindred by wars at home, if their proceedings were slacke abroad. And surely, had not the desire of the beene ouer-passionate, the arguments of Nicias had caused them to abstaine from so chargeable a businesse, and to reserue their forces for a more need∣full vse. But yong counsailes preuailed against the authoritie of ancient men, that were more regardfull of safetie than of honour. Of this businesse, mention hath beene alreadie made, in that which wee haue written of the Peloponnesian warre. But what was there deliuered in general termes, as not concerning the affaires of Greece, otherwise than by consequēce; doth in this place require a more perfect relation, as a matter, wherein the whole State of Sicil was like to haue felt a great conuersion. Though Alcibiades had preuailed against Nicias, in exhorting the people to this great voiage; yet Nicias, together with Alcibiades, and Lamachus, was appointed to be one of the chiefe Commanders therein. These had commission and direction, as well to succour the Segestans, and to re∣establish the Leontines, cast out of their places by the Syracusians, as also, by force of armes, to subject the Syracusians, and all their adherents, in Sicil, and compell them by tribute, to acknowledge the Athenians for their supreme Lords. To effect which, the fore-named Captaines were sent off, with an hundred and thirtie Gallies, and fiue thousand one hundred Souldiers, besides the thirtie ships of burden, which transported their victualls, engines, and other munitions for the warre: and these were Athenians, Mantinaeans, Rhodians, and Candians: there were, besides these, sixe thousand Megarians light armed, with thirtie horse-men. Thucid. l. 6. c. 9. With these troups and fleets they arriue at Rhegium, where the Rhegians refuse to giue them entrie; but sell them victualls for their monie. From thence they sent to the , to know what treasure they would contribute towards the warre, see∣ing for their sakes, they had entred thereinto. But they found by their answeres; that these Egestans were poore, and that they had abused the Athenian Embassadors with false shewes of gold, hauing in all but thirtie talents. The Athenians further were discouraged, when they found that the Rhegians, their ancient friends, and allied vnto the , refused to trust them within their walls. Hereupon Nicias aduiseth to depart towards the Selinuntines, and to force them, or perswade them, to an agreement with the Egestans; as likewise to see what disbursements the Ege∣stans could make; and so to returne againe into Greece, and not to waste Athens in a needlesse warre. Alcibiades, on the other side, would sollicite the Cities of Sicil to confederacie against the Syracusians and Selinuntines, whereby to force them vnto restitution of all that they had taken from the Leontines. Lamachus, hee perswades them to assaile Syracuse it selfe, before it were prepared against them. But in the end (being excluded out of diuers Cities) they surprize Catana: & there they take new counsaile, how to proceede. Thence they imploied Nicias to those of Egista, who receiued from them thirtie talents towards his charges; and one hundred & twen∣tie talents more there were of the spoiles they had gotten in the Iland. Thus, the Summer being spent in idle consultations, & vaine attempts, the Athenians prepare to assaile Syracuse. But Alcibiades hauing beene accused at home, in his absence, was sent for backe by the Athenians, to make his answere: and the Armie was left to the conduct of Nicias and Lamachus. These Commanders obtaine a landing place very neare vnto Syracuse, by this deuice. They imploy to Syracuse an inhabitant of Catana, whom they trust; and instruct him, to promise vnto the Syracusians, that he would deliuer into their hands all the Athenians, within Catana. Hereupon the Syracusians draw thitherward with their best forces. But in the meane while, the Athenians, setting saile from Catana, arriue at Syracuse, where they land at faire ease, and fortifie themselues against the Town. Shortly after this, they fight, and the Syracusians had the losse: but the Athenians, wanting horse, could not pursue their victorie to any great effect. They then retire themselues, with a resolutiō to refresh their Armie at Catana, for the winter-season. From thence they made an attempt vpon Messana, hoping to haue taken it by an in∣telligence, but in vaine. For Alcibiades had discouered such as were Traitors with∣in the Citie to the Messenians. This he now did, in despight of his owne Citizens, the Athenians; because they had recalled him from his command, with a purpose either to haue put him to death, or to haue banished him: whereof heing assured by his friends, he tooke his way towards the Lacedaemonians, and to them hee gaue mischieuous counsaile against his countrey. While this winter yet lasted, the Sy∣racusians send Embassadours to Lacedaemon, and Corinth, for aide: as likewise the A∣thenian Captaines in , send to Athens, for supplies. Which both the one and the other obtained. In the Spring following (which was the beginning of the eighteenth yeare of the Pelopennesian warre) the Athenians in Sicil, saile from the Port of Catana, to Me∣gara, for saken of the Inhabitants; from whence forraging the Countrie, they ob∣taine some small victories ouer the straggling Syracusians: and at their returne to Ca∣tana, they receiue a supply of two hundred men at armes, but without horse, which they hoped to furnish in the Iland, from the Segestans, and other their adherents: they were also strengthened with a companie of Archers and with three hundred talents in monie. Hereupon they take courage, and incampe neere Syracuse, vpon the banks of the great Port, repelling the Syracusians, that sallied to impeach their intrenchments. They also receiued from their Confederates foure hundred horse-men, with two hūdred other horse, to mount their men at armes. Syracuse was now in effect blockt vp, so as hardly any succours could enter, but such as were able to force their pas∣sage: yet the Athenians receiue diuers losses; among which it was not the least, that Lamachus, one of their best Commanders, was slaine. In the meane while, Gylyppus, and Python, with the Lacedaemonian, and forces arriue, and take land at Hymera. The Citizens of Hymera, and of , toge∣ther with the Selinuntines, joyne with them; so that with these and his own troups, Gylippus aduentured to march ouer-land towards Syracuse. The Syracusians send a part of their forces to meet him, and conduct him. The Athenians prepare to en∣counter them, expecting his arriual neere vnto the Citie, vpon a place of aduantage. At the first encounter, they had the better of their enemies, by reason that the Sy∣racusian horse-men could not come to fight in those streights: but soone after, Gy∣lippus charging them againe, brake them, and constrained Nicias to sortifie himselfe within his Campe. Whereupon Nicias made the state of his affaires knowne, by his letters, to the Athenians; shewing, that, without great supplies by Sea and Land, the enterprise would be lost, together with the small Armie remaining. These letters receiued, the Athenians appoint two other Generalls, Eurymedon, and Demosthenes, to joyne with Nicias: the one they dispatch presently with some supply; the other they send after him in the Spring following. In the meane while, Gylyppus at Syracuse, fights with the Athenians, both by Sea and Land, sometimes with ill, and at other times with good successe: but in conclu∣sion, he tooke from them their Fort, neere vnto Syracuse, at the Promontorie, called Plymmyrium; wherein the Athenians lost thèir treasure, and a great part of all their prouisions. Not withstanding which losse, and that the Athenians themselues, in Greece, were (in effect) besieged within Athens, by the Lacedaemonians; yet were they most obstinate in prosecuting the Warre in Sicil, and dispatched away Demosthenes with new succours. Demosthenes, in his way towards Sicil, encountred with Polyan∣thes the Corwthian, with his flecte: both the Captaines being bound for Sicil; the one to succour Nicias; the other, Gylippus. The losse betweene was in effect e∣quall; and neither so broken, but that each of them prosecuted the enterprise they had in hand. But before the succours arriued to either, Gylippus and Ariston had as∣sailed the Athenians in the great Port of Syracuse, and in a Sea-fight put them to the worst, to the great discouragement of the Athenians. On the neck ofthis, arriued with three-score and thirteene Gallies, charged with foot-men; and (blaming the slouth of Nicias ) he inuaded the Syracusians, the same day that he ar∣riued. But he made more haste, than he had good speede, being shamefully beaten, and repulsed with great losse. Hereupon Demosthenes and Enrymedon, determine to vp from before Syracuse, and returne to the succour of Athens: but Nicias dispu∣ted to the contrarie, pretending that hee had good intelligence within Syracuse, whereby he learned, that the Towne could not long hold out. Whatsoeuer Nicias his intelligence was; vpon the arriuall of a new supply into the Towne, the Athenians had all consented to depart, and to lodge at Catana: had not an Eclipse of the Moone, boding (as was thought) ill successe, caused them to deferre their departure. But this superstition cost them deare. For the Syracusians, Lacedaemonians, and Corinthians, with threescore and seuenteene saile of Gallies, en∣tred the great Port of Syracuse, wherein the Athenians kept their fleet, and whereon they had fortified themselues. The Athenians, in the same Port encountred them with fourescore and Gallies, commanded by Eurymedon; in which the Athenian fleet was beaten, by the lesser number, and Eurymedon slaine. Now, though it were so, that the Syracusians receiued the more losse by Land (for the fight was generall) yet when the Athenians were beaten by Sea, in which kinde they thought them∣selues inuincible, they were wonderfully cast downe. For it was well said of Gylip∣pus, to the Syracusians; When any people doe finde themselues vanquished in that manner of , and with those weapons, in which they perswade themselues that they exceede all o∣thers, they not only loose their reputation, but their courage. The Athenians, besides the Gallies sunck and wrackt, seuenteene taken, and possest by the enemie: and with great labour and losse they defended the rest from being fired, hauing drawne them within a Palisado, in one corner of the Port, vnaduisedly: for it is as contrarie to a Sea-warre, to thrust ships into a streight roome and corner, as it is to scatter foot in a plaine against horse; the one subsisting, by being at large; the other, by close imbattaising. The Syracusians, hauing now weakned the Athenian fleet, resolue to imprison them within the Port. And to that purpose they range all their Gallies in the mouth of the Hauen, being about a mile ouer, and there they came to Anchor; fil∣ling the Out-let with all manner of Vessels, which they man most strongly, because the Athenians, being now made desperate, should not with double ranks of Gallies breake through the Syracusian fleet; which lay but single, because they were forst to range themselues ouer all the Out-let of the Port. They therefore, not onely mored themselues strongly by their Anchors, but chained the sides of their Gal∣lies together, and layd behinde them againe certaine ships, which serued in the for∣mer warre for victuallers: to the end, that if any of their Gallies were sunke; or the chaine, which joined them to their fellowes, broken; the Athenians might yet finde themselues, a second time, intangled and arrested. To disorder also those Athenian Gallies, which came on in forme of a wedge, to breake through, and force a passage, the Syracusians had left within these Gallies and Ships, inchained together, a certain number ofloose ones, to stop their course and furie. For where the way of any ves∣sell, vsing oare or sailes, is broken, and their speede fore-slowed, they cannot force with any weight and violence, the resistance opposing. On the other side, the Athenians knew that they were vtterly lost, except with an inuincible resolution, they could make their way, and breake downe this great bridge of boats; or (at least) force a passage through them in some part or other: which they resolue to hazard, with all their shipping (to the number of one hun∣dred and ten, of all sorts) and with all the strength of their Land-armie, in them im∣barqued. But the Gallies, which were within the bridge of boats, did so disorder the Athenian fleet, ere they came to force the bridge, as, albeit some few of them had broken through the chaines, yet being stopt by the ships without, and assailed by other loose Gallies of the Syracusians, which were purposely left at large in the Sea, they were either taken or sunke. Three great disaduantages the Athenians had: the first, that fighting within a Hauen, and (as it were) in a streight, they had no roome to turne themselues, nor to free themselues one from another, being intangled; the second, that hauing ouer-pestered their Gallies with Souldiers, who vsed offensiue armes of darts and slings, they had not place vpon the decks to stretch their armes: the third was, the discomfortable end for which they fought, namely, to force a passage, by which they might saue themselues by running away. To be short, the fight was no lesse terrible than the confusion; the slaughter great on all sides; and the noise, and the cries, so lowd and lamentable, as that no direction could be heard. But in the end, the Athenians, as many as suruiued, were beaten back to the Land, with losse of threescore of their Gallies, broken, sunke, or abandoned. The Syracu∣sians did also loose twentie of theirs, with Python, Commander of the Corinthians. The rest of the Athenian Gallies, running themselues into the bottome of the Port, saued themselues by the helpe and countenance of the Land-armie, there fortified. In this desperate estate, the Athenian Commanders goe to counsell. Demosthenes perswades them, to furnish with fresh Souldiers those few Gallies which remained; and while the Syracusians were triumphing, and made secure by their present victo∣rie, to set vpon them, and forcing their way out of the Port, to returne to Athens. This was no ill counsaile. For, as we haue heard of many great Captaines (yea, the greatest number of all that haue beene victorious) that haue neglected the speedie prosecution of a beaten enemie; so might we produce many examples of those, who, hauing slept securely in the bosome of good successe, haue beene suddenly a∣waked, by the re-allied Companies of a broken Armie, and haue therby lost againe all the honour, and aduantage, formerly gotten. But opposeth the aduice of Demosthenes: Others say, that the Sea-men were against it. Whereupon abando∣ning their Gallies, they all resolue to march ouer land to the Cities of their Confe∣derates, till some more fauourable fortune should call them thence. On the other side, Gylippus, and other the and Corinthian Captaines, with Hermo∣crates, exhort the Syracusians to put themselues presently into the field, and to stop all the passages, leading to those Cities of their enemies, to which the Athenians might make retrait. But many were weary, and many were wounded, and many of them thought that they had done enough for the present. Which humour in some of our Commanders at Cadez, lost vs both the Indian fleet, and the spoiles of many other Neighbour-places. Hermocrates, the Syracusian, finding it a lost labour, to perswade his Countrimen to any hastie prosecution, deuised this good strata∣gem, thereby to gaine time; not doubting, but that after a day or two, hee should draw them willingly out. He sent two or three horse-men out of Syracuse by night, willing them to finde Nicias, and (after they had assured him, that they were of the Athenians faction) to giue him aduice not to march away ouer-hastily from the place, wherein he was fortified; alleaging that the Syracusians had lodged their Ar∣mie, which could not long stay there, vpon the passages & places of aduantage, lea∣ding towards the Cities of their Allies. These tidings Nicias easily beleeued, and put off his journie to the third day. For men newly beaten, are (for the most part) more fearefull than wise; and to them, euery thistle in the field, appeares, by night, a man at armes. The third day (leauing all their Gallies, and all their baggage) they remoue; be∣ing pierced and pursued with the lamentable out-cries of those that were sick and hurt: whom they abandon to the cure of their enemies swords. The rest march a∣way, to the number of fortie thousand; and make their first passage by force, ouer the Riuer of Anapus, notwithstanding the opposition of their enemies. But being euery day charged in their marches, & by the Syracusian horse-men, beaten in from forraging, and prouision of foode, they grow weake and heartlesse. The Syracusi∣ans also possesse the Mountaine Lepas, by which they were to passe towards , and thereby force them to fall back againe towards the Sea coast, and to take what way they could: being vnable to proceede in their journey intended. Many hard shifts they made, in difficult passages, and blinde marches by night; which they were faine to endure, as hauing none other meanes to escape from the enemie that pursued them, and held them waking with continuall skirmishing. To keepe all in order, Nicias vnder-tooke the leading of the Vantgard; and Demosthenes con∣ducted the Reare. At the Riuer Erineus, Nicias takes the of a whole nights march, leauing Demosthenes to make the retrait: who being incompassed, and ouer∣prest with numbers, in the end renders himselfe. The conditions he obtained, were farre better than he could haue hoped for; and the faith of his enemies farre worse than he suspected. For he was afterward, with Nicias, murdered in prison. The Armie of Demosthenes being dissolued, they pursue Nicias with the greater courage: who being vtterly broken, vpon the passage of the Riuer Assinarus, rendred him∣selfe to Gylippus, vpon honest conditions. Gylippus sought to preserue him, and to haue had the honour, to haue brought these two to Sparta; Nicias, as a noble ene∣mie to the Lacedaemonians, and who, at the ouerthrow, which they receiued at Pylus by the Athenians, had saued the liues of the vanquished; Demosthenes, as one that had done to the greatest hurt. Hermocrates also, the Commander of the Syracusian Armie, disswaded the rest, by all the arte he had, from vsing any barba∣rous violence, after so noble a victorie. But the cruell, and the cowardly sort, (co∣wardise and crueltie, being inseparable passions) preuailed, and caused these braue Captaines to be miserably murdered; one part of their Souldiers to bee starued in lothsome prisons; and the rest, sold for slaues. This was the successe of the Sicilian warre: which tooke end at the riuer , the foure and twentieth day of May, in the fourescore and eleuenth . The Athenians being beaten out of Sicil; the Egestans (for whose defence, against the Selinuntines, this late warre had beene taken in hand) fearing the victorious Sy∣racusians, sought helpe from the Carthaginians; to whom they offered themselues, and their Citie, as their Vassals. The Carthaginians, though ambitious enough of enlarging their Dominion in Sicil, yet considering the prosperitie of the Syracusians, and their late victories ouer the Athenians, they staied a while to dispute of the mat∣ter, whether they should refuse, or accept, the offer made vnto them: for the Seli∣nuntines were streightly allied to the Syracusians, as may appeare by what is past. In the end, the Senators of Carthage resolue vpon the enterprise; and (by a trick of their Punick wit) to separate the Syracusians from the Selinuntines, they send Em∣bassadours to Syracuse: praying that Citie, as in the behalfe of the Egestans, to compell the Selinuntines to take reason, and to rest content with so much of the lands in question, as they of Syracuse should thinke meet to allow them. The Syra∣cusians approued the motion; for it tended to their owne honour. But the Selinun∣tines would make no such appointment: rather they tooke it ill, that the Syracusians, with whom they had run one course fortune, in the Athenian war, should offer to trouble them, by interposing as Arbitrators, in a busines, that themselues could end by force. This was right as the Carthaginians would haue it. For now could they of Selinus with an ill grace craue aide of Syracuse; and the Syracusians as ill grant it vnto those, that had to stand to the Arbitrement, which the Carthaginians would haue put into their hands. Hereupon, an Armie of three hundred thousand men is set out from Carthage, vnder the conduct of Hannibal, Nephew to that Amil∣car, who (as you haue heard before) was ouerthrowne with the great Carthaginian Armie at Himera by Gelon. Hannibal was exceeding greedy of this imploiment, that he might take reuenge, as well of his Vncles, as of his Fathers death; the one of them hauing beene slaine by the Himerans; the other by those of Selinus. Both these Cities, Hannibal, in this warre, wonne by force of armes, sackt them, and burnt them; and hauing taken three thousand of the Himerans prisoners, he caused them to be led vnto the place, where Amilcar was slaine, and buried them there. After this followed some trouble at Syracuse, occasioned by the banishment of Hermocrates, who had lately beene Generall of the Syracusian forces, against the A∣thenians. The malice of his enemies had so farre preuailed with the ingratefull mul∣titude, that he was condemned to exile for his meere vertue, at such time, as he was aiding the Lacedaemonians, in their warre against Athens; wherein hee did great ser∣uice. All the honester sort within Syracuse were sorie for the injurie done vnto him, and sought to haue him repealed. Hermocrates himselfe, returning into Sicil, gathe∣red an Armie of sixe thousand; with which he beganne to repaire Selinus; and by many noble actions laboured to winne the loue of his Citizens. But the faction that opposed him was the stronger. Wherefore, he was aduised to seize vpon a Gate of Syracuse, with some strength of men; wherby his friends, within the Towne, might haue the better meanes to rise against the aduerse partie. This he did: but present∣ly the multitude fell to armes, and set vpon him; in which conflict hee was slaine. But his sonne-in-law, Dionysius, shall make them wish Hermocrates aliue againe. †. IIII. Of DIONYSIVS the Tyrant: and others, following him, in Syracuse. THe Syracusians had enjoyed their libertie about threescore yeares, from the of Thrasybulus, to the death of Hermocrates: at which time Dionysius was raised vp by God, to take reuenge, as well of their crueltie towards strangers, as of their ingratitude towards their owne best Citizens. For before the time of Diony∣sius, they had made it their pastime, to reward the vertue of their worthiest Com∣manders with death, or disgrace: which custome they must now bee taught to amend. Dionysius obtained the Principalitie of Syracuse, by the same degrees, that many others, before him, had made themselues Masters of other Cities, and of Syracuse it selfe. For, being made Praetor, and commanding their Armies against the Carthagi∣nians, and other their enemies, he behaued himselfe so well, that he got a generall loue among the people, and men of warr. Then beganne he to follow the example of Pisistratus, that made himselfe Lord of Athens; obtaining a band of sixe hun∣dred men, to defend his person: vnder pretence, that his priuate enemies, being traiterously affected to the State of Syracuse, had laied plots how to murder him, because of his good seruices. He doubled the pay of the Souldiers; alledging, that it would encourage them to fight manfully: but intending thereby to assure them to himselfe. He perswaded the Citizens, to call home, out of exile, those that had beene banished, which were the best men of Syracuse; and these were afterwards at his deuotion, as obliged vnto him by so great a benefit. His first fauour, among the Syracusians, grew from his accusation of the principall men. It is the delight of base people to raigne ouer their betters: wherefore, gladly did hee helpe them to breake downe, as fetters imprisoning their libertie, the barres that held it vnder safe custodie. Long it was not, ere the chiefe Citizens had found whereat hee aimed. But what they saw, the people would not see: and some that were needie, and knew not how to get Offices without his helpe, were willing to helpe him, though they knew his purposes to be such, as would make all the Citie to smart. He began early to hunt after the tyrannie; being but fiue and twentie yeares of age when he obtained it: belike, it was his desire to raigne long. His first worke, of making himselfe absolute Lord in Syracuse, was, the possession of the Citadell; wherein was much good prouision, and vnder it the Gallies were mored. This hee obtained by allowance of the people; and hauing obtained this, he cared for no more, but de∣clared himselfe without all shame or feare: The Armie; the chiefe Citizens, resto∣red by him from banishment; all the needie sort within Syracuse, that could not thriue by honest courses; and some neighbour-townes, bound vnto him, either for his helpe in warre, or for his establishing the faction, raigning at that present, were wholly affected to his assistance. Hauing therefore gotten the Citadell into his hands, he needed no more, saue to assure what hee had alreadie. Hee strengthned himselfe by diuers marriages; taking first to wife the daughter of Hermocrates; and after her, two at once; the one a Locrian, Doris, by whom he had Dionysius, his Suc∣cessor; the other, Aristomache, the daughter of Hipparinus, and sister to Dion, honou∣rable men in Syracuse, which bare vnto him many children, that serued to fortifie him with new alliances. Yet it was not long, ere some of the Syracusians (enuying his prosperitie) incited the multitude, and tooke armes against him, euen in the noueltie of his Rule. But their enterprise was more passionately, than wisely gouerned. He had shamefully been beaten by the Carthaginians at Gela: which, as it vexed the Sicilian men at armes, ma∣king them suspect that it was his purpose to let the Carthaginians waste all, that hee might afterwards take possession of the desolate places; so it inflamed them with a desire to free themselues from his tyrannie. They departed therefore from him, and marched hastily to Syracuse, where they found friends to helpe them: there they forced his Palace, ransaked his treasures, and so shamefully abused his wife, that for the griefe thereof shee poisoned her selfe. But hee followed their heeles a∣pace; and firing a Gate of the Citie by night, entred soone enough to take reuenge, by making a speedie riddance of them. For he spared none of his knowne, no, not of his suspected enemies. After that, he grew so doubtfull of his life, as he neuer durst trust Barber to trim him, nor any person, no, not so much as his brother, to enter into his chamber, vnstript and searched. He was the greatest Robber of the people, that euer raigned in any State; and withall the most vnrespectiuely cruell. After this, he separated with fortification that part of the Citie, called the Iland, from the rest; like as the Spaniard did the Citadell of Antwerpe: therein he lodged his treasures, and his Guards. He then beganne to make warre vpon the free Cities of Sicil: but while hee lay before Herbesse, an in-land Towne, the Syracusians rebelled against him; so, as with great difficultie hee recouered his Citadell: from whence, hauing allured the old Souldiers of the Campanians, who forced their passage through the Citie, with one thousand and two hundred horse, hee againe recouered the masterie ouer the Syra∣cusians. And when a multitude of them were busied in gathering in their Haruest, he disarmed all the Townes-men remayning: and new strengthned the Fort of the Iland, with a double wall. He inclosed that part also, called Epipoles; which, with threescore thousand labourers, hee finished in three weekes; being two leagues in compasse. He then built two hundred new Gallies, and repaired one hundred and ten of the old; forged one hundred and fortie thousand Targets, with as many swords, and head-peeces, with fourteene thousand corslets, and all other sutable armes. Which done, he sent word to the Carthaginians, (greatly enfeebled by the ) That except they would abandon the Greeke Townes, which they held in Sicil, he would make warre vpon them: and, not staying for answere, he tooke the spoile of all the Phoenician ships, and merchandize, within his Ports; as King Philip the second did of our English, before the warre in our late Queenes time. He then goes to the field with fourescore thousand foot, and three thousand horse, and sends his brother Leptines to sea, with twohundred Gallies, and fiue hundred ships of bur∣den. Most of the Townes which held for Carthage yeelded vnto him; sauing Pa∣normus, Segesta or Egesta, Ancyrae, Motya, and Entella. Of these, he first wonne Motya by assault, and put all therein to the sword; but before Egesta hee lost a great part of his Armie, by a sallie of the Citizens. In the meane while Himilco arriues; but, ere he tooke land, he lost in a fight at Sea, with Leptines, fiftie ships of warre, and fiue thousand Souldiers, besides many ships of burden. This notwithstanding, hee re∣couered againe Motya vpon his first descent. From thence marching towards Mes∣sene, he tooke Lypara, and (soone after) Messena, and rased it to the ground. Now beganne Dionysius greatly to doubt his estate. Hee therefore fortified all the places hee could, in the Territorie of the Leontines, by which hee supposed that Himilco would passe toward Syracuse; and he himselfe tooke the field againe, with foure and thirtie thousand foot, and one thousand horse. Now, hearing that Himilco had di∣uided his Armie into two parts, marching with the one ouer land, and sen∣ding Mago with the other by Sea: he sent Leptines, his brother, to encounter Ma∣go. But Leptines was vtterly beaten by the Carthaginians; twentie thousand of his men were slaine, and an hundred of his Gallies . It is very strange, and hardly credible, which yet good Authours tell vs; That one Citie should be able to fur∣nish fiue hundred saile of ships, and two hundred Gallies: (for, so many did Syra∣cuse arme in this warre) and more strange it is, that in a battaile at Sea, without any great Artillerie, or Musket-shot, twentie thousand should be slaine in one fight. In all our fights against the Turkes, of which that at Lepanto was the most notable, we heare of no such number lost; nor in any other fight by Sea, that euer hapned in our age, nor before vs. When Charles the fift went to besiege Algier, hee had in all his fleet, transporters and others, but two hundred and fiftie saile of ships, and threescore and fiue Gallies: for the furnishing of which fleet, he sought helpe from all the Cities and Ports of Spaine, Naples, and the rest of . But in old times it was the manner to carrie into the field, vpon extremitie, as many as were needfull, of all that could beare armes, giuing them little wages, or other allowance: in our daies it is not so; neither indeede, is it often requisite. Vpon this ouerthrow, Dio∣nysius postes away to Syracuse, to strengthen it: Himilco followes him, and besiegeth the Towne by Land and Sea. But the Tyrant, hauing receiued aide from the Lacedaemonians, vnder the conduct of Pharacidas, puts himselfe to Sea, to make pro∣uision for his Citizens: who, in his absence, take twenty of the Carthaginian Gallies, and sinke foure. Hereupon, finding their owne successe prosperous, and that of the Tyrant exceeding ill; hauing also at the present weapons in their hands; they con∣sult how to recouer their libertie. And this they had done, had not Pharacidas the Lacedaemonian resisted them. It also fell out, to his exceeding aduantage, that the plague was so increased, and so violent, among the Carthaginians; as it is said, that aboue an hundred thousand of them died thereof. Hee therefore, with the power that he could gather together, sets vpon them both by Sea and Land; and hauing slaine great numbers of them, forceth Himilco to desire peace. This peace Dionysius sold him for a great summe of monie; on condition that he should steale away with his Carthaginians only: which he basely accepted, betraying the rest of the Africans and Spaniards. Yet no faith was kept with him: for he was pursued, and left many of his Carthaginians behinde him. The rest of the Africans fell vnder the swords of their enemies; only the Spaniards, after they had a while brauely defended them∣selues, were (after their submission) entertained, and serued the Conquerour. Many such examples of dealing haue I noted in other places, and can hardly forbeare to deliuer vnto memorie the like practises, when they meete with their matches: That which hapned vnto Monsieur de Piles, was very sutable to this treacherie, wherewith Dionysius pursued Himilco. I was present, when De Piles rela∣ted the injurie done vnto him. He had rendered S t . Iohn d'Angelie, to the French King Charles the ninth, who besieged him therein. rendred it, vpon promise made by the faith of a King, that he should be suffered to depart in , with all his followers. Yet in presence of the King himselfe, of the Duke of Anion his bro∣ther, Generall of his Armie, of the Queene Mother, and of diuers Dukes and Mar∣shalls of France, he was set vpon, and broken in his march; spoiled of all that he had; and forced to saue his life by flight, leauing the most of his Souldiers dead vpon the place: the Kings hand and faith, warranting him to march away with ensignes di∣splaid, and with all his goods and prouisions, no whit auailing him. It needes not therefore seeme strange, that an Heathen Tyrant should thus break his faith, since Kings, professing Christianitie, are bold to the like, or command their Cap∣taines to doe it for them. Dionysius, after this great victorie, tooke care to re-edifie Messena. Mago, who staied in Sicil, to hold vp the Carthaginians therein, is againe beaten by Dionysius; who is also beaten by the Tauromenians. A new supply of fourescore thousand Souldiers is sent from Carthage to Mago; but they take egges for their , and make peace with Dionysius, leauing the Sicilians in Tauromenium, to shift for them∣selues: whom Dionysius, after a long siege, ouer-came, and gaue their Citie to his mercinarie Souldiers. He then past into Italie, obtained diuers victories there, brought the Rhegians on their knees, forced them to pay him one hundred & fourescore thousand crownes, to furnish him with threescore Gallies, and to put in an hundred pledges, for assu∣rance of their future obseruance of couenants. This he did, not with any purpose to performe vnto them the peace that they had so dearely bought; but that hauing taken from them their Gallies, he might besiege them, and ruine them vtterly, with the more . Now to the ende hee might not, without some colour, the faith that hee had giuen to them; he pretended to want victual for his Armie, at such time as hee seemed ready to depart out of Italie, and sent to them to furnish him the rewith; promising to returne them the like quantitie, at his comming home to . His resolution was, that if they refused to furnish him, hee would then make their refusall the cause of his quarrell: if they yeelded to aide him with the pro∣portion which he desired, that then they should not be able, for want of food, to endure a siege any long time against him. For to ruine them hee had fully deter∣mined, at what price soeuer. And great reason he had to take reuenge of them, if he had done it fairely, and without breach of faith. For when in the beginning of his raigne, he desired them to bestow a daughter of some of their Nobilitie vpon him, for a wife: they answered, That they had not any one fit for him, saue the Hang-mans daughter. Princes doe rather pardon ill , than villanous words. Alexander the Great forgaue many sharpe swords, but neuer any sharpe tongues; no, though they told him but truely of his errours. And certainely, it belongs to those that haue warrant from God, to reprehend Princes: and to none else, espe∣cially in publique. It is said, that Henrie the fourth of , had his heart more inflamed against the Duke of Biron, for his ouer-bold and biting taunts, that hee vsed against him before Amiens, than for his conspiracie with the Spaniard, or Sanoyan: for he had pardoned tenne thousand of such as had gone farther, and drawne their swords against him. The contemptuous words that Sir Iohn Par∣ret vsed of our late Queene Elizabeth, were his ruine; and not the counterfait letter of the Romish Priest, produced against him. So fared it with some other, greater than hee, that thereby ranne the same, and a worse fortune, soone after. To bee short, hee made them know new bread from old. Hee assaulted their Towne on al sides, which he continued to doe eleuen moneths, till he wonne it by force. He vsed his victorie without mercie; specially against Phyton, who had com∣manded within it. Some other warres hee made with the Carthaginians, after the taking and ra∣sing of this Citie; and those with variable successe. For as in one encounter hee slue Mago, with ten thousand Africans: so the sonne of Mago beat him, and slue his brother Leptines, with foureteene thousand of his Souldiers. After which hee bought his peace of the Carthaginians, as they had formerly done of him; following therein the aduice of Prosperitie and , as all Kings and States doe. When he had raigned eight and thirtie yeeres, he died: some say, in his bedde, peaceably; which is the most likely, though others report it otherwise. A man he was, and a faithlesse; a great Poet, but a foolish one. He entertained Plato a while, but afterward, for speaking against his tyrannie, hee gaue order to haue him slaine, or sold for a slaue. For he could endure no man, that flattered him not beyond measure. His Parasites therefore stiled his crueltie, The hate of euill men; and his lawlesse slaughters, The ornaments and effects of his . True it is, that flatterers are a kinde of vermine, which poison all the Princes of the World; and yet they prosper better than the worthiest and valiantest men doe: and I wonder not at it; for it is a world: and as our Sauiour Christ hath told vs, The World will loue her . To this Dionysius, his sonne of the same name succeeded; and inherited both his Kingdome, and his Vices. To winne the loue of the People, he pardoned, and re∣leased out of prison, a great number of persons, by his Father lockt vp, and con∣demned. Withall, hee remitted vnto his Citizens diuers payments, by his Father imposed vpon them. Which done, and thereby hoping, that hee had fastned vnto himselfe the peoples affections; he cast off the Sheepes skinne, and put on that of the Woolfe. For being jealous of his owne Brethren, as men of more vertue than himselfe, he caused them all to bee slaine; and all the Kindred that they had by their Mothers side. For Dionysius his Father (as hath beene said) had two Wiues; Doris of Locris; and Aristomache a Syracusian, the sister of Dion, which Brother-in∣law of his he greatly enriched. By Doris hee had this Dionysius, who succeeded vnto him: and by he had two Sonnes and two Daughters; of which the elder, called , he gaue in marriage to his eldest Sonne, and her halfe-brother, Dionysius; the yon∣ger, called Areta, he bestowed on his Brother Theorides: after whose death, Dion tooke her to Wife, being his Neece. This Dion, a just, and valiant man, finding that Dionysius had abandoned all ex∣ercise of vertue, and that hee was wholly giuen ouer to sensualitie, preuailed so much with Plato, whose Disciple he had beene, as he drew him into Sicil, to instruct the youg King. And hauing perswaded the King to entertaine him, hee wrought so well with him, as Dionysius beganne to change condition; to change Tyrannie, into Monarchie; and to hold the Principalitie, that he had, rather by the loue of his People, and his Nationall Lawes, than by the violence of his Guards and Garri∣sons. But this goodnesse of his lasted not long. For Philistus the Historian, and other his Parasites, that hated Dions , wrought him out of the Tyrants fauour; and caused him soone after to be banished out of Sicil, to the great griefe of the whole Nation. For whereas Dion had made offer to the King, either to compound the quarrels betweene him and the Carthaginians, of whom Dionysius stood in great feare, or (at least) if they refused it, to furnish him with fiftie Gal∣lies at his owne charge, during the warre against them: his enemies found meanes, by sinister , to conuert his good will into matter of treason. They told Dionysius, that al the great commendations, giuen of Plato, had tended to none other end, then to soften his minde, and to make him neglect his owne affaires, by the studie of Philosophie; whilest Dion, in the meane time hauing furnished fiftie Gallies, vnder colour of the Kings seruice, had it in his owne power, either to deli∣uer to the Syracusians their former liberty, or to make himself Lord and of their State. It is likely, that the honest and liberall offer which hee made, to serue the King with so great a preparation, at his owne charge, begot him many enemies. For they that had serued the King for none other ende, than to raise and enrich themselues, and had already beene raised and enriched, thought themselues bound to make the same offer, that Dion had made, if the King had had the grace to con∣ceiue it aright. But these couetous and ignorant cowards, that had neither the knowledge, nor the daring, that Dion had, were bold to stile his Loue and Liberalitie, Pride and Presumption; and heartned the yong King, in his oppressing, and eating vp his owne people, of whose spoiles they themselues shared no small portion. I haue heard it, That when Charles the fift had the repulse at Algier in Africa, Ferdinando Cortese, one of the brauest men that euer Spaine brought forth, offered vnto the Em∣perour, to continue the siege at his owne charge. But he had neuer good day after it. For they that enuied his victories, and his conquest of Mexico in the west Indies, perswaded the Emperour, that Cortese sought to value himselfe aboue him; and to haue it said, That what the Emperour could not, Cortese had effected, and was therefore more worthy of the Empire, than he that had it. When Dion was newly , the Tyrant was contented, at first, to send him the reuenewes of his Lands, and permit him to dispose of his moueables, at his own pleasure: not without giuing hope, to recall him in short time. Had he continued in this good moode, like enough it is, that Dion would haue well pleased to liue well, as he did, at Athens. But after sometime, Dionysius made Port-sale of this Noble-mans goods; and thereby vrged him to take another course; euen to seeke the restitution of his Countrie to libertie. The vertues of Dion, especially his great liberalitie, had purchased much loue in Greece. This loue made him suspected and hated of the Tyrant: but it stood him in good stead, when he sought to raise men, with whose helpe he might returne into Sicil. Yet he got not aboue eight hundred (for hee caried the matter closely) to follow him in this aduenture. But many of them were men of quality, and fit to be Leaders. Neither did he doubt of finding in Syracuse, as many as should be needfull, that would readily assist him. Therefore he landed boldly in Sicil; marched to Syracuse; entred the Citie without resistance; armed the multitude; and wonne all, saue the Citadell. Dionysius was then absent in Italie; but hee quickely had aduertisement of this dangerous accident. Wherefore hee returned hastily to : whence, after many vaine treaties of peace, and some forceable attempts to recouer the Towne, he was faine to depart; leauing yet the Castle to the custodie of Apollocrates, his el∣dest sonne. Yet ere he went, his Minion Philistus, comming with a strength of men to assist him, was beaten, taken, and put to death by torment. But Dion, for re∣couerie of his Countries libertie, had the same reward, that all worthy men haue had from popular Estates. He was disgraced, assaulted, and forced to abandon the Citie. Hee retired himselfe to the Leontines, who receiue him with great ioy. Soone after his departure from Syracuse, new troups enter the Castle: they sallie out, assaile, spoile, and burne a great part of the Citie. Dion is sent for, with humble request: yet, ere hee could arriue, Dionysius his Souldiers were retired; and the Townesmen, thinking themselues secure, shut the gates against Dion. But the next night they of the Castle sallie againe, with greater then euer; they kill Man, Woman, and Child, and set fire in all parts of the Towne. In this their extremitie Dion comes the second time to their succour; the loue of his Countrie surmoun∣ting all the injuries that he had receiued. Hee sets vpon the Garrison of the Castle, with the one part of his Armie; and quencheth the fire, euery-where kindled, with the other part. In conclusion, after he had conquered both the fire and the sword, that had well- burnt to ashes, and depopulated Syracuse, he recouered the Ca∣stle, with the munition and furniture thereof, and sent Apollocrates, after Dionysius his Father, into Italie. But their malice, of whom he had best deserued, and whom he had loued most, gaue an vntimely ende to his dayes. For he was soone after this his victorie, murdered by Calyppus; who, after he had, with ill successe, a while go∣uerned Syracuse, was slaine with the same Dagger, with which hee had murdered Dion. Ten yeeres after the death of Dion, Dionysius, with the assistance of his friends in Italie, recouers his estate, and returnes to Syracuse, driuing Nysaeus thence, whom he found Gouernour therein. The better sort of the Citizens, fearing, more then e∣uer, his crueltie, flee to Icetes, a Syracusian borne, and then ruling the Leontines. I∣cetes enters into confederacie with the Carthaginians, hoping by their assistance, not onely to preuaile against Dionysius; but by the hatred of the Syracusians to∣wards Dionysius, to make him also Lord of their Citie. The Syracusians, being de∣seruingly afflicted on all sides, send to the Corinthians for succour. Icetes also sends thither, and disswades the Corinthians, as well as he can, from intermeddling in the businesse. He tells them, by his messengers, That he had entred into league with the Carthaginians, who were so strong by Sea, that it was not in the power of Co∣rinth, to land any Armie in Sicil. But the Corinthians, being by this treason of Icetes, more inraged then disswaded, sent Timoleon with nineteene Gallies, to deliuer Sy∣racuse from tyrannie. In the meane while, Icetes had entred Syracuse, and with the helpe of the Carthaginians, driuen Dionysius into the Castle, where hee besieged him. Icetes, being himselfe a Tyrant in Leontium, rather sought how to enlarge his power, than, how to deliuer his Countrie. Therefore, hearing that Timoleon was arriued at Rhegium, he sent to him, to returne his fleet; for that all things were (in effect) established in Sicil. The Carthaginian Gallies were also in the same Port of Rhegium; whose Captaines aduised Timoleon, to get him gone in peace. They had farre more Gallies there, then he had, and were like to compell him, if he would not be perswaded. Timoleon, finding himselfe ouer-mastered, makes re∣quest to the Carthaginian Captaines, that they would be pleased to enter into Rhe∣gium, and there, in an open assembly of the people, to deliuer vnto him those argu∣ments, for his returne, which they had vsed to him in priuate; that he might, by publique testimonie, discharge himselfe to the Senate of Corinth. The Carthaginians, perswading themselues, that a victorie, obtayned by a few faire words, was without losse, and farre more easie, than that of many blowes and wounds, yeelded to Timoleons desire. But while the Orations were deliuering, Ti∣moleon, fauoured by the , stole out of the presse; and hauing set saile, before the Gates were opened to the Carthaginians, he recouered the Port of Tauromenium, where he was joyfully receiued by Andromachus the Gouernour. From thence he marched toward Abranum, were surpising Icetes his Armie, hee slue a part thereof, and put the rest to runne. It is the nature of victorie to beget friends. The Adranitans ioyned with him; and so did Mamercus, the Tyrant of Catana. Diony∣sius also sent to Timoleon, offering to surrender the Castle of Syracuse into his hands, as thinking it better to yeeld vp himself, and the places which he could not defend, vnto the Corinthians, than either to Icetes, whom he disdained, or to the Carthagini∣ans, whom he hated. Now Timolcon, who within fiftie daies, after his arriuall, had recouered the Castle of Syracuse, and sent Dionysius to Corinth, to liue there a priuate man, was still inuaded by the Armies, and molested by the practices of Icetes. For he besieged the Corinthians within the Castle of Syracuse, and attempted (but in vaine) the murder of Timolcon. The Corinthians send vnto Timoleon a supply of two thousand foot, and two hundred horse, which are staid in Italie by foule weather. Icetes is strengthned with threescore thousand Africans, brought vnto him by Mago (all which he lodgeth within Syracuse ) and an hundred and fiftie Gallies, to keepe the Port. This was the first time, that euer the Carthaginians had dominion within the walls of that Citie. With this great Armie, Icetes assaulteth the Castle. Timoleon sends them victualls, and succour, in small boats, by night, from Catana. Mago and Icetes doe therefore resolue to besiege Catana; but they were no sooner on their way towards it, with part of their forces, than Leon, Captaine of the Corinthians, sallied out of the Castle, and tooke that part of Syracuse, called , which he fortified. In the meane while, the two thousand Corinthians arriue: with whom, and two thousand other Souldiers, Timoleon towards Syracuse. Mago abandoneth Icetes, being frighted out of Sicil (which he might easily haue conquered) with an idle rumour of treason. This made him returue to Carthage; where the generall exclamation against his cowardize, did so much affright him, that for feare of far∣ther punishment, he hanged himselfe. Timoleon enters the Citie, and beats downe the Castle (which he called the nest of Tyrants ) to the ground. But he found the Ci∣tie when the strangers were fled, in effect desolate; so as their horses did feede on the grasse, growing in the market-place. Therefore, he writes to Corinth, for peo∣ple to re-inhabite it. Ten thousand are sent out of Greece; many come from Italie; others, from other parts of the Iland. But a new storme ariseth. Asdrubal and Amilcar, Carthaginians, arriue about Li∣lybaeum, with threescore and ten thousand Souldiers, transported (with all their pro∣uisions) in a thousand ships of burden, and two hundred Gallies. Timoleon marcheth thither, and chargeth this great Armie vpon the passage of a Riuer. A tempest of raine, haile, and lightning, with boysterous windes, beating vpon the faces of the Carthaginians, they are vtterly broken: ten thousand slain; fiue thou∣sand taken; with all their carriages and prouisions: among which there were found a thonsand corslets, gilt, and grauen. After this Timoleon, gaue an ouerthrowe to Icetes, and following his victorie, tooke him, with his sonne Eupolemus, and the Ge∣nerall Plut. in vit. . of his horse, prisoners; whom he caused all to be slaine: and afterwards (which was imputed to him for great crueltie) he suffered Icetes his wiues and daughters to put to death. But this was the reuenge of God vpon Icetes, who (after the mur∣der of Dion ) had caused Arete, Dions wife and a yong child of his, with Aristomache his sister, to to be cast into the Sea. He againe preuailed against Mamercus, Tyrant of Catana, and wonne Catana it selfe. Mamercus fled to Hippon Tyrant of Messena: but Timoleon, pursuing him, wonne the towne; deliuering Hippon, to his Citizens, who tormented him to death, The same end had Mamercus, and all other, the Tyrants in Sicil. Finally, he made peace with the Carthaginians; on condition, That they should nor passe the Riuer of Lycus. After this, he liued in great honour among the Syra∣cusians, till his death; and was solemnely buried by them in the market-place of their Citie: the day of his Funeralls, being for euer ordained to bee kept holy a∣mong them. After such time, as Timoleon had deliuered Syracuse, from the tyrannie of Diony∣sius, and brought peace to the whole Iland; the inhabitants enioyed their libertie in peace, about twentie yeeres. The Cities and Temples were repaired; the Trade renewed; the Merchant sailed in safetie; and the Labouring man enioyed the fruits of the earth in quiet. But it was impossible that a Nation which neither knew how to gouerne, nor how to obey; which could neither endure Kings, nor men worthie to be Kings, to gouerne them; should any long time subsist. Twentie yeares after the death of Timoleon, there started vp an Agathacles a∣mong them, a man of base birth, and of baser condition; who from a Begger, to a common Souldier; from a Souldier to a Captaine; and so from degree to degree, rising to bee a Praetor; finally became Lord and Soueraigne of the Syraousians. Many fortunes he ranne, and vnder-went as many dangers, ere hee obtained the Principalitie. For he had more than once attempted it, and was therein both bea∣ten and banisht. A passing valiant man he was, and did notable seruice, as well for those by whom he was imploied, as also for the Syracusians, and against them. For in their warres against those of Enna, and the Campanes, he did them memorable ser∣uice: and on the contrarie, as memorable seruice for the Murgantines, against the Sy∣racusians. For being entertained by the people of Murgantia, and made Generall of their forces, he sackt Leontium; and besieged Syracuse so streightly, that the Citi∣zens were driuen to craue aide, euen from their ancient and naturall enemies, the Carthaginians. Amilcar was sent by the Carthaginians, to relieue Syracuse. With him Agathocles wrought so well, that he got him to make peace betweene himselfe and the Syracusians; binding himselfe by promise and oath, to remaine a friend and ser∣uant to the state of Carthage, for euer after. Amilcar entertained the businesse, and compounded the quarrels betweene Agathocles, and the Syracusians. Agathocles is chosen Praetor; he entertaines fiue thousand Africans, and diuers old Souldiers of the Murgantines, vnder colour of a purpose to besiege Herbita. With these, and with the assistance of the poore and discontented Syracusians (the Citie being also diuided into many factions) he assailes the Senators, kills all his enemies and op∣posites; diuides the spoile of the rich, among the poore; and giues libertie to his Souldiers, to robbe, to rauish, and to murder, for two whole dayes and nights, without controlment: the third day, when they had blunted their barbarous appc∣tites, and strewed the streets with ten thousand dead carkasses, besides those that had broken their necks ouer the walls; their furie had no further subject to worke on. Agathocles, in an assembly of the people (being an eloquent knaue) perswaded them, that, for the violent sicknesse, by which the common-wealth was vtterly consumed, he found no better, than the violēt remedies, which he had administred; & that he affected no other thing, than the reducing of the state from an Oligarchie, or the rule of a few tyrannous Magistrates, to the ancient & indifferent Democratie, by which it had beene gouerned, from the first institution, with so great glorie and prosperitie. This he did, to haue the crowne clapt on his head (as it were) per∣force. For as hee knew, that hee had left none liuing, within the Citie, fit, nor able, to exercise the office of a Magistrate: so knew he right well, that all they which had assisted, in the murder and spoile of their fellow-Citizens, had no other hope of de∣fence, then the support of a law lesse Lord, who had beene partaker with them, in their villanies and cruelties committed. So as this Rabble, his Oration ended, proclaimed him King: againe and againe, saluting, and adoring him, by that name, as if it had beene giuen to him by some lawfull election. Hence had our King Richard the third a peece of his patterne; but the one was of base; the other, of Kingly parents; the one tooke libertie from a Common-weale; the other sought only to succeede in a Monarchie; the one continued his cruelty to the end; the o∣ther, after he had obtayned the Crowne, sought, by making of good lawes, to reco∣uer the loue of his people. The life of this Tyrant, is briefly written by ; more largely and parti∣cularly by Diodorus Siculus: the summe whereof is this. The same Amilcar that had brought him into Syracuse, and that had lent him fiue thousand men to helpe in the massacre of the Citizens, was also content to winke at many wrongs, that hee did vnto the Confederates of the Carthaginians. It was the purpose of Amilcar, to settle Agathocles in his tyrannie, and to let him vexe and waste the whole Iland; because it was thereby like to come to passe, that he should reduce all Sicil into such termes, as would make it become an easie prey to Carthage. But when the Cities, confe∣derate with the Carthaginians, sent their Embassadors, with complaint of this ill dealing to Carthage; the Punick faith (so much taunted by the Romans, as no bet∣ter than meere falshood) shewed it selfe very honourable, in taking order for the re∣dresse. Embassadours were sent to comfort the Sicilians, and to put Agathocles in minde of his couenants; Amilcar was recalled home into Africke, and a new Cap∣taine appointed to succeede in his charge, with such forces, as might compell Aga∣thocles to reason, if otherwise he would not harken to it. All this tended, to saue their Confederates, from suffering such iniuries in the future. For that which was past (since it could not be recalled) they tooke order to haue it seuerely punished. Amilcar was accused secretly, and by way of scrutinie: the suffrages being giuen, but not calculated; and so reserued, vntill he should returne. This was not so close∣ly handled, but that Amilcar had some notice of it. In managing his businesse with Agathocles, it is likely that he had an eye to his owne profit, as well as to the publike benefit of his Countrie. For he had made such a composition with the Syracusian, as gaue him not onely meanes to weaken others, but to strengthen himselfe, both in power and authoritie, euen against the Carthaginians. Such is commonly the of those, that hope to worke their owne ends by cunning practices: thinking to deale subtilly, and finely, they spinne their threads so small, that they are broken with the very winde. Amilcar saw, that his Carthaginians had a purpose to deale substantially; and that therefore it would bee hard for him, to make them follow his crooked deuices: which if he could not doe, it was to be expected, that their an∣ger would breake out into so much the greater extremitie, by how the more they had concealed it. Therefore he followed the example, which some of his fore∣goers had taught him; and, for feare of such a death, as the Iudges might award him, he ended his owne life in what sort he thought best. This desperation of A∣milcar serued to informe Agathocles of the Carthaginians intent. He saw they would not be deluded with words, and therefore resolued to get the start of them in action. He dissembled no longer; but, in stead of spoile and , made open warre vpon all their Adherents. He had made the better part of Sicil his owne, ere the Carthaginian forces arriued: which thinking to haue encountred an ill-established Tyrant, found him readie, as a King, to defend his owne, and giue them sharpe en∣tertainement. They were beaten by him; and their Nauie was so Tempest-bea∣ten, that they could neither doe good by Land, nor Sea, but were glad to leaue their businesse vndone, and returne into Africk. The Carthaginians prepare a new fleet: which being very gallantly manned and furnished, was broken by foule weather, and the best part of it cast away, euen whilest it was yet within kenning of their Citie. But Amilcar, the sonne of Gisco, ga∣thering together the remainders of this ship-wrack, was bold to passe ouer into Sicil, and landed not farre from Gela; where Agathocles was soone readie to examine the cause of their comming. Many skirmishes passed betweene them, in which (com∣monly) the Syracusian had the better. But his good successe begat presumption; whereby he lost a battaile, more important than all the fights. One aduerse chance is enough to ouerthrow the state of a Tyrant, if it be not vp-held by great circumspection. The warre was soone transferred to the walls of Syracuse; within which Agathocles was closed vp, and driuen to make his last defence by their helpe, who may be judged to haue loued him not very greatly. But the Inhabitants of Syracuse, after that great massacre of the principall men, made in the beginning of this new tyrannie, were (for the most part) such, as had beene either mercinarie Souldiers, infranchised slaues, or base and needie people; helpers in establishing the present Gouernement, and Executioners of the murders, and spoile, committed in that change. If there were any other (as some there were) they were so well ob∣serued, and (withall) so fearfull, that they durst not stirre. But it was not enough, that they all agreed in the common defence of themselues and their Citie; Famine was likely to grow vpon them, and them to change their resolution. In this necessitie, Agathocles aduentured vpon a strange course, which the euent commen∣ded, as wise. He imbarqued as many as he thought meet, in those vessells that rode in the Hauen; and committing the gouernment of the Citie to his brother An∣tander, willed the people to be of good courage, for that (as he told them) hee had bethought himselfe of a meane, both to raise the siege, and to repaire all other losses. A Carthaginian fleet lay in the mouth of the Hauen, both to hinder the entrance of victuallers, and to keepe the besieged from issuing forth. Now, at such time as Agathocles was readie to depart, aduertisement came, that many ships of burden, laden with corne, and other prouisions, were drawing neere vnto Syracuse. To intercept these, the Carthaginians hoise saile, and lanch forth into the deepe. They were not farre gone, when they might behold Agathocles, issu∣ing forth the Bort, with purpose (as they thought) to giue conuoy vnto his vic∣tuallers. Hereupon they about, and make amaine towards him, as think∣ing him the better bootie. He neither abode their comming, nor fled back into the Citie, but made all speede towards Africk; and was pursued by the Carthaginians, as long as day would giue them light. In the meane season, the victuallers were got∣ten into Syracuse; which was the more plentifully relieued by their comming, for that Agathocles had vnburdened the place of no small number. When the Cartha∣ginian Admirall perceiued; first, that by pursuing two fleets at once, he had missed of them both; and secondly, that Agathocles returned not againe, but was gone to seeke his fortune elsewhere; he thought it good to pursue those that were fled, and to attend so well vpon them, that they should not haue leisure to doe mischiefe in some other part. The Carthaginian Nauie followed Agathocles (whether by chance, or by relation of such as had met with him at Sea) directly towards Africk, and ouer-tooke him after sixe dayes. He had (at the first) a great start of them; so that (belike) they rowed hard; and wearied themselues, in seeking their owne misfortune. For he fought with them, and beat them; and, hauing sunke, or taken many, draue the rest to flie which way they could, laden with strange tidings of his voiage. When Agathocles had landed his men in Africk, then did he discouer vnto them his project; letting them vnderstand, That there was no better way to diuert the Carthaginians, not only from Syracuse, but from all the Ile of Sicil, than by bringing the warre to their owne dores. For here (said hee) they haue many that hate them, and that will readily take armes against them, as soone as they perceiue that there is an Armie on foot, which dares to looke vpon their walls. Their Townes are ill fortified; their people vntrained, and vnexperienced in dangers; the mercinarie forces, that they leuie in these parts, will rather follow vs than them, if wee offer greater wages than they can giue: which wee may better promise and make good, by letting them haue some share with vs in all the wealth of the Carthaginians, than our enemies can doe, by making some addition to their stipends. Thus hee talked, as one already Master of all the riches in Africk; and with many braue wordes en∣couraged his men so well, that they were contented to set fire on all their ships (re∣seruing one or two, to vse as Messengers) to the end that no hope should remaine, saue only in victorie. In this heat of resolution, they winne by force two Cities; which after they had throughly sacked, they burnt to the ground; as a marke of terrour to all that should make resistance. The Carthaginians, hearing this, are ama∣zed; thinking that Amilcar is broken, and his whole Armie destroied in Sicil. This impression so dismaies them, that when they know the truth of all, by such as had scaped in the late Sea-fight, yet still they feare, and know not what. They suspect Amilcars faith, who had suffered Agathocles to land in Africk: they suspect their principall Citizens at home, of a meaning to betray Carthage, vnto the enemie; they raise a great Armie, and know not vnto whose charge they may safely com∣mit it. There were at that time two famous Captaines in the Citie, Hanno, and Bomil∣car; great enemies, and therefore the more vnlikely to conspire against the Com∣mon-wealth. These are made Generalls of the Armie leuied, which farre exceeded the forces of Agathocles. But it seldome happens, that dissension betweene Com∣manders produceth any fortunate euent. Necessitie draue Agathocles to fight: and the courage of his men, resolued to deale with the whole multitude of the Cartha∣ginians, made easie the victorie against the one halfe of them. For Bomilcar would not stirre: but suffered Hanno to be cut in peeces. The reputation of this victorie, brought ouer a King of the Africans, from the Carthaginian societie, to take part with Agathocles: who pursuing his victorie, wins many Townes, and sends word to Syracuse of his good successe. The Carthaginians also send into Sicil, willing Amilcar, their Generall, to succour the state of Africk, which was in danger to be lost, whilest hee was trauailing in the conquest of Sicil. Amilcar sends them fiue thousand men: all his forces he thought it not needfull to transport; as hoping rather to draw Agathocles back into Sicil, than to bee drawne home by one, that could scarce retaine his owne Kingdome. But these good hopes had a bad issue. He spent some time in winning a few Townes, that adhered vnto the Syracusians: and hauing brought his matters to some good order, he conceiued a sudden hope of taking Syracuse by surprise. It was a pretie (though tragicall) acci∣dent, if it were true, as Tullie relates it. Amilcar had a dreame, which told him that he should suppe the next day within Syracuse. His fancie begot this dreame, and he belieued it. He made more haste, than good speede, toward the : and com∣ming vpon it on the sudden, had good hope to carrie it. But his enemies were pre∣pared for him, and had laied an ambush to intrap him, whereinto he fell. So he was carried prisoner into the Citie; in which it was likely, that he had no great cheare to his supper: for they struck off his head, and sent it into Africk (a welcome pre∣sent) to Agathocles. This good successe of things at home, did put such courage into the Sicilian Ar∣mie, that Agathocies was bold to weare a Crowne, and stile himselfe King of Africk. He had allured Ophellas, King of the Cyrenians, to take his part, by promises to deli∣uer the Countrie into his hands: for that (as he said) it was sufficient vnto himselfe to haue diuerted the Carthaginians from Sicil, wherein (after this warre ended) he might raigne quietly. Ophellas came with a great Armie, and was friendly enter∣tained. But the traiterous Sicilian, taking an aduantage, did murder this his assistant; and afterwards, by good words, and great promises, drew all the Cyrenian Armie to follow him in his warres. Thus his found good successe; and he so pre∣uailed in Africk, that he got leisure to make a step into . Many Townes in Sicil had imbraced a desire of recouering their libertie; thinking it high time to fight at length for their owne freedome, after that they had so long beene exposed, (as a re∣ward of victorie) either vnto Aliens, or to Tyrants, of their owne Countrie. These had preuailed farre, and gotten many to take their parts, as in a common cause: when the comming of Agathocles abated their high spirits, and his good successe in many fights, compelled them to obedience. Out of Sicil he returned into Africk, where his affaires stood in very bad termes. Archagathus, his sonne, had lost a bat∣taile; and (which was worse) had ill meanes to help himselfe: his Armie being in mutinie for lack of pay. But Agathocles pacified the tumult, by the accustomed pro∣mises of great bootie and spoile. It had now beene time for him, to offer peace to the Carthaginians which to obtaine, they would (questionlesse) haue giuen to him, both monie enough to pay his Armie, and all that they then held in Sicil. For their Citie had beene distressed, not only by this his warre, but by the treason of Bomil∣car, who failed not much of making himselfe Tyrant ouer them. But ambition is blinde. Agathocles had all his thoughts fixed vpon the conquest of Carthage it selfe: out of which dreame he was awaked, by the losse of a battaile, not so memorable in regard of any accident therein, as of the strange euents following it. The Cartha∣ginians, after their great misfortunes in this warre, had renewed their old sacrifices of children to Saturne: from which they had abstained, euer since they made peace with Gelon. And now they made choice of some, the goodliest of their prisoners, taken in the battaile, to offer vnto the said Idoll, in way of thankefulnesse for their victorie. The fire, with which these vnhappie men were consumed, caught hold vpon the lodgings neerest vnto the Altar; and spreading it selfe farther through the Campe, with the destruction of many men, caused such a tumult, as is vsuall in the like cases. At the same time, the like accident of fire burnt vp the Pauilion of Agathocles. Hereupon both the Armies fled away; each of them beleeuing, that the noise in the aduerse Campe, was a signe of the enemies comming to inuade it. But the Carthaginians had a safe retrait: Agathocles, by a second errour, fell into a new calamitie. In the beginning of this his flight in the darke, hee met with his owne African Souldiers; and thinking them to bee enemies, (as indeede the one halfe of them had reuolted from him, to the Carthaginians, in the last battaile) hee beganne to assaile them, and was so stoutly resisted, that he lost, in this blinde fight, aboue foure thousand of his men. This did so discourage his proud heart; that being fallen from the neere hope of taking the Citie of Carthage, vnto some distrust of his owne safetie, hee knew no more how to moderate his present weake feares, than lately he had knowne how to gouerne his ambition. Therefore he tooke the way that came next into his head; which was, to steale closely aboord his ships, with his yonger sonne (the elder he suspected of Incest, and of Ambition) and so to flie into Sicil; thinking it the best course, to shift for himselfe, as wanting vessells wherein to transport his Armie. His elder sonne, Archagathus, perceiued his drift, arrested him, and put him vnder custodie: but by meanes of a sudden tumult, hee was let loose, escaped, and fled alone, leauing both his sonnes behinde him. His flight being noised through the Armie, all was in vprore; and extremitie of rage caused not only the common Souldier, but euen such as had beene friends to the Tyrant, to lay hold vpon his two sonnes, and kill them. That this flight of Aga∣thocles was extremely base; I neede not vse wordes to proue: That his feare was truly, as all feare is said to be, a passion, depriuing him of the succours which reason offered, the sequele doth manifest. His forsaken Souldiers, being now a headlesse company, and no longer an Armie to be feared, obtained neuerthelesse a reasona∣ble composition from the Carthaginians: to whom they sold those places, whereof they had possession, for nineteene talents. Likewise, Agathocles himselfe, hauing lost his Armie, did neuerthelesse, by the reputation of this late warre, make peace with Carthage vpon equall termes. After this, the Tyrant, being deliuered from forraine enemies, discouered his bloudie nature, in most abominable cruelties, among the Sicilians. His wants, and his feares, vrged him so violently, that he was not satisfied with the spoiles of the rich, or the death of those whom he held suspected: but in a beastly rage depopulated whole Cities. Hee deuised new engines of torment; wherein striuing to exceede the Bull of Phalaris, he made a frame of brasse, that should serue to scortch mens bodies, and withall giue him leaue to behold them in their miserie. So deuillish is the nature of man, when reason, that should be his guide, is become a slaue to his brutish affections. In these mischiefes he was so outragious, that he neither spared Sexe, nor Age; especially, when he was informed of the slaughter of his children in Africk. But this was not the way to preserue his estate: it threw him into new dangers. They whom hee had chased out of their Countrie, tooke armes against him, and draue him into such feare, that hee was faine to seeke the loue at Carthage, which, by ruling well, he might haue had in Sicil. He freely deliuered into the Car∣thaginians hands, all those Townes of the Phoenicians in Sicil, belonging vnto them, which were in his possession. They requited him honourably, with great store of corne, and with foure hundred talents of gold and siluer. So (though not without much trouble and hazard) he preuailed against the Rebells, and setled his estate. Hauing no further businesse left in Sicil, hee made a voiage into Italie. There hee subdued the Brutians, rather by terrour of his name, than by any force, for they yeelded at his first comming. This done, he went to the Isle of Lipara, and made the Inhabitants buy peace with one hundred talents of gold. But when he had got∣ten this great summe, he would needs exact a greater; and finding plainly that they had no more left, he was bold to spoile the Temples of their gods. Herein (me thinks) he did well enough. For how could he belieue those to be gods, that had continually giuen dease to his horrible perjuries? Then hee returned richly home, with eleuen ships loaden with gold: all which, and all the rest of his fleet, were cast away by foule weather at Sea; one Gallie excepted, in which he himselfe escaped, to suffer a more miserable end. A grieuous sicknesse fell vpon him, that rot∣ted his whole bodie, spreading it selfe through all his veines and sinewes. Whilest he lay in this case, all desiring his end, saue only Theogenia (a wife that hee had taken out of Aegypt ) and her small children: his Nephew, the sonne of , be∣fore mentioned, and a yonger sonne of his owne, beganne to contend about the Kingdome. Neither did they seeke to end the controuersie by the old Tyrants de∣cision; they regarded him not so much. But each of them laied wait for the others life: wherein the Nephew sped so well, that he slue his Vncle, and got his Grand∣fathers Kingdome without asking any leaue. These tidings wounded the heart of Agathocles with feare and sorrow. He saw himselfe without helpe, like to become a prey to his vngracious Nephew, from whom hee knew that no fauour was to be expected, either by himselfe, or by those, whom only hee now held deare, which were, Theogenia, and her children. Therefore hee aduised her and them to flie be∣fore they were surprised: for that otherwise they could by no meanes auoid, ei∣ther death, or somewhat that would be worse. Hee gaue them all his treasures and goods, wherewith he euen compelled them (weeping to leaue him desolate in so a case) to imbarke themselues hastily, and make speede into Aegypt. Af∣ter their departure, whether he threw himselfe into the fire, or whether his disease consumed him, there was none left that cared to attend him; but he ended his life as basely, as , and in as much want, as he first beganne it. After the death of Agathocles it was, that the Mamertines his Souldiers traite∣rously occupied Messana, and infested a great part of the Iland. Then also did the Carthaginians to renew their attempts of conquering all Sicil. What the Nephew of Agathocles did, I cannot finde. Likely it is that hee quickly perished. For the Sicilians were driuen to send for Pyrrhus to helpe them, who had married with a daughter of Agathocles. But Pyrrhus was soone wearie of the Countrie (as hath beene shewed before) and therefore left it; prophecying that it would be∣come a goodly champaine field, wherein Rome and Carthage should fight for supe∣rioritic. In which businesse, how these two great Cities did speede, the order of our Storie will declare. §. V. Arecontinuation of the Roman warre in Sicil. How HIERON, King of Syracuse, for sooke the Carthaginians; and made his peace with Rome. WHen Appius Claudius, following the aduantage of his victorie gotten at Messana, brought the warre vnto the Gates of Syracuse, and besieged that great Citie; Hieron found it high time for him to seeke peace: knowing that the Carthaginians had neither any reason to be offended with him, for helping himselfe by what meanes he could, when they were not in case to giue him assistance; and foreseeing withall, that when once hee had purchased his quiet from the Romans, it would be free for him to sit still, with∣out of molestation, whilest Rome and Carthage were fighting for the masterie. In this good moode, the new Roman Consulls, M. Valerius, and C. Octacilius, found him, and readily embraced the offer of his friendship. Yet they made vse of their present aduantage, and sold him peace for an hundred (some say two hundred) Talents. These Consulls had brought a great Armie into Sicil; yet did they nothing else in effect, than bring ouer Hiero to their side. If the Syracusian held them busied (which I finde not, otherwise than by circumstances, as, by the summe of monie imposed vpon him, and by their performing none other peece of seruice) all the whole time of their abode in the Iland; then was his departure from the friend∣ship of Carthage, no lesse to his honour, than it was to his commoditie. For by no reason could they require, that he should suffer his owne Kingdome to runne into manifest perill of subersion, for their sakes, that should haue receiued all the profit of the victorie: seeing they did expose him to the whole danger, without strayning themselues to giue him reliefe. But the Carthaginians had lately made good proofe of the strength of Syracuse, in the daies of Agathocles: and therefore knew, that it was able to beare out a very strong siege. And hereupon it is like that they were the more slack, in sending helpe: if (perhaps) it were not some part of their desire, that both Rome and Syracuse should weaken one the other, whereby their owne worke might be the easier against them both. Yet indeede, the case of the besieged Citie was not the same, when the Romans lay before it, as it had beene, when the Carthaginians attempted it. For there was great reason, to trie the vttermost hazard of warre against the Carthaginians, who sought no other thing than to bring it into slauerie: not so against the Romans, who thought it sufficient, if they could with∣draw it from the partie of their enemies. Besides, it was not all one to be gouerned by Agathocles, or by Hiero. The former of these cared not what the citizens endured, so long as he might preserue his owne tyranie: the later, as a just and good Prince, had no greater desire than to winne the loue of his people, by seeking their com∣moditie; but including his owne felicitie within the publique, laboured to vphold both, by honest and faithfull dealing. Hereby it came to passe, that hee enjoyed a long and happie raigne; liuing deare to his owne Subjects, beloued of the Romans, and not greatly molested by the Carthaginians; whom, either the consideration, That they had left him to himselfe, ere he left their societie, made vnwilling to seeke his ruine; or their more earnest businesse with the Romans, made vnable to compasse it. §. VI. How the Romans besiege and winne Agrigentum. Their beginning to maintaine a fleet. Their first losse, and first victorie by Sea. Of Sea∣fight in generall. H IERON, hauing sided himselfe with the Romans, aided them with victuals, and other necessaries: so that they, presuming vpon his assistance, recall some part of their forces. The Carthaginians finde it high time to bestirre them; they send to the Ligurians, and to the troups they had in Spaine, to come to their aide; who being arriued, they made the Citie of Agrigentum, the seat of the warre, against the Romans, filling it with all manner of munition. The Roman Consulls, hauing made The compasse was ten miles about the walls; and it had sometimes in it eight hundred thousand Inhabitants. This Citie, by reason of the fer∣tilitie of the soile, and the neighbourhood of Carthage, grew in a short space from small beginnings, to great glorie and riches. The plentie and luxurie thereof was so great, as it caused Empedocles to say, That the built Palaces of such sumptuositie, as if they meant to liue for euer; and made such feasts, as if they meant to die the next day. But their greatest pompe and magnificence, was in their goodly Temples, and Theaters, Water-conduits, and Fish-ponds: the ruines whereof at this day are sufficient argument, that Rome it selfe could neuer boast of the like. In the Porch of the Temple of Iupiter Olympius, (by which we may iudge of the Temple it selfe) there was set out on one side the full proportion of the Giants, fighting with the gods, all cut out in polished marble of diuers colours; a worke the most magnificent and rare, that euer hath beene seene: on the other side, the warre of Troy, and the en∣counters which hapned at that siege; with the personages of the He∣roes that were in that warre; all of the like beautifull stone, and of equall stature to the bodies of men in those ancient times: In com∣parison of which, the latter workes of that kinde, are but pertie things, and meere trifles. It would require a volume, to expresse the magnifi∣cence of the Temples of Hercules, , Concord, Lacinia, , , Castor and Pollux, wherein the Master-peeces of those exquisite Painters, and Caruers, , Zeuxis, Myron, and Polycle∣tus, were to be seene. But in processe of time it ranne the same fortune that all other great Cities haue done, and was ruined by diuers calami∣ties of warre: whereof this warre present brought vnto it not the least. peace with Hieron, returne into Italie; and, in their places, Lucius Posthumius, and Quintus Mamilius, arriue. They goe on towards Agrigentum was a goodly Citie, built by the Geloi, vn∣der conduct of Ariston and Pystilus. Agrigentum: and finding no enemie in the field, they besiege it, though it were stuffed with fiftie thou∣sand Souldiers. After a while, the time of haruest being come, a part of the Ro∣man armie range the Country to gather corne, and those at the siege grow negli∣gent; the Carthaginians sallie furiously, and indanger the Roman Armie, but are in the end repelled into the towne with great losse: but by thesmart felt on both sides, the Assailants redoubled their guards, & the besieged kept within their couert. Yet the Romans, the better to as∣sure themselues, cut a deepe trench, be∣tweene the walls of the Citie and their Campe: and another on the out side ; that neither the Carthaginians might force any quarter suddenly, by a sallie, nor those of the Countrie without, breake vpon them vnawares: which double de∣fence kept the besieged also from the receiuing any reliefe of victuals, and muniti∣ons, whilest the Siracusian supplies the assailants with what they went. The besie∣ged send for succour to Carthage: after they had beene in this sort pent vp fiue mo∣neths. The imbarke an Armie, with certaine Elephants, vnder the command of Hanno; who arriues with it at , to the West of Agrigentum. Hanno puts himselfe into the field, and surpriseth Erbesus, a Citie wherein the Ro∣mans had bestowed all their prouision. By meanes hereof, the famine without grew to be as great, as it was within Agrigentum; and the Roman campe no lesse streight∣ly assieged by Hanno, than the Citie was by the Romans: insomuch, as if Hieron had not supplied them, they had beene forced to abandon the siege. But seeing that this distresse was not enough to make them rise; Hanno determined to giue them battaile. To which end departing from Heraclia, makes approch vnto the Ro∣man campe. The Romans resolue to sustaine him, and put themselues in order. Hanno directs the Numidian horse-men to charge their Vantguard, to the ende to draw them further on; which done, he commands them to returne as broken, till they came to the body of the Army, that lay shadowed behind some rising ground. The Numidians performe accordingly; and while the Romans pursued the Nu∣midians, Hanno giues vpon them, and hauing slaughtered many, beats the rest into their Trenches. After this encounter, the Carthaginians made no other attempt for two moneths, but lay strongly incamped, waiting vntill some oportunitie should inuite them. But Annibal, that was besieged in Agrigentum, as well by signes as messengers, made Hanno know, how ill the extremitie which he endured, was able to brooke such di∣latorie courses. Hanno thereupon, a second time, prouoked the Consulls to fight. But his Elephants being disordered by his owne Vantguard, which was broken by the Romans, he lost the day: and with such as escaped, he recouered Heraclea. Annibal perceiuing this, and remayning hopelesse of succour, resolued to make his owne way. Finding therefore that the Romans, after this daies victorie, wearied with la∣bour, and secured by their good fortune, kept negligent watch in the night; hee rusht out of the Towne, with all the remainder of his armie, and past by the Roman campe without resistance. The Consulls pursue him in the morning, but in vaine: sure they were, that he could not carrie the Citie with him, which with little a-doe the Romans entred, and pittifully spoiled. The Romans, proud of this victorie, pur∣pose henceforth rather to follow the direction of their present good fortunes, than their first determinations. They had resolued in the beginning of this Warre, only to succour the Mamertines, and to keepe the Carthaginians from their owne coasts: but now they determine, to make themselues Lords of all Sicil; and from thence, being fauoured with the winde of good successe, to saile ouer into Africke. It is the disease of Kings, of States, and of priuate men, to the greatest things, but not to enioy the least; the desire of that which wee neither haue nor neede, taking from vs the true vse and fruition of what wee haue alreadie. This curse vpon mortall men, was neuer taken from them since the beginning of the World to this day. To prosecute this Warre, Lucius Valerius and Titus Octacilius, two new Consuls, are sent into Sicil. Whereupon, the Romans being Masters of the field, many in∣land Townes gaue themselues vnto them. On the contrarie, the Carthaganians keeping still the Lordship of the Sea, many maritimate places became theirs. The Romans therefore, as well to secure their owne coasts, often inuaded by the African fleets, as also to equall themselues in euery kinde of warfare with their enemies, de∣termine to make a fleet. And herein fortune fauoured them with this accident, that being altogether ignorant in shipwrights-craft, a storme of winde thrust one of the Carthaginian Gallies, of fiue bankes, to the shore. Now had the Romans a patterne, and by it they beganne to set vp an hundred Quinqueremes, which were Gallies, rowed by fiue on euery banke, and twentie, of three on a banke: and while these were in preparing, they exercised their men in the feat of rowing. This they did after a strange fashion. They placed vpon the Sea-sands many seates, in order of the bankes in Gallies, whereon they placed their water-men, and taught them to beat the sand with long poles, orderly, and as they were directed by the Master, that so they might learne the stroke of the Gallie, and how to mount and draw their Oares. When their fleet was finished, some rigging and other implements excepted, C. Cornelius, one of the new Consuls (for they changed euery yere) was made Admi∣rall: who being more in loue with this new kind of warfare, then well aduised, past ouer to Messena with seuenteene Gallies, leauing the rest to follow him. There hee staid not, but would needs row alongst the cost to Lipara, hoping to doe some piece of seruice. Hannibal, a Carthaginian, was at the same time Gouernour in Panormus; who being aduertised of this new Sea-mans arriuall, sent foorth one Boodes, a Se∣natour of Carthage, with twentie Gallies to entertaine him. Boodes, falling vpon the Consull vnawares, tooke both him and the fleet he commanded. When Hannibal receiued this good newes, together with the Roman Gallies, and their Consull; he grew no lesse foolish hardie than Cornelius had beene. For hee, fancying to him∣selfe to surprise the rest of the Roman fleet, on their owne coast, ere they were yet in all points prouided; sought them out with a fleet of fiftie saile: wherewith falling among them, hee was well beaten, and leauing the greater number of his own behind him, made an hard escape with the rest: for of one hundred and twen∣tie Gallies, the Romans vnder Cornelius had lost but seuenteene, so as one hundred and three remained, which were not easily beaten by fiftie. The Romans, being aduertised of Cornelius his ouerthrow, make haste to re∣deeme him, but giue the charge of their fleet to his Colleague, Duilius. Duilius, that the Roman vessels were heauie and slow, the African Gallies hauing the speede of them, deuised a certaine engine in the prow of his Gallies, whereby they might fasten or grapple themselues with their enemies, when theywere (as we call it) boord and boord, that is, when they brought the Gallies sides together. This done, the waightier ships had gotten the aduantage, and the Africans lost it. For neither did their swiftnesse serue them, nor their Mariners craft; the Vessells, wherin both Nations fought, being open: so that al was to be carried by the aduan∣tage of weapon, and valour of the men. Besides this, as the heauier Gallies were likely to crush and crack the sides of the lighter and weaker, so were they by rea∣son of their breadth, more steadie; and those that best kept their feet, could also best vse their hands. The example may bee giuen betweene one of the long boates of his Maiesties great ships, and a London barge. Certainly, hee that will happily performe a fight at Sea, must bee skilfull in ma∣king choice of Vessels to fight in: hee must beleeue, that there is more belonging to a good man of warre, vpon the waters, than great during; and must know, that there is a great deale of difference, betweene fighting loose or at large, and grap∣ling. The Gunnes of a slow ship pierce as well, and make as great holes, as those in a swift. To clap ships together, without consideration, belongs rather to a mad man, than to a man of warre: for by such an ignorant brauerie was Peter , lost at the Azores, when hee fought against the Marquesse of Santa Cruz. In like sort had the Lord Charles Howard, Admirall of England, been lost in the yeare 1588. if he had not beene better aduised, than a great many malignant fooles were, that found fault with his demeanour. The Spaniards had an Armie aboord them; and he had none: they had more ships than he had, and of higher building and char∣ging; so that, had he intangled himselfe with those great and powerfull Vessells, he had greatly endangered this Kingdome of England. For twentie men vpon the de∣fences, are equall to an hundred that boord and enter; whereas then, contrari∣wise, the Spaniards had an hundred, for twentie of ours, to defend themselues with∣all. But our Admirall knew his aduantage, and held it: which had he not done, hee had not beene worthie to haue held his head. Heere to speake in generall of Sea∣fight (for particulars are fitter for priuate hands, then for the Presse) I say, That a fleet of twenty ships, all good sailers, and good ships, haue the aduantage, on the open Sea, of an hundred as good ships, and of slower sayling. For if the fleet of an hundred saile keepe themselues neere together, in a squadron; the twentie ships, charging them vpon any angle, shall force them to giue ground, and to fall back vpon their next fellowes: of which so many as intangle, are made vnseruice∣able, or lost. Force them they may easily, because the twentie ships, which giue themselues scope, after they haue giuen one broad side of Artillerie, by clapping into the winde, and staying, they may giue them the other: and so the twentie ships batter them in pieces with a perpetuall vollie; whereas those, that fight in a troupe, haue no roome to turne, and can alwaies vse but one and the same beaten side. If the fleet of an hundred saile giue themselues any distance, then shall the lesser fleet preuaile, either against those that are a-reare and hindmost, or against those, that by aduantage of ouer-sailing their fellowes keepe the winde: and if vpon a Lee∣shore, the ships next the winde be constrained to fall back into their own squadron, then it is all to nothing, that the whole fleet must suffer shipwrack, or render it selfe. That such aduantage may be taken vpon a fleet of vnequall speed, it hath been wel enough conceiued in old time; as by that Oration of Hermocrates, in Thucydides, . l. 6. which he made to the Syracusians, when the Athenians inuaded them, it may easily be obserued. Of the Art of Warre by Sea, I had written a Treatise, for the Lord HENRIE, Prince of Wales; a subiect, to my knowledge, neuer handled by any man, ancient or moderne: but God hath spared me the labour of finishing it, by his losse; by the losse of that braue Prince; of which, like an Eclypse of the Sunne, wee shall finde the effects hereafter. Impossible it is to equall words and sorrowes; I will therefore leaue him in the hands of God that hath him. Curae leues loquuntur, ingen∣tes stupent. But it is now time to returne to the beaten Carthaginians; who by loosing their ad∣uantage of swift boats, and boording the Romans, haue lost fiftie saile of their Gal∣lies: as on the other side, their enemies by commanding the Seas, haue gotten li∣bertie to saile about the West part of Sicil; where they raised the siege layed vn∣to Segesta, by the Carthaginians, and wonne the Towne of Macella, with some o∣ther places. §. VII. Diuers enterfeats of warre, betweene the Romans and Carthaginians, with va∣riable successe. The Romans prepare to inuade Africk: and obtaine a great victorie at Sea. THe victorie of Duilius, as it was honoured at Rome, with the first Na∣uall triumph, that was euer seene in that Citie; so gaue it vnto the Romans a great incouragement, to proceede in their warres by Sea; whereby they hoped, not onely to get Sicil, but all the other Iles be∣tweene Italie and Africk, beginning with Sardinia, whither soone after they sent a fleet for that purpose. On the contrary side, Amilcar the , lying in Panormus, carefully waited for all occasions, that might helpe to recompence the late misfortune: and being aduertised, that some quarrell was growne betweene the Roman Souldiers, and their Auxiliaries, being such as caused them to incampe a-part, he sent forth Hanno to set vpon them; who taking them vnawares, buried foure thousand of them in the place. Now during the con∣tinuance of the Land-warre in Sicil, Hannibal, who had lately beene beaten by Sea, but escaped vnto Carthage, meaning to make amends for his errour, obtay∣ned the trust of a new fleet, where with hee arriued at Sardinia: the conquest of which Iland, the Romans had entertayned their next enterprise. Now it so sell out, that the Romans, crossing the Seas from Sicil, arriued in the Port where with his new fleet anchored. They set vpon him vnawares, and tooke the better part of the fleet which he conducted; himselfe hardly escaping their danger. But it little auailed him to haue escaped from the Romans. His good friends the Cartha∣ginians, were so ill pleased with this his second vnfortunate voiage, that they han∣ged him vp for his diligence: for (as it hath beene said of old) Non est bis in bellopec∣care; In warre it is too much to offend twice. After this, it was long any thing of importance was done by the Consuls, till If wee may giue credit to Antiquities which Fazellus, a diligent wri∣ter, hath left vs in his Historie of Sicil; , now called Palermo, is one of the first Cities that hath beene built in all Europe. For whereas seemes to make it a Colonie of the Phoenicians; Ranzanus, in libello de Panormo, lib. 6. affirmes that it was first, and long before the time which sets downe, founded by the Chaldaeans, and Damascenes. To proue which, he tells vs of two inscriptions vpon marble in the Hebrew Character, found at Panormus in the time of William the se∣cond, King of Sicil, that were then beheld of all the Citizens, and other strangers; which, being translated into Latine, say as followeth: Isaac filio Abrahae, & regnante in , atq, in Valle Damascena, Esau filio Isaac; ingens Hebraeorum manus, quibus adiuncti sunt Damasceni, at{que}, Phoenices, profecti inhanc Insulam, sedes perpetuas in hoc loco, quem Panormum . In the other marble table are found these words: Non est alius Deus vnum Deum; non est alius Potens, praeter eundem Deum, &c. Turris Praefectus est Saphu, filius Eliphar filij Esau, Iacob filij Isaac, filij Abrahami: & Turriqui∣dem ipsi nomen est Baych; sed Turrihuic proximae nomen est Pharah. And this inscripti∣on (saith Fazellus ) was found intire in the Castle Baych, in the yeere one thousand fiue hundred, thirtie and foure. Now whether these inscriptions were truely as ancient, as these men beleeue they were, I leaue euery man to his owne faith. But that the Citie was of aged times, it appeares by Thucydides, who affirmeth; when the Greekes past first into Sicil, that then the Phoenicians inhabited Panormus: which certaine it is that they did in the first Punik warre; to wit, the Carthaginians, who were Pboenicians, from whom the Romans ( A. Aquilius, and C. Corneliu, commanding this Armie) tooke it. And when Marcellus besieged Syracuse, it sent him in ayde three thousand Souldiers. But it was rather confederate, than subiect to the Ro∣mans. For Ciccro against Verres, names it among the Cities of Sicil. After Si∣racuse destroied, it became the first Citie and Regall seat, as well of the Goths and Saracens in that Iland, as of the Emperours of Constantinople; of the Normans, French, and Arragonians: which honour it holds to this day, and is much frequen∣ted, for the excellent wine which growes about it. Panormus was besieged: where, when the Romans had sought in vaine to draw the Carthaginians into the field; being vnable to force that great Citie, because of the strong Garrison therein bestowed: they departed thence, and tooke certaine inland Townes, as Mytistratum, Enna, Camerina, Hippana, and o∣thers, betweene Panormus and Messana. The yeare following, C. Atilius the Consul, who com∣manded the Roman fleet, disco∣uered a Company of the Car∣thaginian Gallies, ranging the coast: and, not staying for his whole number, pursued them with ten of his. But he was well beaten for the haste hee made, and lost all, saue the Gallie which transported him: where∣in himselfe escaped with great labour. But ere all was done, the rest of his was gotten vp: who renewing the fight, recouered from the Car∣thaginians a double number of theirs; by which the victory remaining doubtful, both chal∣lenge it. Now to try at once, which of these two Nations should command the Seas, they both prepare all they can. The Romans make a fleet of three hundred and thirty Gallies; the Carthaginians, of three hundred and fiftie, The are Gallies, wher∣in euerie Oare hath fiue men to draw it: the Quadriremes had foure to an Oare: and the Triremes, three. Some haue thought, that the Quin∣queremes had fiue ranks of Oares, one ouer another; and the other Gallies (rateably) fewer. But had this been so, they must then haue had fiue decks each ouer other: which hath seldome been seen in ships of a thousand Tonnes, neither could the third, fourth, and fift rankes, haue reached vnto the water with the Oares. Triremes, Quadriremes, and Quinqueremes. The Romans resolue to transport the warre into Africk; the Carthaginians, to ar∣rest them on the coast of Sicil. The numbers, with which each of them filled their fleet, was (perhaps) the greatest that euer fought on the waters. By Polybius his estimation, there were in the Romane Gallies an hundred and forty thousand men; and in those of Carthage, an hundred and fifty thousand: reckoning one hundred and twenty Souldiers, and three hundred Rowers, to euery Gallie, one with the other. The Roman fleet was diuided into foure parts, of which the three first made the forme of a Wedge or Triangle; the two first squadrons making the Flancks, and the third squadron, the Base: the point thereof (wherein were the two as Admirails) look ng toward the enemie and the middle space lying emptie. Their of carriage were towed by the third squadron. After all came vp the fourth, in forme of a Crescent; very well manned, but exceeding thinne: so that the hornes of it all the third squadron, together with the corners of the first and second. The order of the Carthaginian fleet cannot by the relation; but, by the manner of the fight afterwards, I coniecture, that the front of their fleet was thinne, and stretched in a great length, much like to that which the French call Combat en ; a long front of horse, and thinne: which forme, since the Pistoll ouer the Lance, they haue changed. Behind this first out-stretched front, their Battalions were more solide: for Amilcar, Admirall of the Cathaginians, had thus ordered them, of purpose, (his Gallies hauing the speed of the ) that, when the first fleet of the Romans hasted to breake through the Gallies, they should all turne taile, and the Romans pursuing them (as after a victorie) themselues, and, for of taking the Runn awaies, leaue their other three squadrons farre behinde them. For so it must needes out; that the third squadron towed their horse boats, and victuallers; and the fourth had the Reare∣ward of . According to Amilcars direction it succeeded. For when the Romans had charged, and broken, the thinne front of the first , which ran away they forthwith gaue after them with all speed possible, not so has loo∣king behinde for the second squadron. Hereby the were drawne neare vnto the bodie of the fleet, led by Amilcar, and by him (at the first) receiued great losse their second squadron came vp, which so Amilcar to betake him Oares. also, who commanded the right wing of the Carthaginian fleet, inuaded the Roman Reareward, and preuailed against them. But being beaten , fell backe to their succour, and put the to their heeles; as not able to sullaine both squadrons. The Reare , the came to the aide of their third Battalion, which towed their victuaders, which also in great danger of being beaten by the Africans: but the Consulls, their squadrons to it, but the Carthaginians on that part also to running. his victorie fell to the Romans, partly by the hardinesse of their Souldiers; but principally, for that Amilcar, being first beaten, could neuer after joyne himselfe to any of his other , that remained as yet in faire likeli∣hood of preuailing, so long as they fought vpon euen termes, and but squadron to squadron. But Amilcar, forsaking the , thereby left a full fourth part of the Roman fleet vningaged, and readie to giue to of the other parts that were opprest. So as in conclusion, the Romans got the honour of the day: for they lost but foure and twentie of theirs; whereas the Africans lost thirtie that were sunk, and threescore and three that taken. Now, if Amilcar, who had more Gallies than the Romans, had also diuided his fleet into foure squadrons, (besides those that he ranged in the to draw on the enemies, and to ingage them) and that, while hee himselfe fought with one squa∣dron that charged him, all the rest of the enemies fleet had beene at the same time entertained, he had preuailed: But the second squadron, being free, came to the rescue of the first, by which Amilcar was opprest: and Amilcar, being opprest and scattered, the Consuls had good leisure to relieue both their third and fourth squa∣dron and got the victorie. Charles the fift, among other his Precepts to Philip the second his sonne, where he aduiseth him concerning Warre against the Turkes, tells him, that in all battailes betweene them and the , he should neuer faile to charge the Ianisars in the beginning of the fight, and to ingage them at once with the rest. For (saith he) the Ianisars, who are alwaies reserued intire in the Reare of the battaile, and in whom the Turke reposeth his greatest confidence; come vp in a grosse body, when all the troups, on both sides are disbanded and in confusion; whereby they carie the victorie before them without . By the same order of fight, and reseruati∣on, did the Romans also against other Nations. For they kept their in store (who were the choice of their Armie) for the vp-shot and last blow. A great and a victorious aduantage it hath euer beene found, to keepe some one or two good troupes to looke on, when all else are disbanded and ingaged. §. VIII. The Romans preuaile in Africk. ATILIVS the Consullpropoundeth into∣lerable conditions of peace to the Carthaginians. He is vtterly beaten, and made prisoner. NOw the Romans, according to their former resolution, after they had repaired and re-victualled their fleet, set saile for Africa, and arriued at the Promontorie of Hercules, a great Head-land, somewhat to the East of the Port of Carthage, and some fortie leagues from Heraclea in Sicil, where Amilcar himselfe as yet staid. From this Head-land (lea∣uing the entrance into Carthage ) they coasted the East-side of the Promontorie, till they came to Clypea, a Towne, about fiftie English mile from it. There they dis∣imbarked, and prepared to besiege Clypea; which, to ease them of labour, was yeel∣ded vnto them. Now had they a Port of their owne on Africa side; without which all inuasions are foolish. By this time were the Africans also arriued at their owne Carthage; fearing that the Roman fleet and armie had directed themselues thither: but being aduertised, that they had taken Clypea, they made prouisions of all sorts: both by Sea and Land, for their defence. The Romans send to Rome for directions, and in the meane while waste all round about them. The order giuen from the Se∣nate, was, that one of the Consulls should remaine with the Armie, and that the other should returne, with the fleet into Italie. According to this directiou, Manli∣us the Consul is sent home to Rome; whither he carried with him twentie thousand African captaines, with all the Roman fleet and armie; except fortie ships, fifteene thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse, that were left with Atilius. With these forces, Regulus easily wanne some Townes and Places, that were vn∣walled, and laid siege to others. But he performed no great matter, before he came vnto Adis. Yet I hold it worthy of relation, that neere vnto the Riuer of Bagrada, he encountred with a Serpent of one hundred and twentie foot long, which he slue, not without losse of many Souldiers, being driuen to vse against it such engines of warre, as serued properly for the assaulting of Townes. At Adis he met with the Carthaginian Armie, whereof the Captaines were Hanno and Bostar, together with Amilcar, who had brought ouer out of Sicil fiue thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse to succour his Countrie. These (belike) had an intent; rather to wearie him out of Africa, by warie protraction of time, than to vndergoe the hazard of a maine fight. They were carefull to hold themselues free, from necessitie of comming to blowes yet had they a great desire, to saue the Towne of Adis out of his hands. In∣tending therefore to follow their generall purpose, and yet to disturbe him in the siege of Adis, they incampe neere vnto him, and strongly (as they thinke) on the top of an hill: but thereby they loose the seruices, both of their Elephants, and of their horse-men. This disaduantage of theirs Regulus discouers, and makes vse of it. He assailes them in their strength, which they defend a-while; but in fine the Ro∣mans preuaile, and force them from the place, taking the spoile of their campe. Fol∣lowing this their good fortune at the heeles, they proceede to This Citie was taken from the Turkes by Charles the fift, in the yeere 1536. and was one of the three Keyes, which he gaue in charge to Philip the se∣cond his sonne to keepe safe; to wit, this Tu∣nis, the Key of Africa: Flush∣ing, the Key of the Netherlāds: and Cadiz, the Key of Spaine. But two of these Philip so lost, that hee neuer found them againe; the third, our English were bold, in the time of the renowned Queene Elizabeth, to wring out of his hands: where we staid not to pick any locke, but brake open the dores, and haning rifled all, threw it into the fire. Tunis a Citie with∣in sixteene miles of Carthage, which they assault and take. By the losse of this battaile at Adis, and more especially by the losse of Tunis, the Carthaginians were greatly dismaied. The Numidians, their next Neighbours to∣wards the West, insult vpon their misfortunes; inuade, and spoile their Territory, and force those that inhabite abroad, to forsake their villages and fields, and to hide themselues within the walls of Carthage. By reason hereof, a great famine at hand threatens the Citizens. Atilius findes his owne aduantage, and assures himselfe that the Citie could not long hold out: yet he feared lest it might defend it selfe, vntill his time of Office, that was neere expired, should be quite out, where∣by the new Consulls were like to reape the honor of obtaining it. Ambition there∣fore, that hath no respect but to it selfe, perswades him to treat of peace with the Carthaginians. But he propounded vnto them so vnworthy and base conditions, as thereby their hearts, formerly possessed with feare, became now so couragious and disdainefull, that they resolued, either to defend their libertie, or to die to the last man. To strengthen this their resolution, there arriued at the same time a great troupe of Greekes, whom they had formerly sent to entertaine. Among these was a very expert Souldier, named Xantippus, a Spartan: who being informed of what had passed, and of the ouerthrow which the Carthaginians receiued neere vnto Adis, gaue it out publiquely, that the same was occasioned by of the Comman∣ders, and not of the Nation. This bruit ranne, till it came to the Senate; Xantippus is sent for; giues the reason of his opinion; and in conclusion, being made Generall of the African forces, he puts himselfe into the field. The Armie which he led, con∣sisted of no more than twelue thousand foot, and foure thousand horse, with an hundred Elephants. No greater were the forces, wherwith the Carthaginians sought for all that they had, Libertie, Liues, Goods, Wiues, and Children: which might well make it suspected, that the Armies by Sea, before spoken of, were misse-num∣bred; the one consisting of an hundred and fortie thousand, and the other of an hundred and fiftie thousand: were it not commonly found, that they which vse the seruice of mercinarie Souldiers, are stronger abroad, than at their owne dores. Xantippus, taking the field with this Armie, marched directly towards the Ro∣mans; and ranging his troups vpon faire and leuell ground, fittest both for his Ele∣phants and Horse, presented them battaile. The Romans wondred, whence this new courage of their enemies might grow: but confident they were that it should be soone abated. Their chiefe care was, how to resist the violence of the Elephants. Against them they placed the Velites, or light-armed Souldiers, as a hope; that these might, either with darts and other casting weapons, driue back the beasts vpon the enemies, or at least breake their violence, and hinder them from rushing freely vpon the Legions. To the same end, they made their battailes deeper in file, than they had beene accustomed to doe. By which meanes, as they were the lesse subject vnto the impression of the Elephants; so were they the more exposed vnto the violence of horse, wherein the enemie did farre exceede them. The Elephants were placed by Xantippus, all in one ranke, before his Armie; which followed them at a reasonable distance: his horse-men, and some light-armed foot, of the Cartha∣ginians Auxiliaries, were in the wings. The first onset was giuen by the Elephants, against which the Velites were so vnable to make resistance, that they brake into the battalions following, and put them into some disorder. In this case, the depth of the Roman battaile was helpfull. For when the beasts had spent their force, in pier∣cing through a few of the first ranks; the squadrons neuerthelesse persisted in their order, without opening. But the Carthaginian horse, hauing at the first encounter, by reason of their aduantage in number, driuen those of Atilius out of the field, beganne to charge the Roman battalions in flanke, and put them in great distresse; who being forced to turne face euery way, could neither passe forward, nor yet re∣tire; but had much adoe to make good the ground whereon they stood. In the meane while, such of the Romans, as had escaped the furie of the Elephants, and left them at their backes, fell vpon the Carthaginian Armie, that met them in very good array. It was no euen match. The one were a disordred Companie, with labour, and hurt; the other, fresh, and well prepared, to haue dealt with the enemie vpon equall termes. Here was therefore a greater slaughter with little fight; the Romans hastily recoiling to the bodie of their , which being surrounded with the enemie, and spent with trauaile, fell all to rout, vpon the defeat of these troups, that open the way to a generall ouerthrow. So the Carthaginians obtayned a full victorie; destroying the whole Roman Armie, saue two thousand, and taking fiue hundred prisoners, together with Atilius the Consull. Of their owne they lost no more than eight hundred mercinaries, which were slaine, when the fight began, by two thousand of the Romans: that wheeling about, to auoide the Elephants, bare downe all before them, and made way euen to the Carthaginian trenches. These were the two thousand that escaped, when the whole Armie behinde them was routed. All the rest were either taken or slaine. Hereby fortune made the Romans know, that they were no lesse her vassalls, than were the Carthaginians: how inso∣lent soeuer they had beene in their proposition of peace, as if they had purch ased from her the inheritance of their , which she neuer gaue nor sold to any mortall man. With what ioy these newes were welcommed, when they came to Carthage, wee may easily coniecture; and what things the vertue of one man hath often brought to passe in the World, there are many examples to proue, no lesse then this of Xantippus: all of them confirming that sentence of EVRYPI∣DES, Mens vna sapiens, plurium vincit manus; Many mens hands equall not one wise minde. After this great seruice done to the Carthaginians, Xantippus returned into Greece; whether for that he was more enuied then honoured, or for what other cause it is vnknowne. The death of Atilius Regulus the Consull, was very memorable. Hee was sent from Carthage to Rome, about the exchange and ran some of prisoners on both sides: giuing his faith to returne if the businesse were not . When he came to Rome, and plainely saw that his Countrie should loose by the bargaine: so far was he from vrging the Senate vnto compassion of his owne miserie, that he perswaded to haue the prisoners in Africk left to their ill destinies. This done, hee returned to : where for his taken, he was rewarded with an horrible death. For this his constancie and faith, all Writers highly him. But the Carthaginians seeme to haue iudged him an obstinate and malicious enemie; that neither in his prosperitie would harken to reason, nor yet in his calamitie would haue the naturall care, to perserue himselfe and others, by yeelding to such an office of humanitie, as is common in all warres (not grounded vpon deadly hatred) only in regard of some small aduantage. Whatsoeuer the Carthaginians thought of him; sure it is, that his faithfull obseruance of his word giuen, cannot be too much com∣mended. But that graue speech, which he made in the Senate, against the exchange of prisoners, appeares, in all reason, to haue proceeded from a vaine-glorious , rather than from any necessitie of state. For the exchange was made soone after his death; wherein the Romans had the worse bargaine, by so much as Regulus himselfe was worth. As for the authoritie of all Historians, that magnifie him in this point; we are to consider that they liued vnder the Roman Empire: Phi∣linus, the , perhaps did censure it otherwise. Yet the death which he suffered with extreme torments, could not be more greeuous to him than it was dishonourable to Carthage. Neither doe I think that the Carthaginians could themselues herein; otherwise than by : saying, That the Ro∣mans deserued to be no better intreated for as much as it was their ordinary practice to vse others in the like sort. Crueltie doth not become more warrantable, but ra∣ther more odious, by being customarie. It was the Roman fashon, to whip almost to death, and then to behead, the Captaines of their enemies whom they tooke, yea although they were such, as had alwaies made saire warres with them. Where∣fore it seemes not meet, in reason, that they should crie out against the like tyranni∣call insolence in others, as if it were lawfull only in themselues. The consideration both of this misfortune, that rewarded the pride of Atilius his intolerable demands; and of the sudden valour, whereinto the Carthaginians feare was changed by meere desperation; calls to remembrance the like of others in prosperitie, that hath bred the like resolution in those, to whom all rea∣sonable grace hath beene denied. In such cases I neuer hold it impertinent, to adde vnto one, more testimonies; approuing the true rules, from which our passions carrie vs . In the yeere 1378. the Genowaies wonne so fast vpon the Venetians, as they not only draue their Gallies out of the Sea, but they brought their owne fleet within two miles of Venice it selfe. This bred such an amazement in the Citizens of Ve∣nice, that they offered vnto the Genowaies (their state reserued) whatsoeuer they would demand. But Peter Doria, blowne vp with many former victories, would harken to no composition; saue the yeelding of their Citie and State to his discre∣tion. Hereupon, the Venetians, being filled with disdaine, thrust out to Sea with all their remaining power, and Doria with such desperate furie, that they breake his fleet; kill Doria himselfe; take nineteene ofhis Gallies, fourescore boats of Padoa, and foure thousand prisoners; recouer Chiozza, and all the places taken from them; and following their victorie, enter the Port of Genoa, enforcing the Ge∣nowaies, basely to begge peace, to their extreme dishonour and disaduantage, being beaten; which, being victorious, they might haue commanded, to their greatest honour and aduantage. The like hapned to the Earle of Flanders, in the yeere 1380. when hauing taken a notable, and withall an ouer-cruell reuenge vpon the Gantois, he refused mercy to the rest, who in all humilitie, submitting themselues to his o∣bedience, offered their Citie, goods, and estates, to be disposed at his pleasure. This when he had vnaduisedly refused, and was resolued to extinguish them vtterly; they issue out of their Citie with fiue thousand chosen men, and armed with a de∣sperate resolution, they charge the Earle, breake his Armie, enter Bruges (pell-mell) with his vanquished followers; and enforce him to hide himselfe vnder an heape of straw, in a poore cottage; out of which with great difficultie he escaped, and saued himselfe. Such are the fruits of insolencie. §. IX. How the affaires of Carthage prospered after the victorie against ATILIVS: How the Romans hauing lost their fleet by tempest, resolue to forsake the Seas: The great aduantages of a good fleet in warre, betweene Nations diuided by the Sea. BY the reputation of this late victory, all places that had beene lost in Africk, returne to the obedience of Carthage. Onely Clypea stands out; before which the Carthaginians sit downe, and assaile it, but in vaine: For the Romans, hearing of the losse of Atilius with their forces in Africk, and withall; that Clypea was besieged, make ready a grosse Armie, and transport it in a fleet of hundred and Gallies, com∣manded by M. Aemilius, and Ser. Fuluius, their Consulls. At the Promontory of Mercurie, two hundred Carthaginian Gallies, set out of purpose, vpon the bruit of their comming, encounter them: but greatly to their cost. For the Romans tooke by force an hundred and fourteene of their fleet, and drew them after them to Cly∣pea; where they staid no longer, than to take in their owne men that had beene be∣sieged: and this done, they made amaine to ward Sicil, in hope to recouer all that the Carthaginians held therein. In this hasty voyage they despise the aduice of the Pilots, who pray them to finde harbour in time, for that the season threatned some violent stormes; which euer hapned the rising of Orion, and of the There is no Part of the World, which hath not some times of outragious weather besides their accidentall stormes. We haue vp∣on coast a Michaelmas flaw, that seldome or neuer failes: In the west Indies, in the moneths of August and September, those most forcible winds, which the Spani∣ards call the , or Northwinds, are very fearefull: and therefore they that Nauigate in those parts, take harbor till those months take end. Cbarles the fift being as ill aduised, in passing the towards Algire, in the Winter quarter, contrary to the counsaile of A. Doria, as he was in like vnseasonable times to continue his siege before in , lost an hundred and fortie ships by tempest, and fifteene Gallies, with all in effect in them of men, victuailes, horses, and munition: a lofse no lesse great, than his retrait, both from before the one and the other, was extreme dishonourable. Dog∣starre. Now although the Pilots of the Roman had thus fore-warned them of the weather at hand, and certified them withall, that the South coast of Sicil had no good Ports, wherein to saue themselues vpon such an accident: yet this victorious Nation was perswaded, that the winde and seas feared them no lesse, than did the Africans; and that they were able to conquer the Elements themselues. So refusing to stay within some Port, as they were aduised, they would needes put out to Sea; thinking it a matter much helping their repu∣tation, after this victorie against the Carthaginian fleet; to take a few worthlesse Townes vpon the coast. The mercilesse windes in the meane while ouertake them, and neere vnto Camerina, and thrust headlong on the rocks, all but of three hundred and ships: so as their former great victorie was deuoured by the Seas, before the fame thereof recouered Rome. The Carthaginians, hearing what had hapned, repaire all their warlike Vessells, hoping once againe to command the Seas: they are also as confident of their land∣forces since the ouerthrow of Atilius. They send Asdrubal into Sicil with all their old Souldiers, and an hundred and fortie Elephants, imbarqued in two hundred Gallies. With this Armie and fleet he arriues at Lilybaeum; where hee beginnes to vexe the Partisans of Rome. But aduersitie doth not discourage the Romanes: They build in three moneths (a matter of great note) one hundred and twentie ships; with which, and the remainder of their late shipwracke, they row to Panormus, or , the chiefe Citie of the Africans in Sicil, and surround it by Land and Water: after a while they take it, and leauing a Garrison therein, returne to Rome. Very desirous the Romans were to bee doing in Africk: to which purpose they imploied C. Seruilius, and C. Sempronius, their Consulls. But these wrought no won∣ders. Some spoile they made vpon the coasts of Africa: but Fortune robbed them of all their gettings. For in their returne, they were first set vpon the sands, and like to haue perished, neere vnto the lesser Syrtes, where they were faine to heaue all ouer-boord, that so they might get off: then, hauing with much a-doe doubled the of Lilybaeum, in their passage from Panormus towards Italie, they lost an hundred and fiftie of their ships by foule weather. A greater discourage∣ment neuer Nation had; the God of the warres fauoured them no more, than the God of the waters afflicted them. Of all that Mars enricht them with vpon the Land, Neptune robbed them vpon the Seas. For they had now lost, besides what they lost in fight, foure hundred & sixe ships and Gallies, with all the munition and Souldiers transported in them. The exceeding damage hereby receiued, perswaded them to giue ouer their Nauigation, and their fight by Sea, and to send only a Land-armie into Sicil, vnder L. Caecilius, and F. Furius, their Consulls. These they transported in some three∣score ordinarie passage-boats, by the straights of Messana, that are not aboue a mile and an halfe broad from land to land. In like sort, the ouerthrow which Atilius re∣ceiued in Africa, occasioned chiefly by the Elephants, made them lesse cholericke a∣gainst the Carthaginians, than before; so that for two yeeres after, they kept the high and woodie grounds, not daring to fight in the faire and champian Countries. But this late resolution of forsaking the Seas lasted not long. For it was impossible for them to succour those places which they held in Sicil, without a Nauie, much lesse to maintaine the warre in Africa. For whereas the Romans were to send forces from Messana to Egesta, to Lilybaeum, and to other places in the extreme West parts of Si∣cil, making sometimes a march of aboue an hundred and forty English mile by land, which could not be performed with an Armie, and the prouisions that follow it, in lesse than fourteene daies; the would passe it with their , in eight and fortie houres. An old example we haue, of that great aduantage of transporting Armies by wa∣ter, betweene Canutus, and Edmond Ironside. For Canutus, when he had entred the Thames with his Nauie and Armie, and could not preuaile against London, suddenly imbarqued; and sailing to the West, landed in Dorset-shire, so drawing Edmond and his Armie thither. There finding ill entertainement, he againe shipt his men, and entred the Seuerne, making Edmond to march after him, to the succour of Worcester∣shire, by him greatly spoiled. But when he had Edmond there, he sailed back againe to London: by meanes whereof, he both wearied the King, and spoiled where hee pleased, ere succour could arriue. And this was not the least helpe, which the Ne∣therlands haue had against the Spaniards, in the defence oftheir libertie, that being Masters of the Sea, they could passe their Armie from place to place, vnwearied, and entire, with all the Munition and Artilerie belonging vnto it, in the tenth part of the time, wherein their enemies haue beene able to doe it. Of this, an instance or two. The Count Maurice of Nassau, now liuing, one ofthe greatest Captaines, and ofthe worthiest Princes, that either the present or Ages haue brought forth, in the yeare 1590. carried his Armie by Sea, with fortie Canons, to Breda: making countenance either to besiege , or Gertreuiden Berg; which the e∣nemie (in preuention) filled with Souldiers, and victualls. But as soone as the winde serued, he suddenly set saile; and arriuing in the mouth of the Meuze, turned vp the Rhine, and thence to Yssel, and sate downe before Zutphen. So before the Spaniards could march ouer land round about Holland, aboue fourescore mile, and ouer many great Riuers, with their Cannon and carriage, Zutphen was taken. A∣gaine, when the Spanish had ouercome this wearisome march, and were now farre from home, the Prince Maurice, making countenance to saile vp the Rhine, changed his course in the night; and sailing downe the streame, he was set downe before Hulst in Brabant, ere the Spaniards had knowledge what was become of him. So this Towne he also tooke, before the Spanish armie could returne. Lastly, the Spanish armie was no sooner arriued in Brabant, than the Prince Maurice, well atten∣ded by his good fleet, hauing fortified Hulst, saile againe, and presented himselfe before Nymegen in Gelders, a Citie of notable importance, and mastred it. And to say the truth; it is impossible for any maritime Countrie, not hauing the coasts fortified, to defend it selfe against a powerfull enemie, that is of the Sea. Hereof I had rather, that Spaine than England should bee an exam∣ple. Let it be supposed, that King Philip the second had fully resolued to hinder Sir Iohn Norris in the yeare 1589. from presenting Don Antonio, King of , before the gates of Lysborne; and that he would haue kept off the En∣glish, by power of his land-forces; as being too weake at Sea, through the great o∣uerthrow ofhis mighty Armada, by the fleet of Queene Elizabeth, in the yeere . Surely, it had not beene hard for him, to prepare an Armie, that should be able to resist our eleuen thousand. But where should this his Armie haue beene bestowed? If about Lysborne; then would it haue beene easie vnto the English, to take, ransack, and burne the Towne of Groine, and to waste the Countrie round about it. For the great and threatning preparations, ofthe Earle of Altemira, the Marquesse of Seralba, and others, did not hinder them from performing all this. Neither did the hastie leauie of eight thousand, vnder the Earle of Andrada, serue to more effect, than the increase of honour to S r ^ Iohn Norris, and his Associates: considering, that the English charged these, at Puente de Burgos, and passing the great Bridge, behinde which they lay, that was flanked with shot, and barricadoed at the further end, routed them; tooke their campe; tooke their Generalls standard with the Kings Armes, and pursued them ouer all the Countrie, which they fired. If a roiall Armie, and not (as this was) a Companie of priuate aduenturers, had thus begunne the warre in Galicia; I thinke it would haue made the Spaniards to quit the guard of Portugale, and make haste to the defence of their S t . Iago, whose Temple was not farre from the danger. But, had they held their first resolution; as know∣ing, that Sir Iohn Norris his maine intent was, to bring Don Antonio, with an Armie, into his Kingdome, whither comming strong, he expected to bee readily and joy∣fully welcomed: could they haue hindred his landing in Portugale? Did not he land at Penicha, and march ouer the Countrie to Lysborne, sixe daies iournie? Did not hee (when all Don Antonio his promises failed) passe along by the Riuer of Lysborne to Cascaliz, and there, hauing wonne the Fort, quietly imbarque his men, and depart? But these, though no more than an handfull, yet were they Englishmen. Let vs consider of the matter it selfe; what an other Nation might doe, euen against England, in landing an Armie, by aduantage of a fleet, if wee had none. This que∣stion, Whether an inuading Armie may be resisted at their landing vpon the coast of Eng∣land, were there no fleete of ours at the Sea to impeach it; is alreadie handled by a lear∣ned Gentleman of our Nation, in his obseruations vpon Caesars Commentaries, that maintaines the affirmatiue. This he holds only vpon supposition; in absence of our shipping: and comparatiuely; as that it is a more safe and easie course, to defend all the coast of England, than to suffer an enemie to land, and afterwards to fight with him. Surely I hold with him, that it is the best way, to keepe our enemie from treading vpon our ground: wherein, if wee faile, then must wee seeke to make him wish, that he had staied at his owne home. In such a case, if it should happen, our judgements are to weigh many particular circumstances, that belong not vnto this discourse. But making the question generall, and positiue, Whether England, with∣out helpe of her fleet, be able to debarre an enemie from landing; I hold that it is vnable so to doe: and therefore I thinke it most dangerous to make the aduenture. For the incouragement of a first victorie to an enemie, and the discouragement of being beaten to the inuaded, may draw after it a most perilous consequence. It is true, that the Marshall Monluc, in his Commentaries, doth greatly com∣plaine, that by his wanting forces, wherewith to haue kept the frontier of Guienne, they of the Protestant religion, after the battaile of Moncounter, that Coun∣trie, and gathered great strength and reliefe thence; for if the King (saith he) would haue giuen me but reasonable meanes, j euse bien garde a Monsieur l'Admiral, de faire ses Cheuaux en la Garonne; I would haue kept the Admiral from watering his horses in the Riuer of Garonne. Monsieur de Langey, on the contrarie side, preferres the not fighting vpon a frontier with an inuading enemie, and commends the delay; which course the Constable of France held, against the Emperour Charles, when hee inuaded Prouence. Great difference I know there is, and a diuerse consideration to be had, betweene such a Countrie as France is, strengthned with many sortified places; and this of ours, where our Rampars are but of the bodies of men. And it was of inuasions vpon firme land, that these great Captaines spake: whose entran∣ces cannot be vncertaine. But our question is, of an Armie to be transported ouer Sea, and to be landed againe in an enemies Country, and the place left to the choice of the Inuader. Hereunto I say, That such an Armie cannot resisted on the coast of England, without a fleet to impeach it; no, nor on the coast of France, or any other Countrie: except euery Creeke, Port, or sandie Bay, had a powerfull Armie, in each of them, to make opposition. For let his whole supposition be gran∣ted; That Kent is able to furnish twelue thousand foot; and that those twelue thousand be laied in the three best landing places within that Countie, to wit, three thousand at Margat, three thousand at the Nesse, and sixe thousand at Foulk∣ston, that is somewhat equally distant from them both; as also that two of these troups (vnlesse some other order be thought more fit) bee directed to strengthen the third, when they shall see the enemies fleet to bend towards it: I say, that not∣withstanding this prouision, if the enemie, setting saile from the Isle of Wight, in the first watch of the night, and towing their long boates at their sternes, shall arriue by dawne of day at the Nesse, and thrust their Armie on shore there; it will be hard for those three thousand that are at Margat, (twentie and foure long miles from thence) to come time enough to re-enforce their fellowes at the Nesse. Nay, how shall they at bee able to doe it, who are neerer by more than halfe the way? seeing that the enemie, at his first arriuall, will eyther make his entrance by force, with three or foure hundred shot of great Artillery, and quickly put the first three thou∣sand, that were intrenched at the Nesse, to runne; or else giue them so much to doe, that they shall be glad to send for helpe to Foulkston; and perhaps to Margat: where∣by those places will bee left bare. Now let vs suppose, that all the twelue thousand Souldiers arriue at the Nesse, ere the enemie can be ready to disimbarque his Armie, so that hec shall finde it vnsafe, to land in the face of so many, prepared to withstand him; yet must we beleeue, that he will play the best of his owne game; and (hauing liberty to goe which way he list) vnder couert of the night, set sayle to∣wards the East, where what shall hinder him to take ground, eyther at Margat, the Downes, or elsewhere, before they at the Nesse can be well aware of his departure? Certainly, there is nothing more easie than to doe it. Yea the like may bee sayd of Waymouth, Purbeck, Poole, and of all landing places on the South Coast. For there is no man ignorant, that Ships, without putting themselues out of breath, will easily out-runne the Souldiers that coast them. Les Armees ne volent poynt en poste; Ar∣mies neyther flye, nor runne post, sayth a Marshall of France. And I know it to be true, that a fleet of Ships may be seene at Sunne-set, and after it, at the Lisard; yet by the next morning they may recouer Portland, whereas an Armie of foot shall not bee able to march it in sixe dayes. Againe, when those troupes, lodged on the Sea-shores, shall be forced to runne from place to place in vaine, after a fleet of Ships; they will at length sit downe in the mid-way, and leaue all at aduenture. But say it were o∣therwise; That the inuading enemie will offer to land in some such place, where there shall be an Armie of ours readie to receiue him; yet it cannot be doubted, but that when the choice of all our trained bands, and the choice of our Commanders and Captaines, shal be drawn together (as they were at Tilburie in the yeare 1588.) to attend the person of the Prince, and for the defence of the Citie of London: they that remaine to guard the coast, can be of no such force, as to encounter an Armie like vnto that, wherewith it was intended that the Prince of Parma should haue landed in England. The Ile of Tercera hath taught vs by experience, what to thinke in such a case. There are not many Ilands in the world, better fenced by nature, and strengthned by art: it being euery where hard of ; hauing no good harbour wherein to shelter a Nauie of friends; and vpon euery coue or watering place a Fort erected, to forbid the approch of an enemies boat. Yet when Emanuel de Sylua, and Monsieur 1582. de Chattes, that held it to the vse of Don Antonio, with fiue or sixe thousand men, thought to haue kept the Marquesse of Santa Cruz, from setting foot on ground therin; the Marquesse hauing shewed himselfe in the Roade of Angra, did set saile, ere any was aware of it, and arriued at the Port des Moles, farre distant from thence, where hee wanne a Fort, and landed, ere Monsieur de Chattes, running thither in vaine, could come to hinder him. The example of Philip Strossie, slaine the yeere before, without all regard of his worth, and of three hundred French prisoners mur∣dered in cold blood, had instructed de Chattes and his followers, what they might expect at that Marquesse his hands: Therefore it is not like, that they were slow in carrying reliefe to Port des Moles. Whether our English would bee perswaded to make such diligent haste, from Margat to the Nesse, and backe againe, it may bee doubted. Sure I am, that it were a greater march than all the length of ; whereof the French-men had not measured the one halfe when they found them∣selues preuented by the more nimble ships of Spaine. This may suffice to proue, that a strong Armie, in a good fleet, which neither foot, nor horse, is able to follow, cannot be denied to land where it list, in England, France, or elsewhere, vnlesse it be hindred, encountred, and shuffled together, by a of equall, or answerable strength. The difficult landing of our English, at Fayal, in the yeere 1597. is alleaged a∣gainst this: which example moues me no way to thinke, that a large coast may be defended against a strong fleet. I landed those in Fayal, my selfe, and therefore ought to take notice of this instance. For whereas I finde an action of mine cited, with omission of my name; I may by a ciuill interpretation, thinke, that there was no purpose to defraud me of any honour; but rather an opinion, that the en∣terprise was such, or so ill managed, as that no honour could be due vnto it. There were indeed some which were in that voiage, who aduised me not to vndertake it: and I harkened vnto them, somewhat longer than was requisite, especially, whilest they desired mec, to reserue the title of such an exploit (though it were not great) for a greater person. But when they began to tell me of difficultie: I gaue them to vnderstand, the same which I now maintaine, that it was more difficult to defend a coast, then to inuade it. The truth is, that I could haue landed my men with more ease then I did; yea without finding any resistance, if I would haue rowed to ano∣ther place, yea euen there where I landed, if I would haue taken more companie to helpe me. But, without fearing any imputation of rashnesse, I may say, that I had more regard of reputation, in that businesse, than of safetie. For I thought it to be∣long vnto the honour of our Prince & Nation, that a few Ilanders should not think any aduantage great enough, against a fleet set forth by Q. Elizabeth: and further, I was vnwilling, that some Low-Countrie Captaines, and others, not of mine owne squadron, whose assistance I had refused, should please themselues with a sweet conceipt (though it would haue bin short, when I had landed in some other place) That for want of their helpe I was driuen to turne taile. Therfore I tooke with me none, but men assured, Cōmanders of mine own squadron, with some of their followers, and a few other Gentlemen, voluntaries, whom I could not refuse; as, Sir William Brooke, Sir William Haruey, Sir Arthur Gorges, Sir Iohn , Sir Thomas Ridgeway, Sir Henrie Thinne, Sir Charles Morgan, Sir Walter Chute, Marcellus Throckmorton, Captaine Laurence Kemis, Captaine William Morgan, and others, such as well vnder∣stood themselues and the enemie: by whose helpe, with Gods fauour, I made good the enterprise I vndertooke. As for the working of the Sea, the steepenesse of the Cliffes, and other troubles, that were not new to vs, we ouercame them well enough. And these (not withstanding) made fiue or sixe Companies of the enemies, that sought to impeach our landing, abandon the wal, whereon their Musketiers lay on the rest for vs, and wonne the place of them without any great losse. This I could haue done with lesse danger, so that it should not haue serued for example of a rule, that failed euen in this example: but the reasons before alleaged, (together with other reasons well knowne to some of the Gentlemen aboue named, though more pri∣uate, then to be here laid downe) made me rather follow the way of brauerie, and take the shorter course; hauing it still in mine owne power to fall off when I should thinke it meet. It is easily said, that the Enemie was more then a Coward; (which yet was more then we knew) neither will I magnifie such a small peece of seruice, by seeking to proue him better: whom had I thought equall to mine owne followers, I would otherwise haue dealt with. But for so much as concernes the Proposition in hand; he that beheld this, may well remember that the same enemie troubled vs more in our march towards Fayal, than in our taking the shore; that he sought how to stop vs in place of his aduantage; that many of our men were slayne or hurt by him, among whom Sir Arthur Gorges was shot in that march; and that such, as (thinking all danger to bee past, when we had wonne good footing) would needes follow vs to the Town were driuen by him, to forsake the pace of a man of warre, and betake themselues to an hastie trot. For end of this digression, I hope that this question shall neuer come to triall; his Majesties many moueable Forts will forbid the experience. And although the English will no lesse disdaine, than any Nation vnder heauen can doe, to be beaten vpon their owne ground, or elsewhere by a forraigne enemie; yet to entertaine those that shall assaile vs, with their owne beefe in their bellies, and before they eate of our Kentish Capons, I take it to be the wisest way. To doe which, his Maiestie, af∣ter God, will imploy his good ships on the Sea, and not trust to any intrenchment vpon the shore. §. X. How the Romans attempt againe to get the mastrie of the Seas. The victorie of CEA∣CILIVS the Roman Consull at Panormus: The siege of Lilybaeum. How a Rhodian Gallie entred Lilybaeum at pleasure, in despight of the Roman fleet. That it is a matter of great difficultie to stop the passage of good ships. The Romans, by reason of grieuous losses receiued, vnder CLAVDIVS and IVNIVS their Consulls, abandon the Seas againe. WHen, without a strong Nauie, the Romans found it altogether impos∣sible, either to keepe what they had alreadie gotten in Sicil, or to en∣large their Dominions in Africa or elsewhere, they resolued once a∣gaine, notwithstanding their late misaduentures, to strengthen their fleet and ships of warre. So causing fiftie new Gallies to be built, and the old to be repaired, they gaue them in charge (together with certaine Legions of Souldiers) to the new Consulls, C. Atilius, and L. Manlius. On the other side, As∣drubal perceiuing that the Romans, partly by reason of the shipwarke which they had lately suffered, partly by reason of the ouerthrow which they receiued by Xantippus in Africa, were lesse daring than they had beene in the beginning of the warre; and withall, that one of the Consulls was returned into Italie, with the one halfe of the Armie; and that Caecilius, with onely the other halfe, remained at Pa∣normus: he remoued with the Carthaginian forces from Lilybaeum towards it, hoping to prouoke Caecilius to fight. But the Consull was better aduised. For when Asdru∣bal had made his approches somewhat neere the Towne, Caecilius caused a deepe trench to be cut, a good distance without the ditch of the Citie: betweene which and his trench he left ground sufficient, to embattaile a Legion of his Souldiers. To these he gaue order that they should aduance themselues, and passe ouer the new trench, till such time as the African Elephants were thrust vpon them. From those beasts he commanded them to retire, by slow degrees, till they had drawne on the Elephants to the brinke of the new trench, which they could by no meanes passe. This they performed accordingly. For when the Elephants were at a stand, they were so gawled and beaten, both by those Souldiers that were on the inside of the trench, and by those that lay in the trench it selfe, that being inraged by their many wounds, they brake back furiously vpon their owne foot men, and vtterly disorde∣red them. Caecilius, espying this aduantage, sallied with all the force hee had; and charging the other troups, that stood embattailed, he vtterly brake them, and put them to their heels; making a great slaughter of them, and taking al their Elephants. The report of this victorie being brought to Rome, the whole state, filled with courage, prepared a new fleet of two hundred saile, which they sent into Sicil, to giue end to that warre, that had now lasted foureteene yeeres. With this fleet and armie the Romans resolue to attempt Lilybaeum, the only place of importance which the Carthaginians held in Sicil; and all (indeed) saue Drepanum, that was neere ad∣joyning. They set downe before it, and possesse themselues of all the places of ad∣uantage neere vnto it, especially of such as cōmand the hauen, which had a very dif∣ficult entrance. They also beat to the ground sixe towres of defence; & by forcible engines weaken so many other parts of the city, as the defendants begin to despaire. Yet Himilco, Commander of the Place, faileth not in all that belongs to a man of Warre. All that is broken, herepaireth with admirable diligence; he maketh many furious sallies, and giueth to the Romans all the affronts that possibly could bee made. He hath in Garrison (besides the Citizens) ten thousand Souldiers; among which there are certaine Lieutenants, and other pettie Officers, that conspire to render and betray the Towne. But the matter is reuealed by an Achaean, called Alexon, who had formerly, in danger of the like treason, saued Agrigentum. Hi∣milco vseth the helpe of Alexon, to assure the hired Souldiers; and imployeth Han∣nibal to appeaze the troups of the Gaules, which did wauer, and had sent their agents to the enemie. All promise constancie and truth; so that the Traitors, being vn∣able to performe what they had vndertaken, are faine to liue in the Roman campe as fugitiues, that had wrought no good whereby to deserue their bread. In the meane while, a supply of ten thousand Souldiers is sent from Carthage to their re∣liefe, hauing Hannibal the sonne of Amilcar, for their Conductor: who, in despight of all resistance, entred the Port and , to the incredible ioy of the besieged. The old Souldiers, together with the new Companies, (thereto perswaded by Himilco with hope of great reward) resolue to set vpon the Romans in their Trenches, and either force them to abandon the siege, or (at least) to take from them, or set on fire, their engines of batterie. The attempt is presently made, and pursued to the vt∣termost, with great slaughter on both sides. But the Romans being more in number, and hauing the aduantage of the ground, hold still their places, and with extreme difficultie defend their engines. They of Carthage desire greatly to vnderstand the state of things at Lilybaeum; but know not how to send into the Towne. A certaine Rhodian vndertakes the seruice; and hauing receiued his dispatch, sailes with one Gallie to Aegusa, a little Iland neere Lilybaeum. Thence, taking his time, he steered directly with the Port; and hauing a passing swift Gallie, he past through the best of the , and re∣couered the water-gate, ere any of those, which the Romans had to guard the Port, could thrust from the shores on either side. The next day, neither attending the couert of the darke night, nor dreading to be boorded by the Roman Gallies, who waited his returne, he set saile, and shipping his Oares (his Gallie being exceeding quick of steerage, and himselfe expert in all parts of the channell) recouered the Hauens mouth, and the Sea, in despight of all the pursuit made after him. Then, finding himselfe out of danger of being incom∣passed by many, he turned againe towards the mouth of the Hauen, challenging any one, if any one durst come forth, to vndertake him. This enterprise, and the wel performing of it, was very remarkeable, and much wondred at in those dayes: and yet, where there was no great Artillerie, nor any other weapons of fire, to kill a-farre-off, the aduenture which this Rhodian made, was not greatly hazardous. For in this Age, a valiant and iudicious man of warre will not feare to passe by the best appointed Fort of Europe, with the helpe of a good Tide, and a leading gale of wind: no though fortie peeces of great Artillerie open their mouthes against him, and threaten to teare him in pieces. In the beginning of our late Queenes time, when Denmarke and Sweden were at Warre; our East-land fleet, bound for Leif-land, was forbidden by the King of Den∣marke to trade with the subiects of his enemies, and he threatned to sinke their ships if they came through the streights of Elsenour. Notwithstanding this, our Mer∣chants (hauing a ship of her Maiesties, called the Minion, to defend them) made the aduenture; and sustaining some Vollies of shot, kept on their course. The King made all the prouision he could, to stop them, or sinke them, at their returne. But the Minion, commanded (as I take it) by William Burrough, leading the way, did not only passe out with little losse, but did beat downe, with artillerie, a great part of the Fort of Elsenour; which at that time was not so well rampard, as now perhaps it is: and the fleet of Merchants that followed him, went through without any wound receiued. Neither was it long since, that the Duke of Parma besieging Antwerp, and finding no possibilitie to master it, otherwise then by famine, laid his Cannon on the bancke of the Riuer, so well to purpose, and so euen with the face of the water, that he thought it impossible for the least boat to passe by. Yet the Hol∣landers and Zelanders, not blowne vp by any winde of glorie, but comming to finde a good market for their Butter and Cheese, euen the poore men, attending their profit when all things were extreme deare in Antwerp, passed in boats of ten or twelue Tonne, by the mouth of the Dukes Cannon, in despight of it, when a strong Westerly winde, and a Tide of floud fauoured them; as also with a contrarie winde, and an ebbing water, they turned backe againe: so as he was forced, in the ende, to build his Stockado ouerthwart the Riuer, to his maruailous trouble and charge. The Fort St. Philip terrified not vs in the yeere 1596. when we ented the Port of Caliz; neither did the Fort at Puntal, when we were entred, beat vs from our an∣choring by it; though it plaied vpon vs with foure Demi-cannons within point blanque, from sixe in the morning till twelue at noone. The siege of Ostend, and of many other places, may be giuen for proofe, how hard a matter it is to stop the pas∣sage of a good ship, without another as good to encounter it. Yet this is true, that where a Fort is so set, as that of Angra in Tercera, that there is no passage along be∣side it, or that the ships are driuen to turne vpon a bow line towards it, wanting all helpe of winde and tide; there, and in such places, is it of great , and fearefull: otherwise not. But to returne to our aduenturous Rhodian: Hee arriues in safetie at Carthage, and makes them know the estate of Lilybaeum. Others also, after this take vpon them to doe the like, and performe it with the same successe. The Romans therfore labour to choke the channell; and, for that purpose, fill many Merchants ships with great stones, and sinke them therein. The force of the Tides cleares it againe in part: but they grounded so many of those great-bellied boats in the best of the entrance, as at last it made a manifest rising and heape, like a ragged Iland, in the pas∣sage. Hereby it came to passe, that a Carthaginian Gallie, taking her course by night, and not suspecting any such impediment, ranne her selfe a-ground thereon, and was taken. Now comes the braue Rhodian, thinking to enter, as hee had done before: but this Carthaginian Gallie, a little before taken, gaue him chace, and gathered vp∣on him; he findes what shee is, both by her forme and by her swiftnesse: and be∣ing not able to runne from her, to fight with her. But she is too well man∣ned for him, so that he is beaten and taken. Lilybaeum, after this, is greatly distressed; the Souldiers being worne with labour and watching. But in this despaire there rose so violent a tempest, as some of the Romans woodden Towers, by which they ouer-topt the walls of Lilybaeum, were ouer-turned. A Greeke Souldier vndertakes to fire those that were fallen, and per∣formes it: for the fire was no sooner kindled, but being blowne vnto by the bel∣lowes of a tempest, it increased so fast, as it became resistlesse, and in the end burned all to ashes, and melted the brasen heads of the battering Rammes. Hereupon, de∣spaire and wearinesse hinder the Romans from repairing their Engines: so that they resolue, by a long siege, to starue the defendants. Vpon relation of what had past, a supply of ten thousand Souldiers is sent from Rome, vnder M. Claudius, the Consull. He arriues at Messana, and marcheth ouer land to Lilybaeum: where hauing re-inforced the Armie, and supplied the Gallies with new Rowers, he propounds the surprise of Drepanum, a Citie on the other side of the Bay of Lilybaeum. This seruice the Captaines and Souldiers willingly embrace. So the Consull embarques his troups, and arriues on the sudden in the mouth of the Port. Adherbal is Gouernour of the Towne, a valiant and prudent man of warre, who being ignorant of the new supply arriued at Lilybaeum, was at first amazed at their sudden approch; but hauing recouered his spirits, hee per∣swades the Souldiers, rather to fight abroad, than to be inclosed. Herewithall hee promiseth great rewards to such, as by their valour shall deserue them; offering to leade them himselfe, and to fight in the head of his fleete. Hauing sufficiently en∣couraged his men, he thrusts into the Sea towards the Romans. The Consull, de∣ceiued of his expectation, calls back the foremost Gallies, that he might now mar∣shall them for defence. Hereupon some row backward, some forward, in great confusion. Adherbal findes and followes his aduantage, and forceth the into a Bay at hand, wherein he rangeth himselfe, hauing the land on his back: ho∣ping thereby to keepe himselfe from being incompassed. But he was thereby, and for want of Sea-roome, so streightned, as hee could not turne himselfe any way from his enemies, nor range himselfe in any order. Therefore when hee found no hope of resistance, keeping the shore on his left hand, he thrust out of the Bay with thirtie Gallies, besides his owne, and so fled away: all the rest of his , to the number of ninetie and foure ships, were taken or sunke by the Carthaginians. Ad∣herbal for this seruice is greatly honoured at Carthage; and Claudius, for his indis∣cretion and flight, as much disgraced at Rome. The Romans, notwithstanding this great losse, arme threescore Gallies, with which they send away L. Iunius, their Consull, to take charge of their businesse in Sicil, Iunius arriues at Messana, where he meets with the whole remainder of the Roman fleet, those excepted which rode in the Port of Lilybaeum. One hundred and twentie Gallies he had; and besides these, hee had gotten together almost eight hundred ships of burthen, which were laden with all necessarie prouisions for the Armie. With this great fleet he arriues at Syracuse, where he staies a while; partly to take in corne; partly, to wait for some, that were too slow of saile, to keepe com∣panie with him along from Messana. In the meane time, hee dispatcheth away to wards Lilybaeum, his Quaestors or Treasurers; to whom he commits the one halfe of his victuallers, with some Gallies for their conuoy. Abherbal was not carelesse, after his late victorie: but studied how to vse it to the best aduantage. The ships and prisoners that he had taken, he sent to Carthage. Of his owne Gallies hee deliuered thirtie to Carthalo, who had threescore and ten more vnder his owne charge; and sent him to trie, what good might be done against the Roman fleet, in the Hauen of Lilybaeum. According to this direction, suddenly enters the mouth of that Hauen, where he findes the Romans, more atten∣tiue to the keeping in of the besieged Carthaginians, than to the defence of their owne against another fleet. So hee chargeth , boords and takes some, and fires the rest. The Roman Campe takes alarme, and hastens to the rescue. But Himilco, Gouernour of the Towne, is not behinde hand; who sallies out at the same time, and putting the Romans in great distresse, giues Carthalo good leisure to go through with his enterprise. After this exploit, Carthalo ranne all along the South coast of Sicil, deuising how to worke mischiefe to the enemie: wherein Fortune presented him with a faire oc∣casion, which he wisely managed. He was aduertised by his Scouts, that they had descried, neere at hand, a great fleet, consisting of all manner of Vessells. These were the victuallers, which the Consull Iunius, more hastily than prouidently, had sent before him towards Lilybaeum, Carthalo was glad to heare of their comming: for hee and his men were full of courage, by reason of their late victories. Accomp∣ting therefore the great multitude of Roman Hulks approching, to be rather a prey, than a fleet, likely to make strong opposition, he hastens to encounter them. It fell out according to his expectation. The Romans had no minde to fight: but were glad to shelter in an open Road, full of rocks, vnder couert of a poore Towne, belonging to their partie; that could helpe to saue them only from the present dan∣ger, by lending them engines and other aide, wherewith to beat off the Carthagi∣nians that assailed them. Carthalo therefore, hauing taken a few of them, lay wai∣ting for the rest, that could not long ride vnder those rocks, but vvould be forced, by any great change of winde, either to put out into the deepe, or to saue their men, how they could, by taking land, with the losse of all their shipping. Whilest he was busied in this care; the Consull drew neere, and was discouered. Against him Carthalo makes out, and findes him altogether vnprepared to fight, as being wholly ignorant of that which had hapned. The Consull had neither meanes to flie, nor abilitie to fight. Therefore he likewise ran into a very dangerous Creeke; thinking no danger so great, as that of the enemie. The Carthaginian, seeing this, betakes himselfe to a Station betweene the two Roman fleets; where hee watcheth, to see which of them would first stirre, with a resolution to assault that, which should first dare to put it selfe into the Sea. So as now all the three fleets were on the South coast of Sicil, betweene the Promontorie of Pachinus and Lilybaeum; a Tract exceeding dangerous, when the winde stormed at South. The , who knew the times of tempest, and their signes, finding (belike) some swelling billow (for so we doe in the West of England, before a Southerly storme) hasted to double the of Pachinus, thereby to couer themselues from the rage at hand. But the Romans, who knew better how to fight, than how to Nauigate, and neuer found any foule weather in the entrailes of their beasts, their Soothsayers being all , were suddenly ouer-taken with a boisterous South winde, and all their Gallies forced against the rocks, and vtterly wrackt. This calamitie so discouraged the Romans, that they resolued againe to forsake the Seas, and trust onely to the seruice of their Legions vpon firme ground. But such a resolution cannot long hold. Either they must be strong at Sea, or else they not make warre in an Iland, against those that haue a mightier fleet. Yet are they to excused, in regard of the many great calamities which they had suffered, through their want of skill. Here I cannot forbeare to commend the patient ver∣tueof the Spaniards. We seldome or neuer finde, that any Nation hath endured so many misaduentures and miseries, as the Spaniards haue done, in their Indian Disco∣ueries. Yet persisting in their enterprises, with an inuincible constancie, they haue annexed to their Kingdome so many goodly Prouinces, as burie the remembrance ofall dangers past. Tempests and shipwracks, famine, ouerthrowes, mutinies, heat and cold, pestilence, and all manner of diseases, both old and new, together with extreme pouertie, and want of all things needfull, haue beene the enemies, where∣with euery one of their most noble Discouerers, at one time or other, hath encoun∣tred. Many yeeres haue passed ouer some of their heads, in the search of not so many leagues: yea more then one or two, haue spent their labour, their wealth, and their liues, in search of a golden Kingdome, without getting further notice of it, than what they had at their first setting forth. All which notwithstanding, the third, fourth, and fift vndertakers, haue not beene disheartned. Surely, they are worthily rewarded with those Treasuries, and Paradises, which they enjoy; and well they deserue to hold them quietly, if they hinder not the like vertue in others, which (perhaps) will not be found. §. XI. The Citie of Eryx is surprized by the Romans, and recouered by AMILCAR; Who stoutly holds warre with them fiue yeeres. The Romans hauing emptied their common treasurie, build a new fleet, at the charges of priuate men. The great victorie at Sea of LVCTATIVS the Consull; whereby the Carthaginians are forced to craue peace. The conditions of the peace betweene Rome and Carthage. THE Romans were carefull, to supply with all industrie, by land, the want of strength at Sea. Therefore they continue the siege of Lily∣baeum, and seeke to make sure to themselues all places, whither the enemies ships could not bring reliefe. The Consull Iunius, to cure the wound of dishonour, which hee had receiued, bethought him what enterprise to vndertake. In the end hee resolued to attempt the Mountaine and Citie of Eryx, with the Temple of Venus Erycina: which was the fairest and rich∣est of all the Iland; and of these, by cunning or treason, hee got possession. Eryx was commodiously seated betweene Drepanum and Panormus; so that it seemed a fit place for a Garrison, that should restraine the Carthaginians from making roads into the Countrie. Wherefore Iunius fortified both the top of the Mountaine, and the first entrance of the passage from the bottome, (both which places were verie defencible) with a good strength of men. But shortly after, in the eigh∣teenth yeere of this warre, the Carthaginians sent forth Amilcar, surnamed Barcas, Father of the great Hannibal, with a flect and armie, who sailing to the coasts of Ita∣lie, did throughly repay the spoiles which the Romans made in Africa. For hee first of all wasted and destroied the Territories of the Locrines, and of the Brutians, that were dependants of Rome. Then entred hee into Sicil; and finding there no walled Citie in the Carthaginians power, that serued fitly to infest the Romans, hee occupied a peece of ground of great aduantage, and lodged his Armie thereon; to as well the Romans, that were in Panormus, as those that kept about Eryx, putting himselfe betweene both Armies with admirable resolution. The place that Amilcar had seized vpon, was not only very strong by situation, but had the command of a Port: whereby it gaue him oportunitie, to scoure all the coast of Italie with his fleet, wasting all along as farre as to Cuma. In the Isle of Sicil hee held the Romans to hard worke: lying neere vnto Panormus, where in three yeeres abode hee did many notable acts, though not of much consequence, for that the enemie could neuer bee drawne to hazard the maine chance. Hauing wearied himselfe and the Romans long enough about Panormus, hee vndertooke a strange of worke at Eryx. The Roman Garrisons, placed there by Iunius, on the top, and at the bottome of the Mountaine, were very strongly lodged. Ne∣uerthelesse Amilcar found a way, lying towards the Sea-side, by which hee con∣ueighed his men into the Citie of Eryx, that was about the middest of the ascent, ere the enemie knew of it. By this it came to passe, that the Romans which kept the top of the Mountaine, were streightly held (as it were) besieged. And no lesse was Amilca himselfe restrained, by both of these Garrisons, and such as came to relieue them. There he found them pastime about two yeeres more; hoping still to wearie out those that lay ouer his head, as they on the contrarie did their best, to thrust him out of those quarters. At this time, all the care, both of the Romans and of the Carthaginians, was bent vnto the prosequuting of this businesse at Eryx. Wherein it seemes true (as Hanni∣bal, in Liuie, spake vnto Scipio ) that the affaires of neuer stood in better . . 3. l. 10. termes, since the beginning of the warre, than now they did. For whereas the Ro∣mans had vtterly forsaken the Seas, partly by reason of their great losses; partly vpon confidence of their land-forces, which they held resistlesse; , with a small Armie, had so well acquited himselfe, to the honour of his Countrie, that by the triall of fiue yeares warre, the Carthaginian Souldier was judged equall, if not superiour to the Roman. Finally, when all, that might be, had beene deuised and gone, for the dislodging of this obstinate Warriour: no way seemed better to the Senate of Rome, than once againe to build a fleet; whereby, if the mastrie of the Sea could once be gotten, it was likely that Amilcar, for lack of supply, should not long be able to hold out. But in performing this, extreme difficultie was found. The common treasurie was exhausted: and the cost was not little, that was requisite vn∣to such an enterprise. Wherefore there was none other way left, than to lay the burden vpon priuate purses. Diuers of the principall Citizens vndertooke to build (each at his owne charges) one Quinquereme, which example wrought so well, that they, whose abilitie would not serue to doe the like, joyned with some others, and laying their monie together, cōcurred two or three of them, in building of another; with condition to be repaied, when the warre was finished. By this voluntarie con∣tribution, they made and furnished two hundred new Quinqueremes: taking for their patterne, that excellent swift-rowing Gallie which they had gotten from the , in the Port of Lilybaeum, as was shewed before. The charge of this fleet was committed to C. Luctatius Catulus; who past with the same into Sicil, the Spring following, and entred the Port of Drepanum, indeuouring by all meanes to haue forced the Citie. But being aduertisec that the Carthaginian fleet was at hand, and being mindfull of the late losses which his Predecessours had receiued; he was care∣full to put him selfe in order, against their arriuall. Hanno was Admirall of the Carthaginian fleet; a man (as his actions declare him) wise in picture, exceedingly formall, and skilfull in the arte of seeming reuerend. How his reputation was first bred, I doe not finde; but it was vp-held by a factious contradiction, of things vndertaken by men more worthie than himselfe. This qualitie procured vnto him (as it hath done to many others) both good liking a∣mong the ancient sort, whose cold temper is auerse from new enterprises, and therewithall an opinion of great fore-sight, confirmed by euery losse receiued. More particularly, hee was gracious among the people, for that hee was one of the most grieuous oppressours of their subject Prouinces; whereby he procured vnto the much wealth, but therewithall such hatred, as turned it al to their great losse. Hee had ere this beene imployed against the Numidians, and wilde A∣fricans, that were more like to Rouers, than to Souldiers, in making Warre. Of those fugitiue Nations, hee learned to neglect more manly enemies, to his owne great , and to the great hurt of Carthage; which lost not more by his bad conduct, than by malicious counsaile, when, hauing shewed himselfe an vnworthie Captaine he himselfe to the long Robe. Yet is hee much com∣mended in Roman , as a temperate man, and one that studied how to pre∣serue the League betweene Carthage and Rome. In which regard, how well hee deserued of his owne Countrie, it will appeare hereafter: how beneficiall hee was to the Romans, it will appeare, both hereafter, and in his present voyage; wherein he reduced the Carthaginians to a miserable necessitie of accepting, vpon hard condi∣tions, that peace which he thence-forth commended. Hanno had very well furnished his Nauie, with all needfull prouisions for the Souldiers at Eryx: (for dexteritie in making preparation was the best of his quali∣ties) but hee had neither beene carefull in trayning his Mariners, to the practice of Sea-fight, nor in manning his Gallies with stout fellowes. Hee thought, that the fame of a Carthaginian fleet was enough, to make the vnexpert Romans giue way: forgetting, that rather the resistlesse force of tempests, than any other strength of opposition, had made them to forsake the Seas. Yet in one thing hee had either conceiued a-right, or else was sent forth well instructed. It was his purpose, first of all to saile to Eryx, and there to discharge his ships of their lading: and hauing thus lightned himselfe, he meant to take aboord some part of the Land-armie, together with Amilcar himselfe, by whose helpe he doubted not, but that he should be able to make the enemie repent of his new aduenture to Sea. This was a good course, if it could haue beene performed. But Catulus vsed all possible diligence, to pre∣uent the execution of this designe: not because hee was informed of the enemies purpose, but for that he knew it to be the best for them, and for that feared no dan∣ger so greatly, as to encounter with Amilcar. Wherefore although the weather was very rough, and the Seas went high, when the Carthaginian fleet was descried; yet he rather chose to fight with the enemie, that had the winde of him, than to suffer this conuoy to passe along to Eryx, vpon vnlikely hope of better oportu∣nitie in the future. All that Hanno should haue done, Catulus had performed. Hee had carefully exercised his men in Rowing; hee had lightned his Gallies of all vnnecessarie burthen; and hee had taken aboord the choice men of the Roman Land-souldiers. The Carthaginians therefore, at the first encounter, were vtterly broken and defeated; hauing fiftie of their Gallies stemmed and sunke, and seuentie taken, wherein were few lesse than ten thousand men, that were all made prisoners: the rest, by a sudden change of winde, escaping to the Ile of Hieronesus. The state of Carthage, vtterly discouraged by this change of fortune, knew not whereon to resolue. Meanes to repaire their fleete in any time there were none left; their best men of warre by Sea were consumed; and Amilcar, vpon whose valour and judgement the honour and safetie of the Common-weale rested, was now surrounded by his enemies in Sicil, where hee could not bee relieued. In this extremitie, they make dispatch vnto Amilcar himselfe, and authorize him to take what course should seeme best vnto his excellent wisedome; leauing all conclusions to his election and sole counsaile. Amilcar, whom no aduersitie, accompanied with the least hope or possibilitie of recouerie, had euer vanquished, looking ouer euery promise, true or false, that the present time could make him, (for to attend any thing from the future hee was not able) resolued to make triall, whether his necessitie might bee compounded vpon any reasonable termes. He therefore sent to Luctatius the Consull an Ouer∣ture of peace: who considering it well, gathered so many arguments from the pre∣sent pouertie of the Roman State, wasted beyond expectation in the former warre, that he willingly harkened vnto it. So, in conclusion, an accord was made, but with prouision, That it should hold none otherwise, than if the Senate and People of Rome would ratifie it with their allowance. The conditions were: First, that the Carthaginians should clearely abandon the Isle of Sicil. Secondly, that they should neuer vnder-take vpon Hieron King of Syracuse, nor inuade any part of his Territories, nor the Territories of any of his Friends and Allies. Thirdly, that they should set at libertie, and send back into Italie, all the Romans, whom they hold prisoners, without ransome. Lastly, that they should pay vnto the Romans two thousand and two hundred ta∣lents; which make, as the French reckon the talent, thirteene hundred and twentie thousand crownes: the same to be deliuered within twentie yeeres next following. These Articles were sent to Rome, where they were not throughly approued: but ten Commissioners were sent into Sicil, to make perfect the agreement. These Commissioners added a thousand talents to the former summe; and required a shorter time of payment. Further also, they tooke order, that the Carthaginians should not onely depart out of Sicil it selfe, but should also with draw their Com∣panies out of all the other Ilands betweene it and Italie, renouncing their whole in∣terest therein. Such was the end of the first Punick Warre, that had lasted about twentie foure yeares without intermission; in which time the Romans had lost, by fight or shipwrack, about seuen hundred Quinqueremes; and the Carthaginians, about fiue hundred: the greatnesse of which losses, doth serue to proue the greatnesse both of these two Cities, and of the Warre it selfe; wherein I hold good the judgement of , That the Romans, in generall, did shew themselues the brauer Nation; and Amilcar, the most worthie Captaine. CHAP. II. Of diuers actions passing betweene the first and second Punick Warres. §. I. Of the cruell warre begunne betweene the Carthaginians and their owne . THE Romans, hauing partly by force, and partly by composition, thrust the Carthaginians out of Sicil, and all the little Ilands thereunto adjacent, gaue them ra∣ther meanes and leisure to helpe themselues in a fol∣lowing warre, than cause to hold themselues conten∣ted with the present peace. It is a true rule, Quòd leges à victoribus dicuntur, accipiuntur à victis; That lawes Q. Curt. l. . are giuen by the Conquerors, and receiued of the conquered. But the Romans had either forgotten the answer that was made vnto them, by one of the Priuer nates; or else had forgotten to follow it, in this waightie busi∣nesse. For when one of Priuernum, after a rebellion, defending in the Senate the cause of his Citie, was demanded by a Senator, What peace the Romans might hope for, or assure themselues of, they quitted their present aduantage ouer them; he answered in these words, Sibonam dederitis, & & perpetuam; si malam, haud ; If the peace be good and faithfull that you giue vs, it will be perpetuall; if it be ill, then of little continuance. To this answere, the Senate, at that time; gaue such approbation, that it was said, Viri & liberi auditam; an credi posse, vllum populum, aut in ea conditione, cuius poeniteat, diutius quàm necesse sit mansurum? That it was the speech of a manly, and a free man; for who could beleeue, that any people, or in∣deede any one man, would continue longer in an ouer-burdened estate, than meere necessitie did enforce? Now if the Romans themselues could make this judgement, of those Nations, who had little else, besides their manly resolution, to defend their liber∣tie; surely, they grosly flattered themselues, in presuming, that the Carthaginians, who neither in power nor in pride, were any way inferiour vnto themselues, would sit downe any longer by the losse and dishonour receiued, than vntill they could re∣couer their legs, and the strength, which had a while failed them, to take reuenge. But Occasion, by whom (while well entertained) not only men, but Kings and publique States, haue more preuailed, than by any proper prowesse or vertue, with-held the tempest from the Romans for a time, and turned it most fearefully vpon Africa, and the Carthaginians themselues. For after that the first Punick Warre was ended; Amilcar, leauing Eryx, went to Lilybaeum, from whence most conueniently the Armie might be transported into Africk: the care of which businesse he committed vnto Gesco, to whom, as to a man of approued sufficiencie, he deliuered ouer his charge. Gesco had an especiall consi∣deration of the great summes, wherein Carthage was indebted vnto these Mercina∣ries; and, withall, of the great disabilitie to make paiment. Therefore he thought it the wisest way, to send them ouer (as it were) by handfulls, a few at a time; that so the first might haue their dispatch, and be gone, ere the second or third Com∣panies arriued. Herein hee dealt prouidently. For it had not beene hard to per∣swade any small number, lodged within so great a Citie as Carthage, vnto some such reasonable composition, as the present emptinesse of the common Treasurie did re∣quire: so that the first might haue beene friendly discharged, and a good president left vnto the second and third, whilest their desiunction had made them vnable to recouer their whole due by force. But the Carthaginians were of a contrarie opini∣on. They thought to finde, in the whole Armie, some that would be contented to gratifie the Publique state, by remitting a great part of their owne due: and hoped by such an example, to draw all the multitude to the like agreement and capitula∣tion. So they detayned the first and second commers; telling them, that they would make an euen reckoning with all together. Thus euery day the number in∣creased, and many disorders (a thing incident among Souldiers) were committed; which much disquieted the Citie, not accustomed vnto the like. In this regard it was thought fit, to remoue them all to some other place where they might be lesse troublesome. This must be done by some colourable words of perswasion: for their number was alreadie so great, that it was not safe to offend them too farre. Wherefore it is deuised, that they should all attend the comming of their fellowes, at Sicca: receiuing euery one a peece of gold, to beare his charges in the meane while. This motion is accepted, and the Souldiers beginne to dislodge; leauing behinde them their wiues, their children, and all their baggage, as meaning shortly to fetch away all, when they came back for their pay. But the Carthaginians haue no fancie to their returning into the Towne; and therefore compell them to trusse vp their fardells, that they might haue none occasion left, to make any errands thi∣ther. So to Sicca they remoued, with all their goods; and there lay waiting for newes of their fellowes arriuall, and their owne pay. Businesse they had none to doe, and therfore might easily be drawne to mutinie: the whole argument of their discourse inclining them to nothing else. Their daily talke was, how rich they should be, when all their mony came in; how much would fall to euery single share; and for how long time the Citie was behinde hand with them in reckoning. They were all growne Arithmeticians; and hee was thought a man of worth, that could finde most reason to increase their demands, to the very highest, euen beyond their due. No part of their long seruice was forgotten; but the comfortable words and promises of their Captaines, leading them forth to any dangerous fight, were cal∣led to minde, as so many obligations, not to be cancelled, without satisfying their expectation by some vnordinarie largesse. Thus the time passeth away; vntill the whole Armie being arriued, and lodged in Sicca, Hanno comes thither to cleare the accompt. Now is the day come, where∣in they shall all be made rich; especially if they can hold together, in maintaining stoutly the common cause. So thinke they all; and assemble themselues to heare what good newes this messenger had brought: with a a full resolution to help his memorie, in case he should happen to forget any part of the many promises made vnto them; all which were to be considered in their Donatiue. Hanno begins a ve∣rie formall Oration; wherein he bewailes the pouertie of Carthage; tells them, how great a summe of mony is to be paid vnto the Romans, reckons vp the excessiue charges, whereat the common-wealth had beene in the late warre; and finally de∣sires them to hold themselues contented with part of their pay, and out of the loue which they bare vnto the Citie, to remit the rest. Few of them vnderstood his dis∣course: for the Carthaginian Armie was composed of sundry Nations, as Greekes, A∣fricans, Gaules, Ligurians, Spaniards, and others, all of different languages. Yet they stared vpon him, and were (as I thinke) little pleased with his very gesture. But when such, as conceiued the whole tenour of his speech, had informed the rest what cold comfort he brought; they were all enraged, and fared like mad men, so that nothing would serue to appease them. Hanno would faine haue asswaged their furie, but he knew not how: for hee lesse vnderstood their dissonant lowde noises, than they did his Oration. An Armie collected out of many countries, that haue no one language common to all, or to the greater part of them, is neither easily stir∣red vp to mutinie, nor easily pacified, when once it is broken into outrage. The best that Hanno can doe, is to vse the helpe of Interpreters, and messengers. But these In∣terpreters mistake his meaning; some, for want of skill; others, of set purpose; and such as deliuer his errandes in the worst sense, are best beleeued. Finally, they thinke themselues much abused by the Carthaginians, and resolue to demand their owne in peremptorie termes, at a neerer distance. In this moode they leaue Sic∣ca, and march as farre as Tunis, that is within a little of Carthage, and there they incampe. Now begin the Carthaginians to find their one errour. It is a good rule, Curandum inprimis, ne magna iniuria fiat Fortibus & miseris. Haue speciall care, that valiant pouertie Be not opprest with too great iniurie. But this proud citie, hauing neglected the rule, hath also beene carelesse in proui∣ding to secure her selfe against the inconuenience that might followe. She had suf∣fered the whole multitude, whereunto shee was like to giue cause of discontent, to ioyne it selfe into one bodie, when the seuerall troupes might easily haue beene dispersed: shee hath turned out of her gates the wiues, children, and goods of these poore men, which had shee retained in shew of kindnesse, shee might haue vsed them as Hostages, for her owne safetie; and by imploying a miserable pennie-fa∣ther, in her negotiation with men of warre, shee hath weakened the reputation of her brauest Captaines, that might best haue serued to free her from the threatning danger. Yet likely enough it is, that Amilcar had no desire to be vsed as an instrumēt in defrauding his owne souldiours of their wages: epecially considering, that as he best could beare witnesse of their merits, so was hee not ignorant, that meanes to content them were not wanting, if the Citizens had beene willing thereunto. Here∣to may be added a probable coniecture, that Hanno, with his complices, who at this very time was a bitter enemie to Amilcar, had the boldnesse to impose the blame of his owne wretched counsaile, vpon the liberall promises made by the Captaines. Amilcar therefore did wisely, in suffering those that maligned him, to haue the managing of their own plot, and to deale the cards which themselues had shuffled. This they continue to doe as foolishly, as they had at first begun. They furnish a market at Tunis, for the souldiours; whom they suffer to buy what they list, and at what price they list. They send euer and anon some of their Senatours into the Campe; who promise to satisfie all demands, as farre forth as it should be possible. And thus by shifting from one extreme to another, they make the soul∣diours vnderstand, into what feare the City was driuen; which cannot but adde much insolency to the passions alreadie stirred vp. This sudden change of weather, and the true cause of it, is quickly by the Armie, which thereupon growes wise, and finding the season fit, labours to make a great haruest. Monie must be had, and without any abatement. This is granted. Many haue lost their horses, in publique seruice of the state. The state shall pay for them. They had liued some yeares, by making hard shift, without receiuing their allowance of victualls from Carthage. If they had liued, they wanted not meat; therefore what was this to the Carthaginians? Was it not all one, whether the ships did bring in prouision; or their Captaine direct them where to fetch it? But this would not serue. They said that they had beene sometimes driuen to buy; and that (since they could not remember, how much, or at what rate they bought) they would be paid for their prouision, during the whole time, and according to the dearest price that wheat had borne, whilest the warre lasted. Such are now the de∣mands of these Mutiners; who might easily haue beene satisfied with farre lesse charges, and farre more honour, by receuing their due at the first. But now they make none end of crauing. For whilest the Carthaginians are perplexed, about this corne-monie; the Souldiers haue deuised many more tricks, whereby to extort a summe of monie, without all regard of shame. Since therefore no good end could bee found of these controuersies which daily did multiply, it was thought conuenient, that one of the Carthaginians, which had commanded in Sicil, should be chosen by the Souldiers, to reconcile all differences. Hereunto the Armie con∣descended, and made choise of Gesco: partly out of good liking to him, who had shewed himselfe at all times a friendly man to them, and careful of their good, espe∣cially when they were to be transported into Africk: partly out of a dislike which they had of Amilcar; for that he had not visited them in all this busie time. So Gesco comes among them; and, to please them the better, comes not with∣out monie: which might giue better countenance to his proceedings, than barren cloquence had done to the negotiation of Hanno. Hee calles vnto him first of all, the Captaines, and then, the seuerall Nations apart; rebuking them gently for that which had passed; aduising them temperatly concerning the present; and exhor∣ting them to continue their loue vnto the State, which had long entertained them, and would alwaies be mindfull of their good seruices. After this he beganne to put hand to his purse: offering to giue them their whole paie in hand; and then after to consider of other recknonings, at a more conuenient time. This had beene well accepted, and might haue serued to bring all to a quiet passe; if two seditious ring∣leaders of the multitude had not stood against it. There was in the Campe one Spendius, a sturdie fellowe, and audacious, but a slaue; that in the late warre had fled from a Roman whom hee serued, and there∣fore stood in feare, lest he should be deliuered backe to his Master; at whose hands he could expect no lesse, than to be whipt and crucified. This wretch could finde no better way to prolong his owne life, than by raising such troubles as might serue to withdraw men from care of priuate matters, and make his owne resti∣tution impossible, were his Master neuer so importunate. With Spendius there associated himselfe one Matho; an hote-headed man, that had beene so forward in stirring vp the tumult, as hee could not choose but feare, lest his owne death should bee made an example, to deterre others from the like seditious be∣hauiour. This Matho deales with his Countrimen, the Africans; telling them, that they were in farre worse condition, than either the Gaules, the Greekes, the Spa∣niards, or any forreyne mercinaries. For (saith he) these our companions haue no more to doe, than to receiue their wages, and so get them gone: but wee, that are to stay behinde in Africa, shall be called to another manner of accompt, when wee are left alone; so that we shall haue cause to wish, that wee had returned home beggers, rather than loaden with the monie, which (little though it be) shall breake our backes. Yee are not ignorant, how tyran∣nically these our haughtie Masters of CARTHAGE doe reigne ouer vs. They thinke it reasonable, that our liues and goods should be at their disposition; which they haue at other times beene to take away from vs, euen without apparent cause, as it were to declare their Souereigntie: what will they now doe, seeing that we haue demeaned our selues as free men, and beene bold to set a good face on the matter, demanding our owne, as others haue done? Ye all doe know, that it were a very shame for vs, if hauing beene as forward in cuerie danger of warre, as any other men, we should now stand quaking like slaues, and not dare to open our mouthes, when others take libertie to require their due. This notwithstan∣ding yee may assure your selues, that we are like to be taught better manners, as soone as our fellowes are gone: in regard of whom they are contented to shadow their indignation with a good, but a forced countenance. Let vs therefore be wise; and consider, that they hate and feare vs. Their hatred will shew it selfe, when their feare is once past: vnlesse wee now take our time, and, whilest we are the stronger, enfeeble them so greatlie, that their hatred shal not be able to doe vs wrong. All their strength consisteth in monie, wherewithall they haue hired others against vs, and vs against others. At the present they haue neither monie nor friends. The best that euer serued them, whereof wee are no small part, lies at their gates, readie to helpe vs if we be men. A better opportunitie cannot be expected: for were our swords once drawne, all AFRICK would rise on our side. As for the CARTHAGI∣NIANS, whither can they send for helpe? The case it selfe is plame: but we must quickely resolue. Either we must preuent the diligence of GESCO, by incensing these GAVLES and SPANIARDES, and procuring them to drawe bloud, or else it behoueth vs to please our goodmasters, by ioyning with them against our fellowes, yea by offering to forgiue vnto them all our wages, if so (peraduenture) they may be wonne to forgiue vs, or not ouercru∣elly to punish our faults already committed. Hee is worthily a wretched slaue, that neither hath care to winne his Masters loue, nor courage to attempt his owne libertie. By such perswasions Matho winnes the African souldiers to his owne purpose. They are not now so greedie of monie, as of quarrell; which hee that seekes, will not misse to finde. When Gesco therefore offered to pay them their whole stipend presently, but referred their other demandes, for horses and victuailes to some o∣ther more conuenient time; they breake into great ontrage, and say that they will haue all, euen all at once, and that out of hand. In this tumult, the whole Armie flocke together about Matho and Spendius; whose diligence is not wanting, to adde more fuell to the fire alreadie blazing. Matho and Spendius are the onely men to whom the souldiours will hearken: if any other stand vp to make a speech, a showre of stones, flying about his eares, puts him to silence, that hee shall neuer after∣wards speake word more. Neither stay they to consider what it is that any man would say: enough hath beene said alreadie by these good spokesmen; so that no other word (though perhaps to the same purpose) can bee heard, saue onely throwe, throwe. Now the Rebellion beginnes to take forme. Matho and Spendius are chosen Captaines; who, followed by a desperate crue of Russians, will suffer no man to make his owne peace, but pursue their owne ends, vnder faire pretence of the com∣mon cause. All which notwithstanding, Gesco is not wanting to the good of his countrie, but aduentures himselfe vpon their furie. One while hee deales with the Captaines, and other principall men; taking them by the hand, and giuing gentle words: another while hee workes with the seuerall Nations; putting them all in hope of their owne hearts desire if any reason would content them. None of them are so sullen as the Africans: indeed none of them had so good cause. They require him peremptorilie, to giue them their owne, and not to feed them with wordes. The truth is, that they are not so couetous as they seeme: but will be more glad of an ill answere, then of a good payment. This is more then Gesco knowes: he sees not that Matho hath, any more then bare words, to bestow vpon them. Wherefore, as rebuking their inconsiderate heat, he telles them, That they may doe well, if they stand in want of monie, to seeke it of their Captaine, Matho. This is enough. Shall he both defraud them & deride them? They stay no longer, but lay violent hands vpon the treasure that he had brought; yea vpon him also, and al that are with him: as intending to take this in part of paiment, and, for the rest, to take another course. Matho and Spendius are glad of this. It had little pleased them to see their fellowes beginne to grow calme, by his faire language: wherefore they cast into bonds both him, and all the Carthaginians that they can finde; that so the Armie may be freed from danger of good admonition, which they call Treason. After this followes open warre. Matho sollicites all Africk; and his Embassadours are euerie where well entertained. Neither is it needefull to vse perswasion: the very fame of this rebellion sufficeth to drawe the whole countrie into it. Now must the Carthagini∣ans bee plagued for those oppressions, with which they haue plagued others. It is true that aduersitie hath neuer beene vntold of her errours: and as she is euer assu∣red to heare her owne, so commonly with her owne shee vndergoes those of other men. The Africans, finding the Carthaginians hang vnder the wheele, tell them boldly, that their Impositions were mercilesse; that they tooke from them the one halfe of their corne; that they doubled their tributes in al things else; and that they inflicted vpon their vassals the greatest punishments for the least offences. These cruelties the Carthaginians themselues haue forgotten: but the people, that haue suffered so much, retaine all in perfect memorie. Wherefore not onely such as can beare armes, are ready to doe seruice in this great Commotion; but the very wo∣men bring forth their iewels, and other ornaments, offering all to sale for mainte∣nance of so iusta quarrell. By this great forwardnesse, and liberall contribution, Matho and Spendius are supplied with a strong aide of threescore and tenne thou∣sand Africans: and are moreouer furnished with monie, not onely to satisfie the present appetite of their men, but sufficient to continue the warre begun, though it should be of long endurance. §. II. Diuers obseruations vpon this warre with the mercinaries. †. I. Of Tyrannie, and how tyrants are driuen to vse helpe of mercinaries. HEre let vs rest awhile, as in a conuenient breathing place: whence wee may take prospect of the subiect, ouer which we trauaile. Behold a tyrannicall Citie, persecuted by her owne mercinaries with a deadly warre. It is a common thing, as being almost necessarie, that a tyrannie should bee vpheld by mercinarie forces: it is common that mercina∣ries should be false: and it is common that all warre made against Tyrants, should be exceeding full of hate and crueltie. Yet wee seldome heare, that the ruine of a Tyrannie is procured or sought, by those that were hired to maintaine the power of it: and seldome or neuer doe we reade of any warre, that hath beene prosecuted with such inexpiable hatred, as this that is now in hand. That which we properly call Tyrannie, is A violent forme of gouernment, not respecting the good of the , but onely the pleasure of the Commander. I purposely forbeare to say, that it is the vniust rule of one ouer many: for verie truely doth Cleon in Thucydides tell the Athenians, that their dominion ouer their subjects, . l. 6. was none other than a meere tyranny; though it were so, that they themselues were a great Citie, and a popular estate. Neither is it peraduenture greatly neede∣full, that I should call this forme of commanding, violent: since it may well and easily bee conceiued, that no man willingly performes obedience, to one regard∣lesse of his life and welfare; vnlesse himselfe bee either a mad man, or (which is little better) wholly possessed with some extreme passion of loue. The practice of tyrannie, is not alwaies of a like extremitie: for some Lords are more gentle, than others, to their very slaues; and he that is most cruell to some, is milde enough towards others, though it be but for his owne aduantage. Neuerthelesse, in large Dominions, wherein the Rulers discretion cannot extend it selfe, vnto notice of the difference which might bee found betweene the worth of seuerall men; it is com∣monly seene, that the taste of sweetnesse, drawne out of oppression, hath so good a , as continually inflames the Tyrants appetite, and will not suffer it to bee re∣strained with any limits of respect. Why should he seeke out bounds, to prescribe vnto his desires, who cannot endure the face of one so honest, as may put him in remembrance of any moderation? It is much that hee hath gotten, by ex∣torting from some few: by sparing none, hee should haue riches in goodly aboun∣dance. He hath taken a great deale from euery one: but euery one could haue spa∣red more. He hath all their purses, and now he hath enough: but (as Co∣uetousnesse is neuer satisfied) he thinkes that all this is too little for a stock, though it were indeede a good yearely Income. Therefore he deuiseth new tricks of rob∣berie, and is not better pleased with the gaines, then with the Art of getting. He is hated for this, and he knowes it well: but hee thinkes by crueltie to change hatred into feare. So he makes it his exercise, to torment and murder all, whom he suspe∣cteth: in which course, if he suspect none vnjustly, he may be said to deale craftily; but if Innocency be not safe, how can all this make any Conspiratour to stand in feare, since the Traitor is no worse rewarded, than the quiet man? Whereforehee can thinke vpon none other securitie, than to disarme all his Subiects; to fortifie himselfe within some strong place; and for defence of his Person and state, to hire as many lustie Souldiers as shall be thought sufficient. These must not bee of his owne Countrie: for if not euery one, yet some one or other might chance to haue a feeling of the publique miserie. This considered, he allures vnto him a desperate rabble of strangers, the most vnhonest that can bee found; such as haue neither wealth nor credit at home, and will therefore be careful to support him, by whose onely fauour they are maintained Now lest any of these, either by detestation of his wickednesse, or (which in wicked men is most likely) by promise of greater re∣ward, than he doth giue, should be drawne to turne his sword against the Tyrant himselfe: they shall all be permitted to doe as he doth; to robbe, to rauish, to murder, and to satisfie their owne , in most outragious manner; being thought so much the more to their Master, by how much the more he sees them grow hatefull to all men else. Considering in what Age, and in what Lan∣guage I write; I must be faine to say, that these are not dreames: though some En∣glish-man perhaps that were vnacquainted with Historie, lighting vpon this leafe, might suppose this discourse to be little better. This is to shew, both how tyran∣nie growes to stand in need of mercinarie Souldiers, and how those Mercinaries are, by mutuall obligation, firmely assured vnto the Tyrant. †. II. That the tyrannie of a Citie ouer her Subiects is worse, than the tyrannie of one man: and that a tyrannicall Citie must likewise vse mercinary Souldiers. NOw concerning the tyrannie, wherewith a Citie or State oppresseth her Sub∣jects; it may appeare some waies to be more moderate, then that of one man: but in many things it is more intolerable. A Citie is jelous of her Dominion; but not (as is one man) fearefull of her life: the lesse neede hath shee therefore, to se∣cure her selfe by crueltie. A Citie is not luxurious in consuming her treasures; and therefore needes the lesle, to pluck from her Subiects. If warre, or any other great occasion, driue her to necessitie, of taking from her Subiects more than ordinarie summes of monie: the same necessitie makes either the contribution easie, or the taking excusable. Indeede, no wrongs are so grieuous and hatefull, as those that are insolent. Remember (saith Caligula the Emperor, to his Grand-mother Antonia ) that I may doe what I list, and to whom I list: these wordes were accounted horrible, though he did her no harme. And reckons it, as the complement of all tor∣ments, inflicted by a cruell Roman Dame vpon her slaues; that whilest shee was whipping them, she painted her face, talked with her Gossips, and vsed all signes of neglecting what those wretches felt. Now seeing that the greatest grieuances wherwith a domineering State offen deth her Subiects, are free from all sence of in∣dignitie: likely it is, that they will not extremely hate her, although desire of liber∣tie make them wearie of her Empire. In these respects it is not needefull, that shee should keepe a Guard of licentious cut-throtes, and maintaine them in all villanie, as a Dionysius or Agathocles must doe: her owne Citizens are able to terrifie, and to hold perforce in obedience, all male-contents. These things, considered alone by themselues, may serue to proue, That a Citie is scarce able to deserue the name of a Tyrannesse, in the proper signification. All this notwithstanding, it shall appeare, That the miseries, wherewith a Ty∣rant lodeth his people, are not so heauie, as the burdens imposed by a cruel Citie. Not without some apparance of truth, it may be said, that Lust, and many other priuate passions, are no way incident to a Citie or Corporation. But to make this good, wee shall haue neede to vse the helpe of such distinctions, as the Argument in hand doth not require. Was not Rome lasciuious, when Cato was faine to rise and leaue the Theater, to the end, that the reuerend regard of his grauitie, might not hinder the people, from calling for a shew of naked Courtisans, that were to be brought vpon the open stage? By common practice, & generall approued custome, we are to censure the quality of a whole State; not by the priuate vertue or vice of any one man; nor by metaphysicall abstraction of the vniuersall from the singular; or of the Corporation, from those of whom it is compounded. I say therefore (as I haue said elsewhere) That it were better to liue vnder one pernicious Tyrant, then vn∣der many thousands. The reasons, prouing this, are too many to set downe: but few may suffice. The desires of one man, how inordinate soeuer, if they cannot be satisfied, yet they may be wearied; he is not able to search all corners; his hu∣mour may be found, and soothed; age or good aduice, yea, or some vnexpected accident, may reforme him: all which failing, yet is there hope, that his successour may proue better. Many Tyrants haue beene changed into worthie Kings: and many haue ill vsed their ill-gotten Dominion, which becomming hereditarie to their posteritie, hath growne into the most excellent forme of Gouernment, euen a lawfull Monarchie. But they that liue vnder a tyrannicall Citie, haue no such hope: their Mistresse is immortall, and will not slacken the reines, vntill they bee pulled out of her hands; and her owne mouth receiue the bridle of a more mightie Chariotier. This is wofull: yet their present sufferings make them lesse mindefull of the future. New flies, and hungrie ones, fall vpon the same sore, out of which, others had alreadie sucked their fill. A new Gouernour comes yearly among them, attended by all his poore kindred and friends, who meane not to returne home emptie to their hiues, without a good lading of waxe and . These flie into all quarters, and are quickly acquainted with euery mans wealth, or whatsoeuer else, in all the Prouince, is worthie to be desired. They know all a mans enemies, and all his feares: becomming themselues, within a little space, the enemies that he fea∣reth most. To grow into acquaintance with these masterfull guests, in hope to win their friendship, were an endlesse labour (yet it must be vnder-gone) and such as e∣uery one hath not meanes to goe about: but were this effected, what auaileth it? The loue of one Gouernour is purchased with gifts: the Successour of this man, he is more louing than could be wished, in respect of a faire Wife or Daughter: then comes the third, perhaps of the contrarie faction at home, a bitter enemie to both his fore-goers, who seekes the ruine of all that haue beene inward with them. So the miseries of this tyrannie are not simple; but interlaced (as it were) with the ca∣lamities of ciuill warre. The Romans had a Law De Repetundis, or Of Recouerie, a∣gainst extorting Magistrates: yet wee finde, that it serued not wholly to restraine their Prouinciall Gouernours; who presuming on the fauour of their owne Citi∣zens, and of their kindred and friends at home, were bold in their Prouinces, to worke all these enormities rehearsed; though somewhat the more sparingly, for feare of judgement. If the subjects of Rome groned vnder such oppressions; what must we thinke of those, that were vassalls vnto Carthage? The Romans imposed no burthensome tributes; they loued not to heare, that their Empire was grieuous; they condemned many noble Citizens, for hauing beene ill Gouernours. At Car∣thage all went quite contrarie: the rapines newly deuised by one Magistrate, serued as presidents to instruct another; euery man resolued to doe the like, when it should fall to his turne; and he was held a notable Statesman, whose robberies had beene such, as might affoord a good share to the common treasure. Particular examples of this Carthaginian practice, are not extant: the gouernement of Verres the Roman, in Sicil, that is liuely set out by Tullie, may serue to informe vs, what was the demea∣nour of these Punick Rulers, who stood in feare of no such condemnation, as Verres vnder-went. By prosequuting this discourse, I might inferre a more generall Pro∣position; That a Citie cannot gouerne her subject Prouinces so mildly, as a King: but it is enough to haue shewed, That the tyrannie of a Citie is farre more intole∣rable, than that of any one most wicked man. Suteable to the crueltie of such Lords, is the hatred of their subjects: and againe, suteable to the hatred of the subjects, is the jealousie of their Lords. Hence it fol∣lowed, that, in warres abroad, the Carthaginians durst vse the seruice of African soul∣diers; in Africk it selfe, they had rather bee beholding to others, that were farther fetcht. For the same purpose did Hannibal, in the second Punick Warre, shift his mer∣cinaries out of their owne Countries; Vt Afri in Hispaniâ, Hispani in Africâ, melior Liu. Dec. 3. l. 1. ab domo futurus vter{que} miles, velut mutuis pignoribus obligati stipendia facerent; That the Africans might serue in Spaine, the Spaniards in Africk, being each of them like to proue the better Souldiers, the farther they were from home, as if they were obliged by mu∣tuall pledges. It is disputable, I confesse, whether these African, and Spanish hirelings, could properly be termed Mercinaries: for they were subiect vnto Carthage, and car∣ried into the field, not only by reward, but by dutie. Yet seeing their dutie was no better than enforced, and that it was not any loue to the State, but meere desire of gaine, that made them fight; I will not nicely stand vpon proprietie of a word, but hold them, as Polybius also doth, no better than Mercinaries. †. III. The dangers growing from the vse of mercinarie Souldiers, and forraigne Auxiliaries. THe extreme danger, growing from the imploiment of such Souldiers, is well obserued by Machiauel: who sheweth, that they are more terrible to those whom they serue, than to those against whom they serue. They are seditious, vn∣faithfull, disobedient, , and destroiers of all places and countries, where∣into they are drawne; as being held by no other bond, than their owne . , that which is most fearefull among such hirelings, is, that they haue of∣ten, and in time of greatest extremitie, not only refused to fight, in their defence, who haue entertained them, but reuolted vnto the part; to the vtter ruine of those Princes and States, that haue trusted them. These Mercinaries (saith Machiauel ) which filled all Italie, when Charles the eighth of France did passe the Alpes, were the cause that the said French King wonne the Realme of Naples, with his Buckler without a sword. Notable was the example of Sforza, the Father of Francis Sforza, Duke of Millan; who being entertained by Queene Ioane of Na∣ples, abandoned her seruice on the sudden; and forced her to put her selfe into the hands of the King of Arragon. Like vnto his father was Francis Sforza, the first of that race Duke of Millan: who, being entertained by the Millanois, forced them to become his slaues; euen with the same Armie which themselues had leuied for their owne defence. But Lodouick Sforza, the sonne of this Francis, by the just judgement of God, was made a memorable example vnto posteritie, in loosing his whole estate by the trecherie of such faithlesse Mercinaries, as his owne father had beene. For, hauing waged an of Switzers, and committed his Duchie, toge∣ther with his person, into their hands; he was by them deliuered vp vnto his ene∣mie the French King, by whom he was inclosed in the Castle of Loches to his dy∣ing day. The like inconuenience is found, in vsing the helpe of forraigne Auxiliaries. We see, that when the Emperor of Constantinople had hired ten thousand Turkes, against his neighbour Princes; he could neuer, either by perswasion or force, set them a∣gaine ouer Sea vpon Asia side: which gaue beginning to the Christian seruitude, that soone after followed. Alexander, the sonne of Cassander, sought aide of the great Demetrius: but Demetrius, being entred into his Kingdome, slue the same A∣lexander, who had inuited him, and made himselfe King of Macedon. Syracon the Turke was called into Aegypt by Sanar the Soldan, against his Opposite: but this Turke did settle himselfe so surely in Aegypt, that Saladine his Successour became Lord thereof; and of all the holy Land, soone after. What neede we looke about for examples of this kinde? Euery Kingdome, in effect, can furnish vs. The Bri∣taines drew the Saxons into this our Countrie; and Mac Murrough drew the En∣glish into Ireland: but the one and the other soone became Lords of those two Kingdomes. Against all this may be alleadged, the good successe of the vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands, vsing none other than such kinde of Souldiers, in their late warre. these Low Countries haue many goodly and strong Cities, filled with Inhabi∣tants that are wealthie, industrious, and valiant in their kinde. They are stout Sea∣men and therein is their excellencie; neither are they bad, at the defence of a place well fortified: but in open field they haue seldome beene able to stand against the Spaniard. Necessitie therefore compelled them to seeke helpe abroad: and the like necessitie made them forbeare to arme any great numbers of their owne. For, with monie raised by their Trade, they maintained the warre: and therefore could ill spare, vnto the Pike and Musket, those hands, that were of more vse in helping to fill the common purse. Yet what of this? they sped well, Surely they sped as ill as might be, whilest they had none other than mercinarie Souldiers. Many attemps, made by the Prince of Orange, can witnesse it: and that braue Comman∣der, Count Lodowick of Nassau, felt it to his griefe, in his retrait from Groeninghen; when in the very instant, that required their seruice in fight, his mercinaries cried out aloud for monie, and so ranne away. This was not the only time, when the hi∣red souldiers of the States, haue either sought to hide their cowardize vnder a shew of ; or at least, by couetousnesse, haue ruined in one houre the labour of many moneths. I will not stand to proue this by many examples: for they themselues will not deny it. Neither would touch the honour of Monsieur the Duke of , brother to the French King; saue that it is follie to conceale what all the world knowes. He that would lay open the danger of forraine Auxi∣liaries, needeth no better . It is commonly found, that such Aiders make themselues Lords ouer those, to whom they lend their succour: but where shall we meet with such another as this Monsieur, who, for his protection promised, being rewarded with the Lordship of the Countrie, made it his first worke, to thrust by violence a galling yoke vpon the peoples neck? Well, hee liued to repent it, with griefe enough. Euen whilest he was counterfeiting vnto those about him, that were ignorant of his plot, an sorrow for the poore Burghers of Antwerpe, as verily beleeuing the Towne to surprised and wonne; the death of the Count St. Aignan, who fell ouer the wall, and the Cannon of the Citie, discharged against his owne troupes, informed him better what had hapned; shewing that they were his owne French, who stood in neede of pittie. Then was his fained passion chan∣ged, into a very bitter anguish of minde; wherein, his brest, and wringing his hands, he exclaimed, Helas, mon Dieu, que veulx tu faire de moy; Alas, my God, what wilt thou doe with me? So the affaires of the Netherlands will not serue to proue, that there is litle danger in vsing mercinarie souldiers, or the help offorraine Auxi∣liaries. This notwithstanding they were obedient vnto necessitie, and sought helpe of the English, Scots, and French: they did wisely, and prospered. For when there was in France a King, partaker with them in the same danger; when the Queen of England refused to accept the Soueraigntie of their Countrie, which they offe∣red, yet being prouoked by the Spaniard their , pursued him with continuall warre; when the heire of England raigned in Scotland, a King too just and wise (though not ingaged in any quarrell) either to make profit of his Neighbours mi∣series, or to helpe those that had attempted the conquest of his owne inheritance: then might the Netherlanders very safely repose confidence, in the forces of these their Neighbour-Countries. The souldiers that came vnto them from hence, were (to omit many other commendations) not onely regardfull of the pay that they should receiue; but well affected vnto the cause that they tooke in hand: or if any were cold in his deuotion, to the side whereon he fought; yet was he kept in order, by remembrance of his owne home, where the English would haue rewarded him with death, if his faith had beene corrupted by the Spaniard. They were therefore trusted with the custodie of Cities; they were held as friends, and patrons; the ne∣cessitie of the poorer sort was relieued, before the pay-day came, with lendings, and other helps, as well as the abilitie of the States could permit. When three such Princes, raigning at one time, shall agree so well, to maintaine against the power of a fourth, injurious (or at least so seeming) to them all, a Neighbour-Countrie, of the same Religion, and to which they all are louingly affected: then may such a Countrie be secure of her Auxiliaries, and quietly intend her Trade, or other busi∣nesse, in hope of like successe. But these circumstances meet so seldome, as it may well hold true in generall: That mercinarie, and forraigne forces, are no lesse dangerous, than the enemie, against whom they are entertained. †. IIII. That the moderate gouernment of the Romans gaue them assurance to vse the seruice of their owne subiects in their warres. That in mans nature there is an affection breeding tyrannie, which hindreth the vse and benefit of the like moderation. HEre may it be demanded, whether also the Romans were not compelled to vse seruice of other souldiours in their many great warres, but performed all by their owne citizens? for if it were their manner to arme their owne subiects; how happened it, that they feared no rebellion? if strangers; how then could they a∣uoide the inconueniences aboue rehearsed? The answere is; That their Armies were compounded vsually of their owne citizens, and of the Latines, in equall num∣ber: to which they added, as occasion required, some companies of the Campanes, Hetrurians, Samnites, or other of their subiects, as were either interessed in the quar∣rell, or might best be trusted. They had, about these times, (though seldome they did imploy so many,) ten Roman Legions; a good strength, if all other helpe had beene wanting: which serued to keepe in good order their subiects, that were al∣waies fewer in the Army than themselues. As for the Latines, if consanguinitie were not a sufficient obligation; yet many priuiledges and immunities, which they en∣ioyed, made them assured vnto the State of Rome: vnder which they liued almost at libertie, as being bound to little else, than to serue it in warre. It is true, that a yoke, how easie , seemes troublesome to the necke that hath been accustomed to freedome. Therefore many people of Italie taken occasion of seuerall aduan∣tages, to deliuer themselues from the Roman subjection. But still they haue beene reclaimed by warre; the Authors of rebellion haue sharpely punished; and the people, by degrees, haue obtained such libertie, as made them esteeme none other∣wise of Rome, than as the common citie of all Italie. Yea, in processe of time it was granted vnto many cities, and those farre off remoued, euen to Tarsus in Cilicia, where Saint Paul was borne, That all the Burgesses should be free of Rome it . This fauour was conferred absolutely vpon some; vpon some, with restraint of gi∣uing voice in election of Magistrates, or with other such limitation, as was thought fit. Hereunto may be added, that it was their manner, after a great conquest, to re∣lease vnto their new subiects halfe of their tribute which they had beene wont to pay vnto their former Lords, which was a readie way, to bring the multitude into good linking of their present condition; when the reuiew of harder times past, should rather teach them to feare a relapse, than to hope for better in the future, by seeking innouation. Neither would it be forgotten, as a speciall note of the Romans good go∣uernment, That when some, for their well-deseruing, haue had the offer to be made Liu. Dec. 3. l. 3. citizens of Rome; they haue refused it, and held themselues better contented with their present . Wherefore it is no maruaile, that Petellia, a citie of the Brutians in Italie, chose rather to endure all extremitie of warre, than, vpon any con∣dition, to forsake the Romans; euen when the Romans themselues had confessed, that Liu. ibid. they were vnable to helpe these their subiects, and therefore willed them to looke to their owne good, as hauing beene faithfull to the vtmost. Such purchased these milde Gouernours, without impairing their Maiestie thereby. The summe of all is: They had, of their owne, a strong Armie; they doubled it, by adioyning thereunto the Latines; and they further increased it, as neede required, with other helpe of their owne subiects: all, or the most of their followers, accounting the pro∣speritie of Rome to be the common good. The moderate vse of souereigne power being so effectuall, in assuring the people vnto their Lords, and consequentlie, in the establishment or enlargement of Domi∣nion: it may seeme strange, that the practice of tyrannie, whose effects are contra∣rie, hath beene so common in all ages. The like, I know, may bee said, of all Vice, and Irregularitie whatsoeuer. For it is lesse difficult ( thinke otherwise) and more safe, to keepe the way of Iustice and Honestie, than to turne from it; yet commonly our passions lead vs into by-pathes. But where , Anger, , or any the like Affection, seduceth our reason; the same either bringeth with it an excuse, or at least-wise taketh away all cause of wonder. In ty∣rannie it is not so: for as much as we can hardly descrie the passion, that is of force to insinuate it selfe into the whole tenour of a Gouernment. It must be confessed, that lawlesse desires haue bred many Tyrants: yet so, that these desires haue seldome beene hereditarie, or long-lasting; but haue commonly with the Tyrants life, sometimes before his death; by which meanes the Gouernment hath reduced to a better forme. In such cases, the saying of Aristotle holds, That Tyran∣nies Arist. Pol. lib. . c. 12. are of short . But this doth not satisfie the question in hand. Why did the exercise Tyrannie? why did the Athenians? why haue many other Cities done the like? If in respect of their generall good; how could they beignorant, that this was an ill course for the safetie of the Weale publique? If they were led hereunto by any affection; what was that affection, wherein so many thou∣sand citizens, diuided and subdiuided within themselues by factions, did all con∣curre, notwithstanding the much diuersitie of temper, and the of pri∣uate hatred among them? Doubtles, we must be faine to say, That Tyrannie is, by it selfe, a Vice distinct from others. A Man, we know, is Animal , , euen by Nature, to command, or to obey; euery one in his proper degree. Other desires of Mankinde, are common likewise vnto bruit beastes; and some of them, to bodies wanting-sense: but the desire of rule belongeth vnto the nobler part of reason; whereunto is also answerable an aptnesse to yeeld obedience. Now as hun∣ger and thirst are giuen by nature, not onely to Man and Beast, but vnto all sorts of Vegetables, for the on of their life: as Feare, Anger, Lust, and other Af∣fections are likewise naturall, in conuenient measure, both vnto Mankinde, and to all creatures that haue sense, for the shunning or repelling of harme, and seeking af∣ter that which is requisite: euen so is this desire of ruling or obaying, engrafted by Nature in the race of Man, and in Man onely as a reasonable creature, for the orde∣ring of his life, in a ciuile forme of iustice. All these in bred qualities are good and vsefull. Neuerthelesse, Hunger and Thirst are the Parents of Gluttonie and Drun∣kennesse, which, in reproach, are called beastlie, by an vnproper terme: since they grow from appetites, found in lesse worthie than beastes, and are yet not so common in beastes, as in men. The effects of Anger, and of such other Passions as descend no lower than vnto bruit beastes, are held lesse vile; and perhaps not without good reason: yet are they more horrible, and punished more grieuously, by sharper Lawes, as being in generall more pernicious. But as no corruption is worse, than of that which is best; there is not any Passion, that nourisheth a vice more hurtfull vnto Mankinde, than that which issueth from the noble roote, euen the depraued Affection of ruling. Hence arise those two great mischiefes, of which hath beene an old question in dispute, whether the worse; That all things, or That nothing, should be lawfull. Of these, a dull spirit, and ouer-loaden by fortune, with power, whereof it is not capable, occasioneth the one; the other proceedeth from a contrarie distemper, whose vehemencie the bounds of Reason cannot limit. Vnder the extremitie of either, no countrie is able to subsist: yet the defectiue dulnesse, that permitteth any thing, wil also permit the execution of Law, to which, meere necessitie doth enforce the ordinarie Magistrate; whereas Tyran∣nie is more actiue, and pleaseth it selfe in the excesse, with a false colour of iu∣stice. Examples of stupiditie, and vnaptnes to rule, are not very frequent, though such natures are euery where found: for this qualitie troubles not it selfe in Empire; or if by some errour of fortune, it encounter therewithall, (as when Claudius, hiding himselfe in a corner, found the Empire of Rome ) some friend or else a wife, is not wanting to supply the defect, which also doth helpe to shadow. Therefore this Vice, as a thing vnknowne, is without a name. Tyran∣nie is more bold, and feareth not to be knowne, but would be reputed honoura∣ble: for it is prosperum & foelix scelus, a fortunate , as long as it can subsist. There is no reward or honour (saith PETER CHARRON) assigned to those, that know how to increase, or to preserue humane nature: all honours, greatnesse, riches, dignities, empires, triumphs, trophees, are appointed for those, that know how to afflict, trouble, or destroy it. CAES AR, and ALEXANDER, haue vn-made and slaine, each of them, more than a million of men: but they made none, nor left none behinde them. Such is the errour of Mans iudgement, in valuing things according to common opinion. But the true name of Tyrannie, when it growes to ripenesse, is none other, than Feritie: the same that Aristotle saith to be worse than any vice. It exceedeth indeed all other vices, issuing from the Passions incident both to Man, and Beast; no lesse than Periurie, Murder, Treason, and the like horrible crimes, exceede in villanie, the faults of Gluttonie and drunkennesse, that grow from more ignoble appetites. Hereof Sciron, Procrustes, and Pityocamptes, that vsed their bodily force to the de∣struction of Mankinde, are not better examples, than Phalaris, Dionysius and Aga∣thocles, whose mischieuous heads were assisted by the hands of detestable Ruffians. The same barbarous desire of Lordship, transported those old examples of Feritie, and these latter Tyrants, beyond the bounds of reason: neither of them knew the vse of Rule, nor the difference betweene Freemen, and slaues. The rule of the husband ouer the wife, and of parents ouer their children, is na∣turall, and appointed by God himselfe; so that it is alwaies, and simplie, allowable and good. The former of these, is, as the dominion of Reason ouer Appetite; the latter is the whole authoritie, which one free man can ouer another. The rule of a King is no more, nor none other, than of a common Father ouer his whole countrie: which hee that knowes what the power of a Father is, or ought to bee, knowes to be enough. But there is a greater, and more Masterlie rule, which God Gen. c. 1. v. 28. gaue vnto Adam, when he said; Haue dominion ouer the fish of the Sea, and ouer the fowle of the aire, and ouer euery thing that moueth vpon the earth: which also hee confirmed vnto Noah, and his children, saying, The feare of you, and the dread of you, Gen. 9. 2. shall be vpon euery beast of the earth, and vpon euery fowle of the aire, vpon all that moueth vpon the earth, and vpon all the fishes of the Sea; into your hands are they deliuered. Hee who gaue this dominion to Man, gaue also an aptitude to vse it. The execution of this power hath since extended it selfe, ouer a great part of Mankinde. There are indeed no small numbers of men, whose disabilitie to gouerne themselues, proues them, according vnto Aristotles doctrine, to be naturallie slaues. Yet finde I not in Scripture any warrant, to oppresse men with bondage: vn∣lesse Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 3 the lawfulnesse thereof be sufficiently intimated, where it is said, That a man shal not be punished for the death of a seruant, whom he hath slaine by correction, if the seruant liue a day or two, because he is his monie; or else by the captiuitie of the Exod. c. 21. v. 21 Num. c. 30. v. 40 Midianitish girles, which were made bond-slaues, and the Sanctuarie had a part of them for the Lords tribute. Doubtlesse the custome hath beene very ancient: for No∣ah laid this curse vpon Canaan, that hee should be a seruant of seruants; and Abraham Gen. 9. 25. had of Pharaoh, among other gifts, men-seruants, and maide-seruants, which were none Gen. 12. v. 16. other than slaues. Christian Religion is said to haue abrogated this olde kinde of seruilitie: but surely, they are deceiued, that thinke so. Saint Paul desired the li∣bertie of Onesimus, whome he had wonne vnto Christ: yet wrote hee for this vnto Epist. to . vers 14. Philemon, by way of request, crauing it as a benefite, not vrging it as a dutie. Agree∣able hereto is the direction, which the same Saint Paul giueth vnto seruants: Let eue∣ry 1. Cor. c. 7. v. 20. & 21. man abide in the same calling wherein hee was called: art thou called, being a seruant? care not for it, but if thou maist be made free, vse it rather. It is true, that Christian Re∣ligion hath procured libertie vnto many; not onely in regard of pietie, but for that the Christian Masters stood in feare, of being discouered by their slaues, vnto the persecuters of religion. Mahomet like wise by giuing libertie to his followers, drewe many vnto his impietie: but whether he forbade it, as , vnto his sectators, to hold one another of them in bondage, I cannot tell; saue that by the practice of the Turks and Moores, it seemes he did not. In England we had many bond-seruants, vntill the times of our last ciuile warres: and I thinke that the Lawes concerning Villenage are still in force, of which the latest are the sharpest. And now, since slaues were made free, which were of great vse and seruice, there are growne vp a rabble of Rogues, Cutpurses and other the like Trades; slaues in Nature, though not in Lawe. But whether this kind of dominion be lawfull, or not; Aristotle hath well pro∣ued, that it is naturall. And certainly wee finde not such a latitude of difference in any creature, as in the nature of man: wherein (to omit the infinite distance in estate of the elect & reprobate) the wisest excell the most , by far greater de∣gree, than the most foolish of men doth surpasse the wisest of beasts. Therfore when Commiseration hath giuen way to Reason: we shall find that Nature is the ground euen of Masterly power, & of seruile obedience, which is therto correspon∣dent. But it may be truly said, that some countries haue subsisted long, without the vse of any seruilitie: as also it is true, that some countries haue not the vse of any tame cattell. Indeede the affections which vphold ciuill rule, are (though more no∣ble) not so simplie needfull, vnto the sustentation either of our kind, as are Lust, and the like; or of euerie one, as are hunger and thirst; which notwithstanding are the lowest in degree. But where most vile, and seruile dispositions, haue libertie to shew themselues begging in the streets; there may more iustly wonder, how the dangerous toile of sea-faring men can finde enough to vndertake them, than how the swarme of idle vagabonds should increase, by accesse of those, that are wearie of their owne more painefull condition. This may suffice to proue, that in Mankind there is found, ingrafted euen by Nature, a desire of absolute dominion: whereunto the generall custome of Nations doth subscribe; together with the pleasure which most men take in flatterers, that are the basest of slaues. This being so, we finde no cause to maruaile, how Tyranny hath beene so rife in all ages, and practised, not onely in the single rule of some vicious Prince, but euer by consent of whole Cities and Estates: since, other vices haue likewise gotten head, and borne a generall sway; notwithstanding that the way of vertue be more honourable, and commodious. Few there are that haue vsed well the inferiour Passions: how then can we expect, that the most noble affections should not bee disordered? In the gouernment of wife and children, some are vtterly carelesse, and corrupt all by their dull conniuencie: others, by masterly rigour, hold their owne blood vnder condition of slauerie. To be a good Gouernour is a rare commenda∣tion; and to preferre the Weale publike aboue all respects whatsoeuer, is the Ver∣tueiustly termed Heroicall. Of this Vertue, many ages not many exam∣ples. Hector is named by Aristotle, as one of them; and deseruedly, if this praise be due to extraordinarie height of fortitude, vsed in defence of a mans owne coun∣trie. But if we consider, that a loue of the generall good cannot be perfect, without reference vnto the fountaine of all goodnesse: wee shall finde, that no Morall vertue, how great , can, by it selfe, deserue the commendation of more than Vertue, as the Heroicall doth. Wherefore we must search the Scriptures, for patterns hereof; such as Dauid, Iosaphat, and Iosias were. Of Christian Kings if there were many such, the world would soone be happie. It is not my purpose to wrong the worth of any, by denying the praise where it is due; or by preferring a lesse excellent. But he that can finde a King, religious, and zealous in Gods cause, without enforcement either of aduersitie, or of some regard of state; a procurer of the general peace and quiet; who not onely vseth his authoritie, but addes the trauell of his eloquence, in admonishing his Iudges to doe iustice; by the vigorous influence of whose Go∣uernment, ciuilitie is infused, euen into those places, that haue beene the dennes of sauage Robbers and Cutthrotes; one that hath quite abolished a slauish Brehon Law, by which an whole Nation of his subiects were held in bondage; and one, whose higher vertue and wisdome doth make the praise not onlie of Nobilitie and other ornaments, but of abstinence from the bloud, the wiues, and the goods, of those that are vnder his power, together with a world of chiefe commendations belonging vnto some good Princes, to appeare lesse regardable: he, I say, that can finde such a King, findeth an example, worthie to adde vnto vertue an honoura∣ble title, if it were formerly wanting. Vnder such a King, it is likelie by Gods bles∣sing, that a Land shall flourish, with increase of Trade, in countries before vn∣knowne; that Ciuilitie and Religion shall be propagated, into barbarous and hea∣then countries; and that the happinesse of his subiects, shall cause the Nations farre off remoued, to wish him their Souereigne. I neede not adde hereunto, that all the actions of such a King, euen his bodilie exercises, doe partake of vertue; since all things tending to the preseruation of his life and health, or to the mollifying of his cares, (who, fixing his contemplation vpon God, seeketh how to imitate the vn∣speakeable goodnesse, rather than the inaccessible maiestie, with both of which himselfe is indued, as farre as humane nature is capable) doe also belong to the furtherance of that common good, which hee procureth. Lest any man should thinke me transported with admiration, or other affection, beyond the bonds of reason; I adde hereunto, that such a King is neuertherlesse a man must die, and may : yet wisdome and fame shall set him free, from errour, and from death, both with and without the helpe of time. One thing I may not omit, as a singular bene∣fite (though there be many other besides) redounding vnto this King, as the fruit of his goodnesse. The people that liue vnder a pleasant yoke, are not onely louing to their Souereigne Lord, but free of courage, and no greater in muster of men, then of ftout fighters, if neede require: whereas on the contrarie, he that ruleth as ouer slaues, shall bee attended in time of necessitie, by slauish mindes, neither lo∣uing his person, nor regarding his or their owne honour. Cowards may bee furi∣ous, and slaues outragious, for a time: but among spirits that haue once yeelded vn∣to Hom. Odyss. l. 17. slauerie, vniuersally it is found true, that Homer saith, God bereaueth a man of halfe his vertue, that day when he casteth him into bondage. Of these things, I might perhaps more seasonably haue spoken, in the generall discourse of Gouernement: but where so liuely an example, of the calamitie follow∣ing a tyrannicall rule, and the vse of Mercinaries, thereupon depending, did offer it selfe, as is this present businesse of the Carthaginians; I thought that the note would be more effectuall, than being barely deliuered, as out of a common place. §. III. How the warre against the Mercinarie was diuerslie mannaged by HANNO and AMILCAR, with variable successe. The bloudy counsailes of the Mercinaries; and their finall destruction. BEing now to returne vnto those Mercinaries, from whome I haue thus farre digressed, I cannot readily finde, by what name henceforth I should call them. They are no longer in pay with the Carthaginians; neither care they to pretend, that they seeke their wages already due; so that they are neither Mercinaries, nor Mutiners. Had they all beene subiects vnto Carthage, then might they iustly haue beene termed Rebels: but Spendius, and others, that were the principall part of them, ought none alle∣geance to that State, which they endeuoured to subuert. Wherefore I will bor∣row the name of their late occupation, and still call them Mercinaries, as Polybius also doth. These vsing the aduantage of their present strength, * Vtica, and Hip∣pagrcta, is sea∣ted in the great Bay, that , not in the Promontorie of Apollo At time it is called , or ; and by the , Melba. Niger saith, that the Towne is ruined, and the place, whereon it stood, now called Maza∣charcs. It was verie ancient, and built be∣fore , saith . As it flo be∣fore Carthage was set vp; so did it after was throwne down by the , in the third Warre. Fa∣mous it was by the death of Cato the youn∣ger, who held it against Cesar. , that worthy Diuine, was Bishop thereof in the time of Gense∣ric the Arrian, who liued all the time of that Tyrant, and hath writ∣ten the of his cruel∣ties. Cities of great importance, as being seated vpon the westerne Hauen of Car∣thage, where it is diuided by a necke of land; Hippagreta standing inwards vpon the great Lake; Vtica further out vpon the Sea. Neither was the Campe at aban∣doned, which lay filthie to hinder the Carthaginians, from passing vp into the coun∣trie: for Matho and Spendius wanted not men, to followe the warre in all parts at once. How the Carthaginians were amazed with this vnexpected perill, any man may conceiue. But the businesse it selfe awakes them hastilie. They are hardly prest on all sides; and therefore trauailed their braines to the vttermost, how to shake off these furious dogges from their shoulders, who sometimes by night, sometimes by day, came vnto the very walles of their Citie. In this exigent Hanno was made their Generall: who failed not in his accustomed diligence of making all good pre∣paration: but had gotten together whatsoeuer was needfull, as well to relieue a Towne besieged, as to batter and assaile any place defended against him. With these prouisions, and with an hundred Elephants, hee came to Vtica; so suddenly, that the enemies as men surprised, forsooke their Trenches, and retired themselues vnto a rising peece of woody ground, where they might be safe against the violence of his beasts. Hanno, thinking that he had to doe with Numidians, whose custome was, after any losse, to flie two or three whole daies iournie off; presently entred the Towne; to shew himselfe, after this his victory. But these good fellowes, against whom he was to warre, had learned of Amilcar, to retire and to fight againe, many times in one day, as need required. Therefore as soone as they perceiued, that hee knew not how to vse a victorie; they assailed their owne Campe, and with great slaughter, draue the Carthaginians out of it, forcing them to hide themselues with∣in Vtica; and got possession of all the store, that Hanno had brought for the reliefe of the Towne. This bad beginning Hanno followed with sutable indiscretion: loosing the benefit of many faire opportunites, and suffering the enemies to take possession of all the entrance from Carthage to the firme land. The Carthaginians, perceiuing this, were exceedingly troubled, and did therefore let fall their shete-anchor; sending to the field their great Captaine, Amilcar, whom they furnished with ten thousand foote of supply, and seuentie Elephants. Amilcar had worke enough to doe, before he should be able to meet with the ene∣mie vpon equall ground. For besides other places of aduantage that the Mercena∣ries had occupied, Hanno had suffered them to winne the only Bridge, by which the Riuer Macra, or Bagradas, was passable vnto these, that were to trauaile into the Continent. This Riuer had not many foords, nor those casie for a single man to get ouer: but vpon them all was kept such guard, as gaue to Amilcar little hope of pre∣uailing in seeking way by force. As for the Bridge it selfe, Matho and his followers were there lodged: and had there built a Towne, wherein to lie commodiously, intentiue onely to the custodie thereof. But Amilcar had obserued, that the very mouth of Bagradas vsed to be sometimes cloyed with sand and grauell, that was driuen in by certaine customarie windes, & could not be driuen out againe, by force of that slow Riuer, till the winde falling, or changing, suffered the weight of the waters, to disburden their channel. Hereof he made vse; and taking his opportunity, passed the Riuer; contrarie to all expectation, either of the enemie, or of his owne Citizens. There was no neede to bid Spendius looke about him, when once it was heard, that Amilcar was come ouer Bagradas: all the Mercenaries were troubled with the newes; knowing that they were no longer to deale with the improuident grauitie of Hanno, but with an able spirit, euen with their own Master in the Art of Warre, whom they admired, though they hated him. But this feare was soone changed into presumption; when more than fifteene thousand of their owne societie, were come from Vtica; and other tenne thousand from the gard of the Bridge. Their Armie was farre greater, than that of Amilcar; and they were, in their owne iudge∣ment, the better men, vpon which confidence, they resolued to charge him on all sides, and beate him downe, in despight of his worth and reputation. With this resolution they attended vpon him; watching for some aduantage; and exhor∣ting one another to play the men, and giue the onset. Especially they that follow∣ed him in the Rere, had a great minde to begin the fight; whereunto their prompt∣nesse was such, as tooke from them their former circumspection. Amilcar held his way towards the Bridge, keeping himselfe on plaine grounds, that were fittest for the seruice of his Elephants, which hee placed in front of his Armie. Neither made hee shewe of any desire to fight, but suffered the rashnes of his enemies to increase, till it should into some disorder. At length perceiuing, that with more bold∣nesse than good heed, they followed him so neere, as would bee little for their good, if hee should turne vpon them, he hastened his march, euen to such a pace, as made a shewe little differing from plaine flight. The Mercinaries presently fell vpon his skirts; , that for feare of them he was ready to runne away. But whilest they confusedly, as in sudden opinion of victorie, were driuing at the heeles of those that had the Reare; Amilcar wheeled about, and met them in the face, charging them hotely, but in very good order, so that amazed with the apprehension of inexpected danger, they fled without making any resistance. In this ouerthrowe, there were sixe thousand of the Mercinaries slaine, and about two thousand taken; the rest fled; some to the Campe at Vtica; others to the Towne at the Bridge; whither Amilcar followed them so fast, that he wanne the place ea∣sily: the enemies being thence also fled vnto Tunes, as not hauing recollected their spirits to make it good. The fame of this victorie, together with the diligence of Amilcar in pursuing it, caused many Townes reuolted, partly by feare, partly by force, to returne to their former obedience. Yet was not Matho wanting to himselfe, in this dangerous time. He sent about Numidia and Africke, for new supplies; admonishing the peo∣ple, now or neuer to doe their best, for the recouerie of their freedome; hee per∣swaded Spendius, and that was Captaine of the Gaules, to wait vpon Amil∣car, and alwaies to keepe the higher grounds, or at least the foot of some hill, where they might be safe from the Elephants; and hee himselfe continued to presse the Towne of Hippagreta with an hard siege. It was necessarie for Amilcar, in passing from place to place, as his businesse required, to take such waies as there were: for all the countrie lay not leuell. Therefore Spendius, who still coasted him, had once gotten a notable aduantage of ground: the Carthaginians lying in a Plaine, surrounded with hilles, that were occupied by the Mercinaries, with their and African succours. In this difficultie; the same of Amilcar his personall worth did greatly benefit his countrie. For Narauasus, a yong gentleman comman∣ding ouer the Numidians, was glad of this occasion seruing to the acquaintance and loue of so braue a man, which he much desired: and therefore came vnto Amil∣car, signifying his good affection to him, with offer to doc him all seruice. Amilcar ioyfully entertained this friend; promised vnto him his owne daughter in marri∣age; and so wanne from the enemies two thousand horse, that following Narauasus turned vnto the Carthaginians side. With this helpe he gaue battaile vnto Spendius: wherein the Numidian laboured to approue his owne valour, to his new friend. So the victorie was great: for there were slaine ten thousand of Spendius his fellowes, and foure thousand taken prisoners, but Spendius himselfe, with Autaritus the Gaule, escaped to doe more mischiefe. Amilcar dealt very gently with his prisoners: pardoning all offences past, and dismissing as many, as were vnwilling to become his followers; yet with condition, that they should neuer more beare armes against the Carthagintans; threatning to take sharpe reuenge vpon all, that should breake this Couenant. This humanitie was vehemently suspected by Matho, Spendius, and Autaritus, as tending to winne from them, the hearts of their souldiers. Wherefore they resol∣ued to take such order, that not a man among them should dare, to trust in the good nature of Amilcar, nor to hope for any safetie, whilest Carthage was able to doe him hurt. They counterfeited letters of aduertisement, wherein was contained, that some of their company respectiue onely of their priuate benefit, and carelesse of the generall good, had a purpose to betraie them all vnto the Carthaginians, with whom they held intelligence; and that it was needfull, to looke well vnto Gesco, and his companions, whom these traitours had a purpose to enlarge. Vpon this Theme Spendius makes an Oration to the souldiours, exhorting them to fidelitie; and shewing with many words, that the seeming humanitie of Amilcar, toward some, was none other than a baite, wherewith to entrap them all at once together; as also telling them, what a dangerous enemie Gesco would prooue, if hee might escape their hands. While hee is yet in the midst of his tale; were letters come, to the same purpose. Then steps forth Autaritus and speakes his minde plainely: saying, that it were the best, yea the onely way, for the common safetie, to cut off all hope of reconciliation with Carthage; that if some were deuising to make their owne peace, it would goe hard with those that had a care of the warre; that it were better to make an end of Gesco his life, than to trouble themselues with loo∣king to his custodie; that by such a course euery one should be ingaged in the pre∣sent Action, as hauing none other hope left, than in victorie alone; finally, that such as would speake here-against, were worthy to bee reputed Traitours. This Autaritus was in great credit with the souldiours, and could speake sundrie langua∣ges, in such sort, that hee was vnderstood by all. According to his motion there∣fore it was , that Gesco, and all the other prisoners, should forthwith be put to horrible death, by torments. Neuerthelesse there were some, that for loue of Gesco, sought to alter his intended crueltie; but they were forth with stoned to death, as a Document vnto others; and so the Decree was put in execution. Neither were they therewithall contented; but further ordained, that all Carthaginian prisoners which they tooke, should be serued in like sort: and that the subiects or friends of Carthage, should lose their hands, and so be sent home: which rule they obserued euer afterwards. Of this crucltie I need say no more, then that it was most execrable feritie. As for the counsaile of vsing it, it was like vnto the counsaile of ACHITOPHEL; All Israel shall heare, that thou art abhorred of thy father; then shall the of all that are with thee, be strong. Such are the fruits of desperation. He that is past all hope of pardon, is afraid of his owne fellowes, if they be more innocent; and to auoide the punish∣ment of lesse offences, committeth greater. The cowardize of offenders, and the re∣vengefull spirits of those that haue beene wronged, are breeders of this desparati∣on: to which may be added, some of Lawes, in the pu∣nishments of malefactors, according to the decree of their seuerall crimes. A coward thinkes all prouision too little, for his owne securitie. If PHOCAS be acoward (said the Emperour ) then is he murderous. To be stedfast and sure, in ta∣king reuenge; is thought a point of honour, and a defen satiue against new iniuries. But wrongfully: for it is opposite to the rule of ; and such a qualitie dis∣couered, makes them deadly enemies, who otherwise would haue repented, and sought to make amends, for the wrong done in passion. This was it, which wrought so much woe to the Carthaginians; teaching Matho, and his Africans, to suspect euen their gentlenesse, as the introduction to extreme rigour. Like vnto the errours of Princes and Gouernours, are the of Lawes. Where one and the same pu∣nishment, is awarded vnto the lesse offence, and vnto the greater, he that hath ad∣uentured to robbe a man, is easily tempted to kill him, for his owne securitie. Against these inconueniences Mercie and Seueritie, vsed with due respect, are the best remedies. In neither of which Amilcar failed. For as long as these his owne souldiours were any way likely to be reclaimed, by gentle courses; his was readie to inuite them. But when they were transported with beastly outrage, beyond all regard of honestie and shame, he rewarded their villanie with answera∣ble vengeance; casting them vnto wilde beasts, to be deuoured. Vntill this time Hanno, with the Armie vnder his command, had kept himselfe apart from Amilcar, and done little, as may seeme, for that nothing is remembred of him, since his late losses. Neither was Amilcar sorrie to want his helpe; as being able to doe better without him. But when the warre grew to such extremitie, as threatned vtter ruine to the one or the other side: then was Hanno sent for, & came to Amilcar, with whom hee ioyned his forces. By this accesse of strength Amilcar was not enabled, to doe more then in former times: rather he could now performe nothing; such was the hatred betweene him and his vnworthy Colleague. The Townes of and Hippagreta, that had stood alwaies firme on the Carthaginian partie, did now reuolt vnto the enemie, murdering all the souldiours that they had in Garrison, and casting their bodies forth, without suffering them to be buri∣ed. The prouisions brought by sea, for maintenance of the Armie, were lost in foule weather: and Carthage it selfe stood in danger of being , about which Ma∣tho and Spendius consulted, whilest one of the Carthaginian Generals did (as it were) binde the others hands. It hath in all Ages beene vsed, as the safest course, to send foorth in great Expedi∣tions, two Generals of one Armie. This was the common practice of those two mighty Cities, Athens and Rome; which other States and Princes haue often imita∣ted; perswading themselues, that great Armies are not so well conducted by one, as by two: who out of emulation to excel each other, will vse the greater diligence. They haue also ioyned two chiefe Commanders in equall commission, vpon this further consideration; the better to restraine the ambition of any one, that should be trusted with so great a strength. For hereofall Common-weales haue beene iea∣lous, hauing beene taught by their examples that haue made them selues Tyrants ouer those Cities and States that haue imployed them. In this point, the Vene∣tians haue bin so circumspect, as they haue for the most part, trusted strangers, and not their owne, in all the warres which they haue made. It is true, that the equall authoritie of two commanding in chiefe, serueth well to bridle the ambition of one or both, from turning vpon the Prince or State that hath giuen them trust: but in mannaging the warre it selfe, it is commonly the cause of ill . In warres made neere vnto Rome it selfe, when two good friends were Consuls, or such two at least, as concurred in one desire of Triumph; which honor (the greatest of any that Rome could giue) was to be obtained by that one yeeres seruice; it is no maruaile, though each of the Consuls did his best, and referred all his thoughts vnto none o∣ther end then victorie. Yet in all dangerous cases, when the Consuls proceeded otherwise then was desired, one Dictator was appointed, whose power was neither hindered by any partner, nor by any great limitation. Neither was it indeede the manner, to send foorth both the Consuls to one warre; but each went, whither his lot called him, to his owne Prouince; vnlesse one businesse seemed to require them both, and they also seemed fit to be ioined in the administration. Now al∣though it was so, that the Romans did many times preuaile with their ioynt Gene∣rals: yet was this neuer or seldome, without as much concord, as any other vertue of the Commanders. For their modestie hath often beene such, that the able Captaine, though of equall authoritie, hath willingly submitted himselfe to the other, and obeyed his directions. This notwithstanding, they haue many times, by ordaining two Commanders of one Armie, receiued great and most dange∣rous ouerthrowes; whereof in the second Punick warre we shall finde examples. On the contrarie , in their warres most remote, that were alwayes mannaged by one, they seldome failed to winne exceeding honour, as hereafter shall appeare. Now of those tenne Generals, which serued the Athenians at the Battaile of Mara∣thon, it may truly be said, that had not their temper been better, than the iudgement of the people that sent them forth, and had not they submitted themselues to the conduction of Miltiades; their affaires had found the same successe which they found at other times, when they coupled Nicias and Alcibiades together in Sicil: the one being so ouer-warie, and the other so hastie, as all came to nought that they vndertooke; whereas Cimon alone, as also Aristides, and others, hauing sole charge of all, did their Countrie and Common-weale most remarkeable seruice. For it is hard to finde two great Captaines, of equall discretion and valour; but that the one hath more of furie than of iudgement, and so the contrarie, by which the best occasions are as often , as at other times many actions are vnseasonably vndertaken. I remember it well, that when the Prince of Condy was slaine after the Battaile of , (which Prince, together with the Admirall , had the con∣duct of the Protestant Armie) the Protestants did greatly bewaile the losse of the said Prince, in respect of his Religion, person, and birth; yet comforting them∣selues, they thought it rather an aduancement, than an hinderance to their affaires. For so much did the valour of the one, out-reach the aduisednesse of the other, as whatsoeuer the Admirall intended to winne by attending the aduantage, the Prince aduentured to lose, by being ouer-confident in his owne courage. But we need no better example, than of the Carthaginians in this present busines: who, though they were still sicke of their ill-grounded to Hanno, and were vn∣willing to disgrace him; yet seeing that all ranne towards ruine, through the dis∣cord of the Generals, committed the decision of their controuersies, vnto the Ar∣mie that serued vnder them. The iudgement of the Armie was, that Hanno should depart the Campe: which he did; and Hannibal was sent in his stead, one that would be directed by Amilcar; and that was enough. After this, the affaires of Carthage began to prosper somewhat better. Matho and Spendius had brought their Armie neere vnto the Citie; and lay before it, as in a siege. They might well be bold, to hope and aduenture much; hauing in their Campe aboue fiftie thousand, besides those that lay abroad in Garrisons. Neuer∣thelesse, the Citie was too strong for them to winne by assault: and the entrance of victuailes they could not hinder, if any should bee sent in by friends from abroad. Hieron, King of Syracuse, though during the warres in Sicil he the Ro∣mans, and still continued in their Alliance, yet now sent succours to the : fearing their fall, and consequently his owne; because if no other State gaue the Romans somwhat to trouble their disgestion, the Principalitie of Syracuse would soone be deuoured by them. The Romans also gaue them some slender assistance, and for the present refused good offers made vnto them by the Mercinaries. This they did, to shew a kind of noble disposition; which was indeed but counterfeit, as the sequele manifestly . Whilest Matho and his followers were busily pressing the Citie, Amilcar was as diligent, in waiting at their backes, and cutting off all that came to their supply: so that finding themselues more straightly besieged by him, than Carthage was by them, they purposed to desist from their vaine attempt, and try some other course. Hereupon they issue into the field: where , and one Zarcas an African Captaine assisting the rebellion, take vpon them to finde Amilcar worke; Matho in Tunis, to negotiate with their friends, and take a generall care of the bu∣sinesse. The Elephants of Carthage, and horse of , made Spendius feare∣full to descend into the Plaines. Wherefore hee betooke himselfe to his former method of warre; keeping the mountaines, and rough grounds, or occupying the straightest passages, wherein the desperate courage of his men might shew it selfe, with little disaduantage. But Amilcar had more skill in this Art, than could bee matched by the labour of Spendius. Hee drew the enemie to many skirmishes; in all which the successe was such, as added courage to his owne men, and abated the strength and spirit of the Rebels. Thus he continued, prouoking them night and day: still intrapping some of them, and sometimes giuing them the ouerthrow in plaine battaile: vntill at length he got them into a straight, whence ere they should get out, he meant to take of them a good account. Their iudgement was enough, to perceiue their owne disaduantage: and therefore they had the lesse stomake to fight; but awaited for helpe from Tunis. Amilcar prudently foreseeing, that ne∣cessitie might teach them, to dare , vsed the benefit of their present feare, and shut them close vp with Trench and Rampart. There they waited mi∣serably for succour, that came not: and hauing spent all their victuailes, were so pinched with hunger, that they fed vpon the bodies of their prisoners. This they suffred patiently, as knowing that they had not deserued any fauour from Carthage; and hoping, that their friends at Tunis would not bee vnmindfull of them. But when they were driuen to such extremitie, that they were faine to deuoure their owne companions, and yet saw none appearance or likelihood of reliefe: their ob∣stinacie was broken; and they threatned their Captaines with what they had , vnlesse they would goe foorth to Amilcar, and secke such peace as might be gotten. So Spendius, Zarxas, and Autaritus, fell to consultation, wherein it was re∣solued, to obey the multitude, and yeeld themselues, if it were so required, vnto the death, rather than to perish by the hands of their owne companions. Hereup∣on they send to craue parle, which is granted; and these three come forth to talke with Amilcar in person. What they could say vnto him, it is hard to coniecture: yet by the conditions which Amilcar granted, it seemes that they tooke the blame vp∣on themselues, and craued pardon for the multitude. The conditions were, that the Carthaginians should choose, out of the whole number of these enemies, any ten whom they pleased, to remaine at their discretion; and that the rest should all be dismissed, each in his shirt, or in one single coate. When the peace was thus concluded; Amilcar told these Ringlcaders, that he chose them presently, as part of the ten, and so commanded to lay hands on them: the rest he foorthwith went to , with his whole Armie in order. The Rebels, who knew not that peace was concluded vpon so gentle articles, thought themselues betraied: and therefore a∣mazedly ranne to armes. But they wanted Captaines to order them; and the same astonishment, that made them breake the Couenants of peace, whereof they were ignorant, gaue vnto Amilcar both colour of iustice, in accomplishing reuenge, and case in doing the execution. They were all slaine: being fortie thousand, or more, in number. This was a famous exploit: and the newes thereof, exceeding welcome to Car∣thage; and terrible to the reuolted Cities of Africk. Henceforward Amilcar, with his and Hannibal, carried the warre from Towne to Towne, and found all places readie to yeelde: Vtica, and Hippagreta, onely standing out, vpon feare of deserued vengeance; and Tunes, being held by Matho, with the remainder of his Armie. It was thought fit to begin with Tunis, wherein lay the chiefe strength of the enemie. Comming before this Towne, they brought forth Spendius, with his fellowes, in view of the defendants, and crucified them vnder the walles; to ter∣rifie those of his olde companions, that were still in armes. With this rigour the siege began; as if speedie victorie had beene assured. Hannibal quartered on that part of Tunis, which lay towards Carthage; Amilcar on the opposite side: too farre asunder to helpe one another in sudden accidents; and therefore it behoued each, to be the more circumspect. Matho from the walles beheld his owne destinie, in the miserie of his compani∣on, and knew not how to auoide it otherwise, than by a cast at dice with fortune. So he brake out vpon that part of the Carthaginian Armie, that lay secure, as if all danger were past, vnder the command of Hannibal: and with so great and vnex∣pected furie he sallied, that after an exceeding slaughter, he tooke Hannibal prisoner; on whom, and thirtie the most noble of the Carthaginian prisoners, he presently the death of Spendius by the same torture. Of this Amilcar knew nothing till it was too late; neither had he strength enough remaining, after this great losse, to continue the siege; but was faine to breake it vp, and remoue vnto the mouth of the Riuer Bagradas, where he incamped. The terrour was no lesse within Carthage, vpon the same of this losse; than had beene the ioy of the late great victorie. All that could beare armes, were sent the field, vnder Hanno; whom, it seemes, they thought the most able of their Cap∣taines the late accidents of Warre. If there were any Law among them, forbidding the imployment of one sole Generall, neere vnto their Citie (for they are knowne to haue trusted one man abroad) the time did not permit, in this hastie exigent, to deuise about repealing it. But thirtie principall men are chosen by the Senate, to bring Hanno to Amilcars campe, and by all good perswasions to reconcile them. This could not be effected in one day. It neerely touched Amilcar in his ho∣nour, that the carelesnesse of Hannibal seemed to be imputed vnto him, by sending his enemie to moderate his proceedings. Neuerthelesse after many conferences, the authoritie of the Senatours preuailed; Amilcar and Hanno were made friends; and thenceforth, whilest this warre lasted, Hanno tooke warning by Hannibals calamities, to followe good directions, though afterwards hee returned to his old and deadly Liu. Dec. 3. l. 1. hatred. In the meane season Matho was come abroad; as meaning to vse the reputation of his late , whilest it gaue some life vnto his businesse. He had reason to doe as he did: but he wanted skill to deale with Amilcar. The skirmishes, and light of warre, wherein Amilcar trained his , did so farre abate the strength, and withall diminish the credit of Matho, that he resolued to trie the for∣tune of one battaile: wherein either his desires should be accomplished, or his cares ended. To this conclusion the Carthaginians were no lesse prone, than Matho: as being wearie of these long troubles, and expences; confident in the valour of their owne men, which had approued it selfe in many trials; and well as∣sured of Amilcar his great worth, whereunto the enemie had not what to oppose. According to this determination, each part was diligent in making prouision: inui∣ting their friends to helpe; and drawing foorth into the fielde, all that lay in Gar∣rison. The issue of this Battaile might haue beene foretold, without helpe of witch∣craft. Matho, and his followers, had nothing whereon to presume, saue their da∣ring spirits, which had beene well cooled by the many late skirmishes, wherein they had learned how to runne away. The had reason to dare, as ha∣uing often beene victorious: and in all points else they had the better of their ene∣mies; especially (which is worth all the rest) they had such a Commander, as was not easily to be matched in that Age. Neither was it likely, that the desire of liber∣tie should worke so much, in men accustomed to seruitude; as the honour of their State would, in Citizens, whose future and present good lay all at once ingaged in that aduenture. So the Carthaginians wanne a great victorie, wherein most of the Africans their enemies were slaine; the rest fled into a Towne, which was not to be defended, and therefore they all yeelded; and Matho himselfe was taken aliue. Im∣mediatly vpon this victorie, all the Africans that had rebelled made submission to their old masters: Vtica onely, and Hippagreta stood out, as knowing how little they deserued of fauour. But they were soone forced, to take what conditions best the victours. and his fellowes were led to Carthage in triumph; where they suffered all torments that could be deuised, in recompence of the mischiefes which they had wrought in this warre. The warre had lasted three yeeres, and a∣bout foure moneths, when it came to this good end: which the Carthaginians, whose subiects did not loue them, should with lesse expence, by contenting their Mercina∣ries, haue preuented in the beginning. §. IIII. How the Mercenaries of the Carthaginians, that were in Sardinia, rebelled: and were afterwards driuen by the Ilanders. The faithlesse dealing of the Romans with the Carthaginians, in taking from them Sardinia, contrarie to the peace. WHilest Matho and Spendius were making this terrible combustion in Africke; other Mercenaries of the Carthaginians had kindled the like fire in Sardinia: where murdering Bostar the Gouernour, and other Carthaginians, they were in hope to get, and hold that Iland to their own vse. Against these one Hanno was sent with a small Armie (such as could be spared in that busie time) consisting likewise of Mercenaries, leuied on the sudden. But these companions that followed Hanno, finding it more for their safety, and present profit, to ioyne themselues with those that were already reuol∣ted, than to indanger themselues by battaile, for the good of that commonweale, of which they had no care; began to enter into practice with the Sardinian Rebels; offering to runne one course of fortune with them in their enterprise. This their offer was kindly taken; but their faith was suspected. Wherefore, to take away all iealousie and distrust, they resolued to hang vp their Commander , and per∣formed it. A common practice it hath beene in all Ages, with those that haue vn∣dertaken the quarrell of an vniust warre, to enioyne the performance of some no∣torious and villainous act, to those that come into them as seconds, with offer to partake, and to assist the impious purposes which they haue in hand. It is indeed the best pawne, that desperate men can deliuer to each other, to performe some such Actions, as are equally vnpardonable to all. By such a kind of crueltie did the vngratefull murder a Garrison of Achaians, sent vnto them for their defence against the , by Aratus; who, when hee had formerly possest himselfe of their Citie, by right of warre, did not onely spare the sacke and spoile thereof, but gaue them equall freedome with the rest of the Cities vnited. These are also common in our Court-warres; where, in the conquests of newe fortunes, and making of newe parties, and factions, without the depression or destruction of olde friends, we cannot be receiued and trusted by old enemies. Ce sont les coups de vieille escrime. These, (say the French ) be the blowes of the old art of fencing. These Mercinaries in Sardinia were no whit lesse violent in their purpose, than were Spendius, and his associates: onely they wanted a Matho among them, to ne∣gotiate with the inhabitants of the Prouince. The Ilanders were no lesse glad, than the souldiours, that the Carthaginians were expelled the Countrie: but they could not agree about the profit of the victorie. The Sardinians thought that it was enough, if they rewarded the souldiours for their paines taken. Contrariwise, the souldiours were of opinion, that the title of the Carthaginians to that Ile, was deuolued vnto themselues, by right of conquest. The same quarrell would (in like∣lihood) haue risen, betweene Spendius with his Mercenaries, and their African friends; if the common desire of both had once taken effect: vnlesse the riches of Carthage had serued to content them all. But in , where there was none o∣ther valuable reward, than possession and rule of the Countrie; the matter was not easily taken vp. So they fell to blowes; which how they were dealt, I know not; but finally, the Mercenaries were driuen out, and compelled to saue themselues in Ita∣lie. Before their departure out of Sardinia, they had inuited the Romans into it; with as good right, as the Mamertines had called them into Sicil. Yet this offer was refu∣sed, vpon reasons that follow. Some Italian Merchants had relieued Matho and Spendius with corne; of whom the Carthaginians tooke almost fiue hundred, and held them in prison. Hereof was made a great complaint: so that the Romans sent Embassadours to Carthage, re∣quiring satisfaction. It was no time for the Carthaginians to dispute: they quietly yeelded to release them all. This was so kindly taken, that they forbade all their Merchants, to trade thenceforth with the Rebels; admonishing them to carry all prouisions to Carthage. And vpon the same reason, did they forbeare to meddle with Sardinia, or to accept the Citie of Vtica, offering it selfe vnto their subiection. This might haue serued, as a notable example of the Roman faith, to all : had not the issue proued, that it was meere regard of greater profit, which kept them so temperate, no longer than the hope lasted of thriuing better thereby, than they should haue done by open breach of faith. The whole estate of Carthage de∣pended, at that time, vpon the vertue of Amilcar: who had he beene ouerthrown by Spendius or Matho, in one maine battaile, that mightie Citie must either haue fallen into the barbarous hands of merciles villaines, or haue humbled herselfe vnder pro∣tection of the Romans, with whom shee had lately striuen for superioritie. That extreme necessitie, whereinto Matho reduced the Citie, by the fortune of one sallie made out of Tunis, is enough to proue, that Carthage was not farre from such a miserable choice. Wherfore it was not vnwisely done of the Romans, to make such demonstration of kindnesse, and honourable dealing, as might inuite a rich, but sinking shippe, to runne her selfe aground vpon their shore. But when all was well ended in Africke, and the Carthaginians began to prepare for the recouerie of Sardi∣nia: then did Ambition put off her goodly vizour. The Romans perceiuing that Carthage, beyond their hope, had recouered her feete againe; began to strike at her head. They entertained the proffer of those Mercinaries, that were fled out of Sar∣dinia; and they denounced warre against this enfeebled and impouerished Citie, vnder a shamelesse pretence, that the preparations made for SARDINIA, were made in∣dced against Rome it selfe. The Carthaginians knew themselues vnable to resist; and therefore yeelded to the Romans demand; renouncing vnto them all their right in Sardinia. But this was not enough. They would haue twelue hundred talents, in recompence belike (for I see not what reason they could alleage) of the great feare which they had endured, of an inuasion from Carthage. It is indeed plaine, that they impudently sought occasion of warre. But necessitie taught the Carthaginians patience; and the monie was paied, how hardly it was raised. From this time forward, let not Rome complaine of the Punick faith, in breach of Couenants: she her selfe hath broken the peace alreadie, which Amilcar purposeth to make her dearely repent; but what Amilcar liues not to performe, shall be accomplished by Hannibal his renoumed sonne. §. V. How the affaires of Carthage went betweene the African Rebellion, and the second Punicke Warre. THe iniurious dealing of the Romans, expressing their desire to picke a quarrell; to instruct the Carthaginians in a necessarie lesson. That either they must make themselues the stronger, or else resolue to be obedient vnto those that were more mighty. In a Citie long ac∣customed to rule, the brauer determination easilie tooke place: and the best meanes were thought vpon, for the increase of puissance and Empire. The strength, and the iealousie of the Romans, forbade all attempts vpon the Mediter∣ran seas; but the riches of Spaine, that lay vpon the Ocean, were vnknowne to Rome: wherefore that Prouince might serue, both to exercise the Carthaginians in warre, and to repaire their decaied forces, with all needfull supplies. Of this Spanish Expedition, the charge and soueraigne trust was committed vnto Amilcar: vpon whom his Countrie did wholly repose it selfe; in hope to recouer strength by his meanes, that had saued it from ruine. Hanno, with some other enuious men, that were of his faction, took little pleasure in the generall loue and honour, which daily increased towards Amilcar and his friends. Yet could they not denie him to bee the most worthy of command in all the Citie: onely they commended peace and quietnesse; aduising men to beware of prouoking the Romans, in whose amitie they said, that the felicitie of Carthage did consist. By such discourses, harsh to the eares of good Citizens, who had feeling of the wrong done to their Common weale; they got none other reputation, than of singularitie: which the ignorant sort suspected to be wisedome. But the glory of Amilcar was continually vpheld and enlarged, by many notable seruices that he did, to the singular benefit of his Countrie. He passed the Streights of Hercules, (now called the Streights of Gibraltar ) and landed on the westerne coast of Spaine; in which Countrie, during nine yeeres that he liued there, hee subiected vnto the State of Carthage the better part of all those Prouinces. But finally, in a battaile that he fought with a Nation in Portugale, called the Vettones, (defending himselfe a long time with an admirable resolution) hee was and slaine: carrying with him to the graue the same great honour and fame, by which in many signall victories, he had acquired the name of a second Mars. After the death of Amilcar; his sonne in law was made Generall of the Carthaginian forces in Spaine. This was a good man of warre; but farre better in practice and cunning, than in deedes of armes. By his notable dexteritie in matter of negotiation, he greatly enlarged the Dominion of Carthage: adding so many sub∣iects and confederates thereunto, that the Romans began to grow iealous againe of this hastie increase. He built a goodly Citie, vpon a commodious Hauen, in the Kingdome of Granado, opposite to that of Oran in Africa, and gaue it the name of New Carthage, which to this day it neerely retaineth, being called now The Spaniards haue since built a Citie of the same name in the West Indies: which being peopled by them in the yeere 1532. was sackt by the English in the yeere 1585 Cartha∣gena. With this successe of the in Spaine, the Romans were not a lit∣tle troubled; but begin to cause their owne negligence. For whereas they had for∣merly taken so much paines to beate them out the Ile of Sicil, as suspecting their neighbourhood there; they had now, by cumbring themselues in a warre of farre importance, (whereof I shall speake anon) giuen them leysure, without inter∣ruption, to recouer vpon their owne Continent, a Dominion by farre exceeding, both in the bodies of men and in reuenue, that which the Romans had taken from them. But how to helpe this, at the present they knew not; for they daily ex∣pected to be inuaded by the Gaules, their ancient enemies, and neerest neighbours to the West. But hee needeth little helpe of force, that knoweth himselfe to be fea∣red: it is enough if hee request; since his request shall haue the vertue of a com∣mand. Yet were the Romans vtterly destitute of all good colour; that might helpe them to intermeddle in Spaine. The Spaniards were then vnacquainted with Rome, where∣of (in probabilitie) they scarce had heard the name: so that there were no Mamer∣tines, nor other such Rebels, to call in Roman succours. But in the enterprise of Sar∣dinia, the Romans had learned an impudent pretence, that might also serue their turne in Spaine. For though it were apparent, that the Spanish affaires had no relation to the peace between these two Cities; and though it were nothing likely, that As∣drubal had any purpose, to extend his victories vnto the gates of Rome, or to any of the Roman frontiers: yet (as if some such matter had beene suspected) they sent vn∣to him, requiring that hee should forbeare to proceed any further, than to the Ri∣uer of Iberus. In addressing their messengers, rather to Asdrubal, than to the Citie of Carthage; they seeme to haue hoped, that howsoeuer the generalitie of the Car∣thaginians had sweetly swallowed many bitter pilles, to auoide all occasion of warre with Rome: yet the brauerie of one man might proue more fastidious, and, resen∣ting the iniurie, returne such answere, as would intangle his whole Countrie in the quarrell, that they so much desired; and might embrace at leisure, when once they had found apparent cause. But Asdruball finely deluded their expectation. He pre∣tended no manner of dislike at all: and whereas they would haue this co∣uenant inserted into the articles of peace; he tooke vpon him to doe it, of his owne power, with such appearance of conformitie to their will, that they went their wayes contented, and sought no further. If it had beene so, that the State of Carthage, thereunto pressed by the Romans, for feare of present warre, had ratified this new composition made by Asdrubal, yet should it not haue stood bound in honour, to obserue the same carefully, vnlesse an oath had also beene extorted, to make all sure. But since all passed quietly, vn∣der the bare authoritie of Asdrubal; this Capitulation was none other in , than a second breach of peace; whereof the Romans might be accused more iustly, than they could accuse the Carthaginians of periurie, (as they after did) for to stand to it. By this Treatie with Asdrubal, the Romans wanne some reputation in Spaine. For when it was once conceiued by the Spaniards, that the Citie which would needes be mistresse ouer them, stood in feare her selfe, of receiuing blowes from a stouter Dame; there were soone found some, that by offering themselues to the protecti∣on of Rome, became (as they thought) fellow-seruants with Carthage. But the Car∣thaginians will shortly teach them another lesson. The Saguntines, a people on the South side of Iberus, entred into confederacie with the Romans, and were gladly ac∣cepted. Surely it was lawfull vnto the Romans, to admit the Saguntines, or any o∣ther people (neither subiect, nor open enemie in warre to the Carthaginians ) into their societie: and vnlawfull it was vnto the Carthaginians, to vse violence towards any that should thus once become confederate with Rome. Neuerthelesse, if we consider the late agreement made with Asdrubal; we shall finde that the Romans could haue none other honest colour of requiring it, than an implicit couenant of making the Riuer Iberus a bound, ouer which they themselues would not passe, in any Discouerie or Conquest by them intended to be made vpon Spaine: in which regard, they might haue some honest pretence to require the like of the Carthagini∣ans; though Rome as yet had no foote, on the one side of Iberus, whereas Carthage, on the other side of that Riuer, held almost all the Countrie. Howsoeuer it were; this indignitie was not so easily digested, as former iniuries had beene. For it was a matter of ill consequence, that the Nations which had heard of no greater power than the Carthaginian, should behold Saguntum resting securely among them, vpon confidence of helpe from a more mightie Citie. Wherefore either in this respect; or for that the sense is most feeling of the latest iniuries; or rather for that now the were of power to do themselues right: warre against Saguntum was generally thought vpon, let the Romans take it how they list. In such termes were the Carthaginians, when Asdrubal died, after he had commanded in Spaine eight yeeres: (being slaine by a slaue, whose master he had put to death) and the Great Hannibal, sonne of the Great Amilcar, was chosen Generall in his stead. §. VI. The estate of Greece from the death of , to the raigne of PHILIP the sonne of in Macedon. IN the long terme of the first Punick warre, and the vacation following, betweene it and the second; the of Greece, after the death of , was growne somewhat like vnto that, wherein Philip of Ma∣cedon had found it; though farre weaker, as in an after-spring. The whole countrie had recouered by degrees, a forme of libertie: the pettie tyrannies (bred of those inferiour Captaines, which in the times of generall combustion, had each vpon such Townes as he could get) were, by force or accident, extirpated, and reformed; and some States were risen to such greatnesse, as not onely serued to defend themselues, but to giue protection to others. This conuersion to the better, proceeded from the like dissensions and tumults in Mace∣don, as had beene in Greece, when Philip first began to encroch vpon it. For after many quarrels and great warres, about the Kingdome of Macedon, betweene An∣tigonus the elder, Cassander, Demetrius, Lysimachus, , Pyrrhus, and the Gaules: Antigonus, the sonne of Demetrius, finally got and held it, reigning sixe and thirtie yeeres; yet so, that he was diuers times thence expelled, not onely by the Gaules, and by Pyrrhus, as hath beene alreadie shewed, but by Alexander the sonne of Pyrrhus the Epirot, from whose father he had hardly wonne it. This happened vn∣to him, by the reuolt of his souldiours, euen at such time, as hauing ouerthrowne with great slaughter an of the Gaules, he was conuerting his forces against the Athenians, whom he compelled to receiue his Garrisons. But his yong sonne Deme∣trius raised an Armie; wherewith he chased Alexander, not onely out of Macedon, but out of his owne Epirus, and restored his father to the Kingdome. By the helpe of this yong Prince Demetrius (though in another kind) Antigonus got into his possession the Citadell of Corinth; which was iustly termed the fetter of Greece. The Citadel called Acrocorinthus, stood vpon a steep rockie hill on the North side of the towne; and was by nature and art so strong, that it seemed impregnable. It commanded the towne; which was of much importance, as occupying the whole breadth of the Isthmus, that running betweene the Aegean and Ionique , ioyneth Peloponnesus to the Maine of Greece. Wherefore he that held possession of this , was able to cut off all passage by land, from one halfe of Greece vnto the other; besides the commoditie of the two Seas, vpon both of which, this rich and goodly Citie had commodious hauens. Alexander, the sonne of Polysperchon; and af∣ter his death, his wife, had gotten Corinth in the great shuffling of Pro∣uinces and Townes, that was made between Alexanders Princes. Afterwards it pas∣sed from hand to hand, vntill it came, I know not how, to one Alexander; of whom I finde nothing else, than that he was thought to bee poisoned by this Antigonus, who deceiued his wife thereof, and got it from her by a tricke. The deuice was this. Antigonus sent his yong Demetrius to Corinth, willing him to court Nicaea, and her marriage. The foolish old widdow perceiued not how vnfit a match she was for the yong Prince, but entertained the fancie of marriage; whereto the old King was euen as readie, to consent, as was his sonne to desire it, and came thi∣ther in person to solemnize it. Hereupon all Corinth was filled with sacrifices, feasts, plaies, and all sorts of games: in the middest of which, Antigonus watched his time, and got into the Castle, beguiling the poore Ladie, whose iealousie had beene ex∣ceeding diligent in keeping it. Of this purchase hee was so glad, that he could not containe himselfe within the grauitie beseeming his old age. But as hee had stollen it; so was it againe stollen from him: neither liued he to reuenge the losse of it, be∣ing alreadie spent with age. Demetrius, the sonne of this Antigonus, succeeding vnto his father, reigned ten yeeres. He made greater proofe of his vertue before he was King than after. The Dardanians, Aetolians, and Achaeans, held him continually busied in warre; wherin his fortune was variable, and for the more part ill. About these times the power of the Macedonians began to decay: and the Graecians to cast off their yoke. Philip, the onely sonne of Demetrius, was a yong child when his father died; and therefore Antigonus, his vncle, had the charge of the Kingdome, during the mino∣ritie of the Prince; but he assumed the name and power of a King, though hee re∣spected Philip as his owne sonne, to whom he left the Crowne at his death; This Antigonus was called the Tutor, in regard of his Protectorship; and was also called Doson, that is as much as, Will-giue, because he was slow in his liberalitie. He repres∣sed the Dardanians and Thessalians, which molested his Kingdome, in the beginning of his raigne. Vpon confidence of this good seruice, hee tooke state vpon him, as one that rather were King in his owne right, then onely a Protector. Hereupon the people fell to mutinie; but were soone appeased by faire words, and a seeming vnwillingnesse of his to meddle any more with the Gouernment. The Achaians tooke from him the Citie of Athens, soone after Demetrius his death; and likely they were to haue wrought him out of all or most that hee held in Greece, if their owne estate had not beene endangered by a neerer enemy. But ciuile dissention, which had ouerthrowne the power of Greece, when it flourished most; ouerthrew it easily now againe, when it had scarcely recouered strength after a long sicknesse; and gaue to this Antigonus no lesse authoritie therein, than Philip the father of A∣lexander, got by the like aduantage. These Achaians, from small beginnings, had increased in short time to great strength and fame: so that they grew the most redoubted Nation of all the Greeks. By the equalitic of their Lawes, and by their clemencie (notwithstanding that they were a long time held vnder by the Macedonians and Spartans ) they did not onely draw all others by their loue and alliance, but induced, through their exam∣ple, the rest of the Cities of Peloponnesus, to bee gouerned by one Lawe, and to vse one and the same sort of waights, measure, and . Aratus, the Sicyonian, was the first that vnited them againe; and gaue them cou∣rage, after that they had beene by the Macedonian Captaines diuided into many Principalities. In elder times they were gouerned by Kings, as most of the great Cities of Greece were; to which kinde of rule they first subiected themselues, after the descent of the Heraclidae, when Tisamenus the sonne of Orestes possest the Ter∣ritorie of Achaia. In this estate they continued to the time of Gyges; after whome, when his sonnes sought to change the Legall gouernment of their Predecessors into Tyrannie, they expelled them, and made their State popular; as seeming most equall. This forme of Common-weale had continuance, with some small changes according to the diuersitie of times, till the reigne of Philip and Alexander Kings of Macedon: who tempest-like ouerturned all things in that part of the world. For those twelue Cities, called the Cities of alliance, whereof Helice, and or Ole∣nus, the Sea had eaten vp a little before the Battaile of Leuctres; were, by distur∣bance of the Macedonians, diuided from other, and trained into a warre, no lesse foolish than cruell, among themselues. But in the one hundred and foure and twentieth Olympiad, in which, or neere it, Ptolomie the sonne of Lagus, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolomie Ceraunus, left the world; two of the ten remaining Cities and people, namely, the Patrenses and the Dimaei, vnited themselues, and laid the foun∣dation of that generall accord, and re-vnion, which after followed. For hauing beene, some of them Partisans with sundrie Macedonian Captaines, and others ha∣uing beene gouerned by pettie Kings; they began to fasten themselues in a strong league of amitie, partly, in the Olympiad before spoken of, and partly, at such time as Pyrrhus made his first voiage into Italie. Now after the vniting of the Patrenses and , to whom also the Cites of Tritaea, and Phara, ioyned themselues; Aegira chased out her Garrisons: and the Burians, killing their Kings, entred with the Ceraunians into the same Confederacie. These Cities, for twentie & fiue yeeres, vsed the same forme of Gouernement with the Achaians; who by a Senatorie and two Praetors, ordered all things in their Commonweale; and soone after, by one Praetor, or Commander: of , Marcus Carynensis was the first, and Aratus the second. This Aratus was a noble yong Gentleman of Sicyon, who liuing at Argos in exile, whilest his Countrie was oppressed by Tyrants, found meanes, through the helpe of other banished men, to enter their owne Citie by night, with ladders; whence they chaced the Tyrant, and restored the people to libertie. This was in the time of Antigonus King of Macedon, a Prince more busie in watching what to get among the Greekes, than wise in looking to his owne. For feare of Antigonus, the Si∣cyonians entred into the Achaian league: which though at that time it receiued more increase, by their accession, than it added strength to them; yet the benefit of this coniunction serued well enough against Antigonus, whose subtilty was somewhat greater than his valour. As the industrie and counsaile of Aratus deliuered his Countrie from bondage, and fortified it by the Achaian league: so further, by his great liberalitie, with the exceeding great cost of one hundred and fiftie talents, he pacified the inexplicable controuersies, betweene the banished Sicyonians, which returned with him, and the other Citizens that had possession of these mens Lands; as also with the same mony he drew many others to assist him in those enterprises following, that redounded to the singular good of all Achaia. The mony he obtai∣ned of Ptolemie Euergetes King of Aegypt; who partly had a desire to hold some strong and sure friendship in Greece, partly was delighted with the conuersation of Aratus himselfe, that made a dangerous voiage to him into Aegypt, and fed his plea∣sure in goodly pictures, with the gift of many curious , wherein the worke∣men of Sicyon excelled. The first of Aratus his great attempts, was the surprize of the Acrocorinthus or Citadell of Corinth; which he wanne by night, being thereinto guided by some theeues that he had hired for the purpose, who liuing in the place, had practised to rob Antigonus his treasurie, passing in and out by a secret path among the rockes. Yet was he faine to fight for it, cre he could get it: though indeede Antigonus his Souldiers were rather ouer-come by their owne feare, than by any force of the as∣sailants; as mistrusting lest the Achaians were more in number, than in truth they were, and hauing lost the aduantages of the place already, vpon which they had presumed, before they were aware of any enemie. In these kinde of night-scruices, ambushments, surprises, and practices, Aratus was very cunning, aduenturous, and valiant: in open field, and plaine battaile, hee was as timorous. By this strange mixture of cowardize and courage, he ministred argument of disputation, to Philosophers and others; Whether a valiant man (as he was esteemed, and in some cases approued) might looke pale and tremble, when he beganne battaile; and whether the vertue of Fortitude were diuersified, by the sundry natures of men, and in a manner confined, vnto seuerall sorts of action. In resoluing which doubts it may be said; that all vertue is perfected in men by exer∣cise, wherein they are trained by occasion: though a naturall inclination standeth in neede of little practice; whereas the defect hereof must be supplied with much instruction, vse, good successe, and other helpe, yet hardly shall grow absolute in generall. Such was Aratus in matter of Warre. In sincere affection to his Countrie he was vnreproueable, and so acknowledged: as his following actions will testifie. When Acrocorinthus was taken, and ioyned vnto the Common-wealth of , the Megarians reuolted soon after from Antigonus, and entred into the same Corpo∣ration. So did the Troezenians, and the Epidaurians: whereby this new erected State grew so powerfull, that it aduentured to take Athens, from the Macedonians; and Argos and Megalopolis, from Tyrants that held them. The enterprise vpon Athens was of none effect. For though Aratus wasted the Ile of Salamis, to shew his strength, and sent home the Athenian prisoners, without ransome, to allure the Citie by shew of loue; yet the Athenians stirred neither against him, nor for him, as being now growne honest slaues to the Macedonians. Vpon the aduenture was car∣ried more strongly. The Achaian; came sometimes to the gates of the Citie, but the people stirred not: once they entred it, and might haue wonne it, if the Citizens would haue lent any helpe to the recouerie of their owne freedome; sundrie times, and with diuers euent, they fought with the Tyrants, (who rose vp one after an∣other in Argos ) in open field, and slue one of them in battaile; but all sufficed not: vntil at length Aristomachus the Tyrant was so terrified, perswaded, and hired, by Aratus, that he consented to resigne his estate. The like did Xenon the Tyrant of Hermione, and Cleonymus that had oppressed the Phliasians. Whilest this businesse with the Argiues was on foot, Lysiadas the Tyrant of Megalopolis was so well hand∣led by Aratus, that, without compulsion, he gaue libertie to his Citie, and annexed it to the Councell of Achaia: whereby he got such credit, that he was chosen Ge∣neral of their forces (which was a yeerly Office, and might not be held two yeeres together by one man) euerie second yeere, for a certaine while, he and Aratus suc∣ceeding one another by turnes. But those late Tyrants, and new Citizens, Lysiadas and Aristomachus, were carried with priuate passion from care of the generall good; in which courses they opposed Aratus, to the great hurt of Achaia, as shall appeare in due time. The Achaeans hauing obtayn ed so much puissance and reputation, that Ptolomie King of Aegypt was become Patron of their Alliance, and (in title of honour) Ge∣nerall of their forces by Sea and Land; made open Warre vpon Demetrius the Sonne of Antigonus Gonatas, for the libertie of Athens. It is strange and worthy of noting, That when Aratus in this quarrell had lost a battaile the Athenians wore Garlands, in signe of ioy, to flatter their good Lords the Macedonians, that had wonne the victorie. Such were now the Athenians become; in whom the rule was verified, that holds true in generall of the multitude, Aut humiliter seruit, aut su∣perbè dominatur; It is either base in seruice, or insolent in command. Neuerthelesse when Demetrius was dead, Aratus performed that by monie, which he could not by force; and corrupting the Captaine of the Macedonian Garrison, purchased libertie to the Athenians, who thencefoorth held good correspondence with the Achaeans, lo∣uing them, and speaking well of them, which was all that they could doe: but in∣to their Corporation they entred not, scorning it belike, in regard of their owne out-worne glorie. Now as the Common-wealth of Achaia daily increased within Peloponnesus, by iustice and honestie; so did the Aetolians, in the vtter part of Greece, yea and within Peloponnesus it selfe, waxe very powerfull, by sturdinesse of bodie, and rude courage in fight, without helpe of any other vertue. They had stoutly defended themselues against Antipater and Craterus; partly by daring to doe and suffer much; partly by the natural strength and fastnesse of their Countric; but especially by the benefit of the time, which called away these famous Captaines to other businesse, as hath beene related. They had molested Cassander, in fauour of Antigonus; and were themselues as much plagued by him, & by the Acarnanians, a little, but a stout Na∣tion, that tooke his part. Afterwards they had to doc with Demetrius, the sonne of the first Antigonus, and more or lesse, with al the Kings of succeeding him. They likewise held often Warre with the Acarnanians, Athamanians, Epirots, and many Cities in Peloponnesus: so that they were hardened with perpetuall trauaile; seldome putting off their Armour. But their hardinesse ill deserued the name of va∣lour, seeing they had no regard of honestie or friendship; measuring all things by their owne insolent wil, and thinking al people base-minded, that were not as fierce and outragious as themselues. These Aetolians had lately made great spoiles in Peloponnesus, and occupied a good part of the countrie. They had inuaded the friends of the Achaeans; taken and sacked Pallene; where although they were soundly beaten by Aratus, yet their desire of gaine made them greedie of a new voiage thither, as to a Countrie wherein some∣what was to be gotten. But they were forced to looke another way, by Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus Gonatas: who pressed them so hardly, that they were driuen to seeke helpe of the Achaeans; which they obtained. The warre which the Achaeans made vpon Demetrius, without Peloponnesus, in Attica, though it tended to expelling the Macedons out of Greece, yet the benefit thereof redounded chiefly vnto the Ae∣tolians, at whose instance it was set on foot: for thereby were the Macedonian forces diuerted from them. Neither was this good turne vnacknowledged; though very basely the Aetolians, giuing thanks in words, deuised how to the benefit with some great mischiefe. They saw that the Achaeans were desirous, to bring all Peloponnesus into their Alliance and Corporation: of which intent, the Lacedaemoni∣ans were very iealous. Wherefore these Aetolians laboured , to set the La∣cedaemonians and Achaeans together by the eares: hoping that if this might come to passe, they themselues should be called into helpe (it skilled not on what side) and so get no small share, both in bootie and Territorie. Neither did they forbeare to communicate this their deuice vnto Antigonus; offering to make him partaker of their gaine, whom they knew to be offended with the many losses, that his King∣dome had sustained by the Achaeans. Of this plot Aratus was aware: who therefore determined to suffer many indignities, rather than to giue the Lacedaemonians cause to take armes. But this resolution was taken somewhat too late: and not altogether in his own power to hold. He had been medling with the Archadians, that were de∣pendants of Lacedaemon: and thereby had prouoked the to looke a∣bout them, seeing that all Peloponnesus, excepting themselues, the Eleans, and a few Arcadians their friends (who also were attempted) was alreadie become Achaean. The Citie of Sparta was in ill case about these times; and subiect to the iniuries of any stronger Neighbour. Pyrrhus had greatly weakned it; The Aetolians entring Laconia with an Armie, had carried away fiftie thousand slaues; and, which was worse, their discipline was corrupted, Auarice and Luxurie raigned among them, the poore was oppressed by the rich, & the generositie of spirit, that had sometime beene their generall vertue, was hardly now to be found among the best of them. There were left in Sparta no more than seuen hundred naturall Citizens; of whom not aboue one hundred had lands: all the rest were needie people and desirous of innouation. Hereupon followed intestine sedition; which endangered the Citie most of all. Agis a good King, who sought to reforme the disorders of the State, exhorted the people to a strict obseruation of his laws. To which purpose he caused them to passe an Act, for the abolishing of all debts, and equal diuision of lands. All the yonger, and the poorer sort were glad of this: but the rich men op∣posed it. These had recourse vnto Leonidas the other King, (for in Sparta were two Kings) who tooke their part: being himselfe a dissolute man, as one trained vp in the Court of Syria, whence also he had his wife. In this contention Leonidas was expel∣led the Citie, and a new King chosen in his stead. But Agis his friends and Coun∣sailors in this enterprise, abused his good meaning to their owne priuate commodi∣tie. They were hastie to take away all debts, and cancell bonds, for they them∣selues were deeply indebted: but the diuision of lands they afterwards hindred, be∣cause their owne possessions were great. Hence arose a tumult in Sparta, which these men increased by their foule oppression of the poorer Citizens. So that in fine, Leo∣nidas was brought home, and restored to his Kingdome, and the two aduerse Kings driuen to take Sanctuarie; out of which, Cleombrotus, the late-made King, was dis∣missed into exile: but Agis was trained forth, drawne into prison, and there by his enemies condemned and strangled, together with his Mother, and his old Grand∣mother. The like to this was neuer knowne in Sparta: and (which is the more o∣dious) this crueltie procecded from the Ephori, Magistrates that should haue giuen Patronage to the lawes, vsing their power, and more power than to them belonged, against a King, that had proceeded orderly in reforming the Citie, as the lawes re∣quired. The death of Agis was much lamented by all good Citizens; and serued to esta∣blish the impotent rule of a few tyrannicall oppressors. In which case Aratus might well hope, to adioyne Lacedaemon to the Achaean Common-wealth: though it were great iniustice to take such aduantages, & attempt by force, that which would haue redounded to the generall good of Peloponnesus, and to the benesit of Sparta it selfe, if it could haue beene wrought by perswasion. But the same man who redressed the disorders of , and reuenged the death of Agis, did also requite the iniust attempts of the , euen in their owne kind: obtruding vpon them by force, an vnion of all Peloponnesus; though little to their good liking, for that the Lacedaemonians and their King, should haue beene the prin∣cipall; not they and their Praetor. Leonidas hauing thus caused Agis to be slaine, tooke his wife that was very rich and beautifull, and gaue her in mariage (perforce) to his owne sonne Cleomenes. This yong Prince fell greatly enamoured on his wife, and sought to winnc her affection, as well as he had her person. He discoursed much with her about the purpose of her former husband Agis, and by pittying his mis∣fortune, began to entertaine a desire of accomplishing that, wherein Agis had failed. So comming himselfe to be King, whilst he was very yong, hee gladly embraced all occasions of warre: for that he hoped by strong hand to effect that, which Agis, by proceeding formally, in so corrupt an estate of the Citie, had attempted to his owne ruine. Therfore when the Ephori gaue him in charge, to take and fortifie Athenaeum, a Temple on the marches of Laconia, to which both they and the Megalopolitans pre∣tended title; he readily performed it. Hereof Aratus made no complaint, but sought to take by surprise Tegea and Orchomenus, Cities then confederate with the Lacedae∣monians: wherein, his intelligence sailing, he lost the labour of a painefull nights tra∣uaile, and discouered his enmitie to Sparta; of which Cleomenes was nothing . By these degrees the warre began. In the entrance whereto Aratus had discouered the Aetolian practice, and therfore would haue staied the quarrell from proceeding too farre. But and would needes fight, and he could doe none other than be ruled by them; especially seeing was so vrgent. was at that time General of the Achaeans, (He & Lysiadas being of great account, since they had abandoned their tyrannie) who sent vnto Aratus, lying then in A∣thens, and required his assistance in a journie to be made into . No disswasions of Aratus would ferue: therefore he came in person, and tooke part of a businesse, lit∣tle pleasing him in the present, and lesse in the future. When he met with Cleomenes, he durst not fight; but opposed himselfe against Aristomachus, who desired to giue battaile. Yet had the Achaeans twentie thousand foot, & one thousand horse, in their Armie: whereas Cleomenes had no more than fiue thousand in all. This gaue repu∣tation to the , and raised an ill report vpon Aratus; which Lysiadas hel∣ped to make worse, by accusing his cowardize. Neuerthelesse the would not fall out with Aratus their Benefactor, but chose him their General the yere, fol∣lowing, against Lysiadas his accuser that sued for the place. Being Generall him selfe, it behoued him to confute, with deedes, the slanderous wordes of Lysiadas. There∣fore he purposed to set vpon the Eleans: but was met withall on the way, neere vnto the Mount Lycaeus, by Cleomenes; who vanquished him in a great battaile, and draue him to hide himselfe all night for feare, so that he was thought to haue beene slaine. This misaduenture Aratus recompenced by a trick of his owne more naturall occu∣pation: performing with his broken Armie, that which could hardly haue been ex∣pected, had he bin victorious. For whilst there was no suspition of any great matter that he could vndertake; he secretly wrought with some of the Mantinaeans, who did let him into their Citie. The Mantinaeans had once before ioyned themselues with the Achaians; but shortly vpon feare, or some other passion, they gaue themselues to the Aetolians; and from the Aetolians, presently after this victorie, to , from whom immediately they were thus won. For this their leuitie they were not punished, but freely admitted now againe into the Achaean societie. As this good successe repaired the credit of Aratus; so another battaile almost ruined it. Cleome∣nes and he encountred neere vnto Megalopolis; where the Achaeans had somewhat the at the first, but their Generall durst not follow his aduantage. Therupon , of whom we spake before, grew some what impatient with anger; and ta∣king with him all the horse, brake vpon the Lacedaemonians, whom hee routed at the beginning, but pursuing them too farre into places of hard passage, he was slaine by them, and his followers driuen backe vpon their owne Companions; in such sort, that finally all the Armie was disordered, and put to flight. This a great losse, and incensed the Achaeans against Aratus: yet their indignation proceeded no fur∣ther, than that they refused to make any longer contribution, towards the pay of those Mercinaries which he had waged. This Aratus tooke patiently, and followed the warre neuerthelesse; wherein though Cleomenes wanne some Townes, and A∣ratus got the better in one small fight, yet little of importance was done; the Achaeans being , and the Spartan King intentiue to another businesse. Cleomenes hauing led into the field all that were like to hinder his purpose, and tired them with painefull journies, for sooke the Achaean warre on a sudden, and came vnexpected home to Sparta, where hee slue the , and restored by force the ancient discipline of Lycurgus. Then gaue hee an accompt of his doings: and shewing by what degrees the Ephori had incroched vpon the power of Kings, and many disorders had growne in the Citie; he justified his proceedings, and forth with began to make equall diuision of the Lands, reducing all to the first institution. Hee also supplied the defect of Citizens, by choosing new, out of such as were friends to the State, and valiant men: so that henceforth his Countrie might not altogether stand in neede of mercinarie helpe, as it lately had done, to saue it selfe from the Ae∣tolians, Illyrians and other enemies. All this was dispatched in great haste; the Spar∣tans well satisfied; and Cleomenes himselfe ready in the field, ere his enemies could take aduantage of these his domesticall troubles. The Achaeans hearing of this great alteration in Sparta, thought that it would be long, ere Cleomenes durst issue forth of the Citie, for feare of some rebellion. But it was not long ere they heard, that he had wasted all the Countrie of Megalopolis; had ranged ouer all Arcadia at his pleasure; and was admitted into Mantinaea; and readie to take other places, euen of Achaia. These newes displeased them not a little: but they must patiently endure to heare worse. For when Cleomenes had sha∣ken off the power of the Ephori, that curbed his authoritie, hee proceeded more roundly in his worke; being better obeyed, and by better men. His Lacedaemonians resumed their ancient courage; and he himselfe had the heart to demand the Prin∣cipalitie of Greece. He did not therefore henceforth contend, about the possession of a few Townes: but aduentured to winne or lose all. The Aetolians, in fauour of his attempt, declared themselues on his side: and whereas he had gotten Manti∣naea, Tegea, and other places, to which they had some title, they willingly renounced all their interest vnto him. Aratus did apprehend the danger of his Countrie, and saw that Antigonus with the Aetolians, or perhaps without them, would shortly make an end of that, which Cleomenes had thus begunne. Therefore hee deuised how to prouide against the worst, and either to repaire all, or (if it could not bee) to all from vtter ruine. The office of Generall when it was next put vpon him, bee refused; fearing to bee so farre prest, as to hazzard in one battaile all the force of his Countrie, to which as hee had neuer any affection, nor per∣chance courage, so was his manner of warfare otherwise. For he commonly at∣tempted by surprise, and defended vpon the aduantage of place, after the manner of the Irish, and of all other Nations, ouer-charged with numbers of men. Yet did he not forsake the care of the weale publike, though in aiming at the generall good, it seemes that priuate passion drew him into an ill course. He saw, that Me∣galopolis could not be defended without making a dangerous hazzard of battaile; that Mantinaea had not only opened her gates vnto Cleomenes, but slaine the Achaean Garrison that lay therein; that other Townes had yeelded vnto him, without compulsion; and that Aristomachus, once Tyrant of Argos, and since Generall of the Achaeans, was now reuolted vnto the enemie, following the fortune of Cleomenes. Ptolemie was too farre off to helpe; and the neerenesse of Antigonus was very dange∣rous; yet might be vsefull, if this King would (as Polybius saith) like others, be friend or enemie, as should best agree with his owne profit. To make triall hereof, Aratus practised with some of Megalopolis, whom he found apt vnto his purpose; and in∣structed them how to deale both with Antigonus, and the Achaeans. The Citie of Megalopolis had beene well affected to the Macedonians, euer since the time of Philip the Father of Alexander, who had obliged it vnto him by some especiall benefits. At this time it lay neerest vnto the danger; was very faithfull, and therefore deserued succour; yet could not well bee relieued by the Achaeans, with their owne proper strength. Wherefore it was thought meet, that Embassa∣dours should bee sent vnto the generall Councell of , requesting leaue and good allowance, to trie the fauour of Antigonus in their necessitie. This was gran∣ted, for lack of what else to answere: and the same Embassadours dispatched away to Antigonus. They did their owne errand briefly; telling him of the good will and respect which their Citie had of long time borne vnto him and his Predeces∣sours; of their present neede; and how it would agree with his honour to giue them aide. But when they deliuered the more generall matter, wherein Aratus had giuen them instruction; shewing how the ambition of Cleomenes, and violence of the Aetolians, might redound to his owne great losse or danger, if the one and the other were not in time preuented; how Aratus himselfe did stand affected; and what good likelihood there was of reducing the Achaeans vnder the Patronage of Macedon: then beganne Antigonus to lend a more attentiue eare to their discourse. He embraced the motion: and to giue it the more life, he wrote vnto the Megalopo∣litans, that his helpe should not be wanting, so farre forth, as it might stand with the Achaeans good liking. Particularly he commended himselfe, by these Messengers, to ; assuring them, that he thought himselfe highly bound to this honoura∣ble man, whose former actions he now perceiued, not to haue beene grounded vp∣on any hatred to the Macedonians, but only vpon a iust and worthy loue to his owne Nation. With this answere they returne to Megalopolis: and are presently sent away to the Councell of Achaia; there to make some speedy conclusion, as the necessitie of the time required. The Achaeans were glad to heare, that Antigonus was so inclinable to their de∣sire; and therefore were ready to entertaine his fauour, with all good correspon∣dence. Hereunto Aratus gaue his consent; and praised the wisedome of his Coun∣trimen, that so well discerned the best and like liest meanes of their common safetie: adding neuerthelesse, that it were not amisse, first of all to trie their owne abilitie; which if it failed, then should they doe well to call in this gracious Prince, and make him their Patron and Protector. Thus hee shewed himselfe moderate, in that which himselfe of all others did most wish: to the end, that hee might not after∣ward sustaine the common reprehension, if any thing fell out amisse; since it might appeare, that he had not beene Author of this Decree, but only followed, and that leisurably, the generall consent. Neuerthelesse in true estimation, this finenesse of Aratus might haue beene vsed, with his greater commendation, in a contrarie course. For it had beene more honourable, to make an end of the Warre, by yeelding vnto Cleomenes that power which they gaue vnto Antigonus: since therby he should both haue freed his Countrie from all further trouble; and withall should haue restored vnto the vni∣uersall state of Greece, that honorable condition, whereof the Macedonians had be∣reft it. But it is commonly found (which is great pittie) that Vertue hauing risen to honour by degrees, and confirmed it selfe, (as it were) in the seat of Principalitie, by length of time, and successe of many actions; can ill endure the hastie growth of any others reputation, where with it sees it selfe likely to bee ouer-topped. Other cause to despise the Lacedaemonians there was none; than that they lately had bin in dangerous case: neither could any reason be found, why Aratus should prefer Anti∣gonus before Cleomenes, than that he had stood in doubt of the one, when he thought himselfe more mighty than the other. Wherefore he was iustly plagued, when he saw his owne honors reuersed by the insolent Macedonians; and in stead of liuing as a companion with Cleomenes, that was descended of a long race of Kings, the poste∣ritie of Hercules was faine to doe sacrifice vnto Antigonus, as vnto a God, and was fi∣nally poisoned by Philip, whose Nobilitie was but of fiue descents, and whom per∣haps he might haue seene his fellowes, if he had not made them his Lords. By this inclination to the Macedonians, the loue of Ptolomie was lost: who forth with tooke part with Cleomenes, though he did not supply him with such liberalitie, as hee had vsed to the Achaeans; being warned, as may seeme, by their example, to be more wa∣rie both in trusting & disbursing. Cleomenes himselfe, whilest this businesse with An∣tigonus was afoot, passed through Arcadia with an Armie, & laboured by all meanes to draw the Achaeans to battaile. At the Citie of Dymes in Achaia were assembled all the remaining forces of the Nation; with which it was concluded, to make triall, whether perhaps they might amend their estate, without seeking helpe of the Ma∣cedonian. Thither went Cleomenes, and there fought with them; where hee had so great a victorie, that the enemie was no longer able to keepe the open field. The ca∣lamitie was such, that Aratus himselfe durst not take vpon him to be their Generall, when his turne came in the next election. Wherefore the Achaeans were compelled to sue for peace; which was granted vpon this easie condition: That they should not arrogate vnto themselues the command of Peloponnesus, but suffer the Lacedae∣monians (as in former ages) to be their Leaders in Warre. Hereunto if they would condescend, he promised vnto them, that he would presently restore al places taken from them, and al his prisoners tansom-free: also that they should enioy their owne Lawes and Liberties without molestation. This gentle offer of Cleomenes was very pleasing to the Achaeans: who desired him to come vnto the Citie of Lerna, where a Parliament should be held, for the conclusion of the Warre. Now seemed the affaires of Greece likely to be settled in better order, than they had euer beene since the beginning of the Peloponnesian Warres, yea or since the Per∣sian Inuasion: when God, who had otherwise disposed of these matters, hindred all, with a draught of cold water, which Cleomenes dranke in a great heat, and thereupon fell extreme sick, and so could not be present at Lerna, but caused the Parliament to be deferred to another time. Neuerthelesse he sent home the chiefe of his prisoners, to shew that he meant none other than good faith. By this faire dealing he confir∣med the Achaeans in their desire of his friendship: who assembled againe at Argos, there to establish the League. But Aratus was violently bent against it; and sought by great words, and terrible threats, to make his Countrimen afraid of resoluing. When all would not serue turne, he betooke himselfe to his cunning; and sent word to Cleomenes, that hee should doe well to leaue his Armie behinde him, and come a∣lone into Argos, receiuing Hostages for safetie of his person. Cleomenes was already farre on his way, when he met with this aduertisement: and tooke it in ill part, that he should be thus deluded. For it had beene an easie matter, to haue told him so much at the first, and not haue made him come so farre with an Armie, which after∣wards he must dismisse. Yet that which chiefly seemes to haue troubled him, was the drift of his oppugners; who sought thereby, either to make him wait without the gates, and deale only with themselues and their Messengers; or if he would ad∣uenture himselfe into the Citie, then to depriue him of all Royall shew, that might breede respect of him in the Multitude. This was that indeede which Aratus feared, and for which he sought to hinder his comming thither in person: lest the people, hearing the promises of Cleomenes ratified by his owne mouth, should presently be wonne with his gentle words, & finish the bargaine without more adoe. There∣fore Cleomenes wrote vnto the whole Councell, bitterly complaining against these iuggling tricks: and Aratus was not farre behinde with him, in as bitter an Oration. So betweene feare of the one, and reuerence of the other, the Assembly knew not how to proceede, but abruptly brake vp, leauing all as it were to fortune. Cleomenes tooke his aduantage of their present weakenesse, and renewed the Warre. Many Ci∣ties yeelded vnto him willingly; many hee forced; and partly by force, partly by terrour, he wanne Argos, which neuer King of Sparta before him could doe. In this case Aratus sent his owne sonne to Antigonus, entreating him to deferre no time, but come presently to relieue the distressed Achaeans. Antigonus gaue as good words as could be wished: sauing that he vtterly refused to doe any thing, vnlesse he might first haue Acrocorinthus put into his hand. This demand was somewhat like vnto that of the Hunter, who promised to helpe the Horse against his enemie the Stag: but with condition, that the Horse should suffer himselfe to be saddled & bridled. Aratus was herewithall contented, but wanted all honest colour to doe it: seeing the Corinthians had no way deserued, to be thus giuen away to the Macedonians. Yet at length an occasion was found; for that the Corinthians, perceiuing what he intended, were minded to arrest him. So hee withdrew himselfe out of their Citie, and sent word to Antigonus, that the Castle should bee ready to let him in. The Co∣rinthians on the other side ranne to Cleomenes; who lost no time, but made haste with them to Corinth, where he sought how to get possession of their Castle, or at least to saue it from Antigonus, by surrounding it with Trenches, that none might issue nor enter without his leaue. Whilest this was in doing, he tooke speciall order, that Aratus his house and goods, within the Towne, should be safely kept for the Owner; to whom he sent Messenger after Messenger, desiring him to come to a∣greement, and not to bring in the barbarous Macedonians, and Illyrians, to Pelopon∣nesus: promising that if he would harken to these perswasions, then would he giue him double the same pension, which hee had beene wont to receiue of King Pto∣lemie. As for the Castle of Corinth, which was the gate of Peloponnesus, and with∣out which none could hold assured soueraigntie of the Countrie; he desired that it might not be committed vnto his owne disposition, but be ioyntly kept by the La∣cedaemonians and Achaeans. All this entreatie serued to no purpose. For Aratus, re∣iecting vtterly the motion, sent his owne sonne as an Hostage to Antigonus; and la∣boured with the Achaeans, to put Acrocorinthus into his hands. Which when Cleome∣nes vnderstood, he seised vpon the goods of Aratus in Corinth, and wasted all the Countrie of Sicyon, whereof this his Aduersarie was natiue. Antigonus in the meane time drew neere to the Isthmus; hauing passed with his Armie through Euboea, because the Aetolians held the streights of Thermopylae a∣gainst him. This they did, either in fauour of Cleomenes, which they pretended; or in doubt of the greatnesse, the Macedonians might attaine by the good successe of this iournie. At his comming thither he found the Lacedaemonians ready to forbid his entrance: and that with sufficient strength; yet with no purpose to hazzard battaile, but rather to wearie him thence with hunger, against which hee came not well prouided. Antigonus therefore laboured hard to make his way by force; but he was not able so to doe: hee secretly got into the Corinthian Hauen; but was violently driuen out againe, with great losse of men; finally he resolued to turne aside, and seeke a passage ouer the gulfe of Corinth, to Sicyon, or some other part of Achaia; but this required much time, and great preparation, which was not easily made. In this perplexitie newes from Argos came by Sea, that greatly comforted Anti∣gonus, and no lesse troubled his Enemies. The were gotten into that Citie; and the Garrison which Cleomenes had left , it was not driuen out of the Citadell, yet was hardly distressed, and stood in neede of present helpe. Argos had alwaies bin enemie to and well affected to the Kings of Macedon. When Cleomenes tooke it, he forbare to chase out those whom he most suspected; partly, at the entreatie of friends; and partly, for that they all made shew to be glad of his prosperitie. They were glad indeede of his victories, both in Argos and elsewhere, as many as hoped that he would cause all debtors to be discharged from their creditours, as he had lately done in Sparta. But that which Cleomenes had done in Sparta, was agreeable to the Spartan institution: in other places, where it would haue beene tyrannicall, he did it not. Thereupon, such as were disappointed of their vniust hopes, beganne to turne good Common-wealths-men; and called him Ty∣rant for his doings at home, because hee would not doe the like abroad. So they tooke their time; inuited the ; assailed his Garrison; cut in peeces the Rescue that he sent; and compelled him at length, to forsake the defence of Corinth, and looke vnto the enemies that were behind his backe. For when he vnderstood, by continuall messages, that his men which held the Citadell at Argos, were almost lost: hee beganne to feare, lest his labour in guarding the entry should grow friuo∣lous; the Achaeans in the meane while spoiling all that lay within. Therefore hee forsooke his custodie of the Isthmus, and made all haste towards Argos: which if he could saue, he meant to trust fortune with the rest. And so farre he preuailed at his comming to Argos; that both Argiues and Achaeans were glad to house themselues, leauing him Master of the streets: when the horse men of Antigonus were disco∣uered a-farre off, hasting to relieue the Citizens; and Antigonus himselfe (to whom Corinth was yeelded, as soone as the Spartan had turned his backe) following apace with the bodie of his Armie. Cleomenes therefore had no more to doe, than to make a safe retrait. This he did; and got him home into Laconia: loosing in short space all, or most, of that which he had beene long in getting. Antigonus hauing shewed himselfe at Argos, and commended the Citizens, went into Arcadia; where he wanne such Castles as were held for Cleomenes, and restored them to the old Possessors. This done, he tooke his way to Aegium, where was held a Parliament by the Achaeans: to whom he declared the cause of his comming, and spake braue wordes, that filled them with hope. The Achaeans were not behinde with him; but made him Captaine Generall ouer them and their Confederates; and entred into couenant with him, That they should not deale with any Prince or State, either by writing or Embassadour, without his consent. All this while, & somwhat longer, Aratus was the only man, that seemed to rule the Kings heart: carring him to Sicyon, his owne Towne (for Winter was come on) where he not only feasted him as a great Prince, but suffered more than humanehonours, as sacrifices and the like, to be done vnto him. This example of Aratus and his Si∣cyonians, was followed by the rest of Achaia: which had made (forsooth) a very wise bargaine, if in stead of Cleomenes that would haue beene a King, it had obtained the protection of a God. But this God was poore; and wanting wherewith to pay his Macedonians, imposed the burthen vpon the Achaeans. This was hardly taken: yet worse must be endured in hope of better. Neither was Aratus himselfe ouer-care∣fully respected; when the statues of those Tyrants, which he had throwne downe in Argos, were againe erected by Antigonus; or when the statues, which he had e∣rected, of those that had taken Acrocorinthus with him, were all throwne downe by the same King, and one only left vnto himselfe at his earnest entreatie. It might therefore appeare, that this God was also spightfull. Neuerthelesse in taking re∣uenge vpon those that offended him, Aratus did satisfie his owne passion by the aide of these Macedonians. For with extreme torments he did put Aristomachus to death, who had beene once Tyrant of Argos; afterwards Generall of the Achaeans; and from them reuolting vnto Cleomenes, did fall at length into their hands. In like sort handled hee (though not as yet) the for their ingratitude and crueltie shewed to the Achaeans. For he slue all the principall Citizens, and sold the rest, men, women, and children, all for bond-slaues: diuiding the spoile; two parts to the Macedonians, and the third to the Achaeans. The Towne it selfe was giuen by Anti∣gonus to the Argiues: who peopled it with a of their owne; and Aratus ha∣uing charge of this businesse, caused it to be new-named . Surely of this crueltie there can be no better excuse; than euen the flatterie, which Aratus was driuen to vse to Antigonus: forasmuch as it was a token of seruilitie, whereinto they had vrged and brought him; whom he, as in reuenge thereof, did thus requite. But leauing to speake of this change, which the comming in of the Macedonian wrought, in the Ciuill state of the Achaeans; Let vs returne into his warre against the Lacedaemonian. The next Summer Antigonus wanne Tegea, Mantinaea, , Heraea, and Tel∣phussa: Mantinaea he dispeopled, as was said before; in Orchomenus he placed a Gar∣rison of his Macedonians; the rest he restored to the Achaeans: with whom he win∣tred at Aegium, where they held a Parliament. Once only Cleomenes had met him this yeare; and that was on the borders of Laconia, where he lay ready to defend his owne Territorie. The reason why he stirred no further, nor followed Antigonus to Mantinaea, and to those other Townes that hee wanne, was this: He had few Soul∣diers, and not monie enough to wage more. Ptolemy the Aegyptian promised much, but would performe nothing, vnlesse he might haue Cleomenes his own Mother, and his children in pledge. These were sent into Aegypt; yet the aide came not. For Ptolemie was slow; as dealing in the businesse of Greece, rather for his mindes sake, than vpon any apprehension of necessitie. Cleomenes therefore prouided for him∣selfe, as well as his owne abilitie would serue. He manumised all the Heilotes, which were the Lacedaemonian slaues: taking monie for their libertie, and arming two thou∣sand of them, after the Macedonian fashion. thus increased his forces, hee came on the sudden to Megalopolis; that lay secure, as hauing defended it selfe in more dangerous times, and hauing now Antigonus neere at hand in Aegium. The Towne he : but after he was entred, all that were fit to beare armes, rose ha∣stily against him; & though they could not driue him out, yet saued the multitude, to whom they gaue a Port free for their escape. He sent after the Citizens, offering their Towne and goods to them againe, if they would bee of his partie. But they brauely refused his offer: wherefore he sacked and ruined it, carrying with him to Sparta a great bootie that he found therein. These newes astonished the Achaeans at Aegium: who thereupon brake vp their Parliament. Antigonus sent hastily for his Macedonians, out of their wintering places: but they were so long in comming, that Cleomenes was safely gone home. Therfore he returned them back to their lodgings, and went himselfe to Argos, there to passe the rest of this vnlucky winter, somewhat further from the eyes of the greeued Achaeans. When he had laine awhile at Argos, Cleomenes was at the gates; with no great number of men, yet with more than An∣tigonus had then about him. The Argiues perceiuing that their Countrie would be spoiled, if Antigonus did not issue into the field; were very earnest with him to goe forth and fight. But hee was wiser then to be moued with their clamours; and suf∣fered them to see their villages burnt; to him resigne his Office of Protector vn∣to some that were more valiant; and to satisfie their passions with foolish wordes; rather than he would be ouer-come in fight, and thereby lose more honour than could easily be repaired. By this Cleomenes had his desire, in weakning the reputati∣on of his enemie: though he thereby added-neither followers, nor other strength, vnto Lacedaemon. Afterwards, when the season was more fit for warre, Antigonus gathered toge∣ther all his troups; meaning to these brauado's of his enemie, with the conquest of Sparta. Cleomenes on the other side, laboured to keepe the warre from his owne gates; and therefore entred vpon the Countrie of Argos, where he made such hauocke, as drew Antigonus thither, from his intended inuasion of Laconia. Many great affronts the Macedonian was faine to endure, in coasting the Spartan King; that ranging ouer the Countrie of the Argiues, Phliasians, and Orchomenians, draue a Garrison of his out of Oligyrtis; and did sacrifice, as it were, before his face, in the suburbs of Argos, without the Temple of Iuno, that was shut vp; sending vn∣to him in scorne, to borrow the keyes. These were light things; yet serued to dis∣hearten the Achaean side, and to fill the enemy with courage, which was no matter of light importance. Therefore hee concluded to lay apart all other regard of things abroad, and to put all to hazzard; by setting vp his rest, without more de∣lay, vpon Sparta it selfe. He had in his Armie eight and twentie thousand foot, and twelue hundred horse, collected out of sundrie Nations, as Macedonians, Illyrians, , Epirots, Boeotians, Acarnanians, and others; together with the Achaeans, and their friends of Peloponnesus. Cleomenes had of all sorts, twentie thousand, with which he lay at Selasia: fortifying slightly the other passages into Laconia, through which the Macedonians were not likely to seeke entrance. Antigonus comming to Se∣lasia, found his enemie so strongly incamped, vpon and between the hils of Eua and Olympus, that he was constrained to spend much time there, before hee could ad∣uance any one foot: neither lay it in his power to come hastily to blowes, which he greatly desired, without the hazzard of his whole armie, in assayling their wel-de∣fenced Campe. But at length (as it happens, when men are wearie both of their hopes and feares) both Kings being resolued to make an end one way or other; An∣tigonus attempted with his Illyrians, to force that part which lay on the hill Eua, but his Illyrians were so ill seconded by the Achaean foot, that the Spartan horse, & light∣armed foot, incamped in the streight vallie between those hils, issuing forth, fell vp∣on their skirts; and not onely disordered them, but were like to haue endangered al the rest. If Cleomenes himselfe had stood in that part of the battaile, he would haue made great vse of such a faire beginning. But Euclidas, his brother, a more valiant than skilfull Souldier, commanded in that wing: who neither followed this ad∣uantage, nor tooke such benefit as the ground , whereon he lay. Philopoe∣men the Arcadian of Megalopolis, who afterwards proued a famous Captaine, serued then on horse, as a priuate yong man, among the Achaeans. He seeing that all was like to goe to rout, if their Illyrians were driuen to fall backe vpon the Army follow∣ing them; perswaded the Captaines of the Achaean horse, to break vpon the Spartan Mercinaries. But they would not: partly despising his youth and want of charge; partly, for that Antigonus had giuen order, that they should keepe their places, vntill they receiued a signe from him, which was not as yet. Philopoemen perceiuing them to be more orderly, than well aduised; entreated some of his owne Countri∣men to follow him; gaue a charge vpon the Spartans; and forced them not onely to leaue the Illyrians, but seeke how to saue themselues. Being so farre aduanced, he found the place which the Illyrians had attempted, like enough to bee wonne, through the vnskilfulnesse of him that held it. Wherefore hee alighted, and per∣swaded the men at armes his Companions to doe the like: the folly of Euclidas be∣ing manifest, who kept the top of the Hill, and stirred not to hinder those that as∣cended, but waited for them in a Plaine, where they might fight vpon euen termes. So he recouered the Hill top; where though he was sore hurt, yet yee made good the place that he had gotten, vntill the whole Armie came vp to him; by which the Lacedaemonians were beaten from it, with great slaughter of them in their descent. This ouerthrow, and death of Euclidas, made Cleomenes lose the day: who figh∣ting brauely on the other side, vpon Olympus, against Antigonus himselfe, was like to haue beene surrounded and lost, if he had not withdrawne himselfe with an ex∣traordinarie speede. In this battaile ended the glorie of Lacedaemon, which, as a light readie to go out, had with a great, but not long blaze, shined more brightly of late, then in many ages past. Cleomenes fled vnto Sparta: where he had no desire to stay, finding onely two hundred left, of sixe thousand Spartans that he had led vnto this battaile, and most of his hired Souldiers dead, or gone away. So hee perswaded his people to yeelde themselues vnto Antigonus; and promising to doe all that should at any time lie in his owne power, for their good, he hasted away to the Sea-side (where he had ship∣ping long before prouided, against all that might happen) and imbarqued himselfe for Aegypt. Hee was louingly entertained by Ptolemie Euergetes; who vndertooke to restore him to his Kingdome; and (perhaps) meant no lesse, as being much de∣lighted with his gallant behauiour and qualities. In the meane season hee had a pension allowed him, of foure and twentie talents, yeerely. But this Ptolemie died; and his sonne Ptolemie succeeded him: a vicious yong Prince, wholly gouerned by lewd Women, and base Men, vnmindefull of all vertue, and hating any in whom it was found. When therefore Cleomenes was desirous to re∣turne into Greece, whither the troubles in Peloponnesus did seeme to inuite him; Ptolemie, and his Minions, would neither giue him aide; nor yet dared to dismisse him (as he desired) to trie his owne friends in Greece, because he was too well ac∣quainted with the weakenesse of Aegypt: nor well knew how to him a∣gainst his will. At length they deuised matter against him, and made him priso∣ner. The last act of him was; that with thirtie of his Countrimen, he vndertooke a desperate enterprize: breaking out of the prison, and prouoking the Alexandrians to rebell and seeke their libertie. In which attempt hee slue some enemies of his that he met; and hauing walked vp and downe the streets, without resistance (no man offering to take his part, or, which is very strange, to fight against him on the Kings behalfe) he, and his Companions, agreed together to bee ministers of their owne death. Vpon his dead bodie Ptolemie was bold to shew his indignation: and slue his Mother and Children, that had beene sent thither as Hostages, together with the wiues of his Adherents, as many as were there, attending vpon the old Queene. Such was the end of Cleomones; a generous Prince, but Sonne of Leonidas, who had caused Agis, with his Mother and Grand-mother, to come to such a bloudie ende, as now befell his owne Wife, Sonne, and Grand∣children. After the Victorie at Sellasia, Antigonus without resistance entred Sparta: whereinto neuer the force of any Enemie, before him, could make way, Hee kindely entreated the Citizens, and left them to their owne Lawes and Gouern∣ment: tarrying there no longer, than two or three dayes; after which he hastened out of Peloponnesus, and neuer returned. The cause of his speedy departure was, an aduertisement that he receiued out of Macedon; how the Illyrians ouer-ranne, and destroied the Countrie. Had these newes come a little sooner; or had Cleome∣nes either deferred the fight, a few dayes longer, or at least-wise tarried a few dayes after the fight, in Sparta: the Kingdome of Lacedaemon would haue stood, and perhaps haue extended it selfe ouer all Greece. But God had otherwise deter∣mined. Antigonus fought a great battaile with the Illyrians, and ouer-came them. Yet therein he caught his bane: not by any wound, but by ouer-strayning his voice; wherewith he brake a veine that bled inwardly, and in short space finished his life, who was troubled before with a consumption of the lungs. His Kingdome descen∣ded vnto Philip, the sonne of Demetrius, being then a Boy: as also about the same time it was, that Antiochus, surnamed (I know not why) the Great; and Ptolemie Philopater; beganne to raigne in Asia, and Aegypt; Boyes all. Of these, Ptolemie, though old enough to loue Harlots, when he first was King, yet continued a Boy, all the seuenteene yeeres of his raigne. The vnripe age of Philip and Antiochus, bred such intestine inconuenience to their Kingdomes, as is vsual in the minoritie of Princes: but their elder yeares brought them acquainted with the Romans; vpon which occasion, when it comes, we shall more seasonably speake of them, and of their Kingdomes, more at large. §. VII. How the Illyrians infested the coast of Grecce; and how they were sub∣dued by the Romans. WHilest things thus passed in Greece; and whilest the Carthaginians were in their conquest of Spaine: thc Romans had found themselues worke among the Sardinians and Corsicans, that were easily subdued at first, and casily vanquished againc, when they rebelled. They made also warre with the Illyrians, wherein they got much honour with little paine. With the Gaules they had much adoe, that lasted not long; being rather, Liu. l. 21. as Liuie saith, a then a warrc. So that by al these light exercises, their valour was hardly kept from rust. How they got the Ilands in the Mediterran Sea, it hath bene shewed before: of their dealings with the Illyrians and Gaules, it is not meet to be vttcrly silent. The inhabited the Country now called Slauonia: a troublesome Nation, impatient of rest, and continually making warre for gaine, without either regard of friend or foe. They were inuited by Dcmetrius King of Macedon, to helpe the My∣dionians, his friends, that were bcsicged by thc Aetolians; for that they refused to be of their society. Before the Illyrian succours came, the Mydionians were so far spent, that the Aetolians contended about the booty: the old Praetor, or chiefe Magistrate of their Nation, who was going out of his Office, clayming to haue the honour of the victory, and the diuision of the spoile to be referred vnto him; for that he had in a manner brought the to an end, and wonne the Towne: others, that were in hope to he chosen into the Office, contradicting this, and desiring that old orders might be kept. It was a pretic strife, and somewhat like to that of the in later ages, who thought vpon diuiding the prey, bcfore they had wonne the victories, which anon they lost, at Poitiers and at Agincourt. The Aetolians wisely compoun∣ded the difference, ordering it thus; That thc old, and the new Praetor, should be ioyntly intitled in the victoric, and hauc equall authoritie in distribution of the get∣tings. But the Illyrians finished the strife much more clegantly, and after another fa∣shion. They arriucd, and landed, ere any was aware of them; they fell vpon the Aetolians; & though good resistance was made, yet got the victoric, partly by forcc of their owne multitudc, partly by helpe of the Mydionians, that were not idle in their owne businesse, but stoutly sallied out of the Townc. Many of the Aetolians were slaine, more were taken their Campe and all their baggage was lost: the Illy∣rians tooke the spoile, and wcnt their way; the Mydionians crected a Trophie, in∣scribing the names, both of their old and new Magistrate (for they also chosc new Officers at the same time) as the Aetolians had directed them by example. The successe of this voyage, highly pleased Agron King of the Illyrians: not only in regard of the monie, wherewith Demetrius had hired his assistance; or of the boo∣tie that was gotten; but for that hauing vanquished the stoutest of the Greeks, hee found it not vneasie, to enrich himselfe by setting vpon the lesse warlike. For ioy of this he feasted, and dranke so immoderately, that he fell into a Pleurisie, which in few ended his life. His Kingdomc, together with his great hopes, he left vnto , his wife. Teuta gauc her people free libertie, to rob all Natson at Sea, making no diffe∣rence betweene friend and foc; as if shee had beene sole Mistresse of the salt Wa∣ters. Shee armed a , and sent it into : willing hee Captaines, to make Warre where they found aduantage, without any further respect. These fell with the westerne coast of Peloponnesus; where they inuaded the Eleans, and Messenians. Afterwards they returned along by Epirus, & stayed at the Citie of Phoenice, to take in victuailes and other necessaries. There lay in Phoenice eight hundred Gaules; that hauing beene Mercinaries of the Carthaginians, went about to , first Agrigen∣tum, then Eryx, to the Romans; but fayling to do either, they neuerthelesse , and wcre for their misdecdes disarmed, and sent to Sea by the Romans, yet by these Epirots, and trusted to lie in Garrison within their . The Gaules were soone growne acquainted with thc Illyrians, to whom they ; which deserued none other, in trusting them. Al Epirus was presently in armes, and hastned to driue out these vnwelcome guests. But whilest the Epirots lay before the Towne, there came newes into their Campe, of another Illyrian , that was marching thitherward by Land, vnder one Scerdilaidas; whom Queene Teuta had sent to help his fellowes. Vpon this aduertisement, a part of them is sent away to∣wards Antigonia, to make good that Towne, and the streights , by which these new commers must enter into their Countrie; part of at Phoenice, to continue the siege. Neither the one, nor the other, sped businesse. For found meanes to joyne with his fellowes; and they that were besieged within Phoenice, sallied out of the towne, and gaue such an ouerthrow to the Epirots, as made them despaire of sauing Countrie, without great and helpe from abroad. Wherefore Embassadours were sent to the and Aetolians: their helpe, with very pittifull termes of . They their suit; neither was it long, before an Armie, sent by these two Nations, was readie in Epirus, to present battaile vnto . But Scerdilaidas was called home, by letters from Teuta the Queene, that signified a rebellion of some Illyrians against her: so that he had no minde to put his forces to hazzard, but offered com∣position; which was accepted. The agreement was, That the Epirots might ran∣some their Townc, and all their people that were prisoners; and that the Illyrians should quietly depart, with all their bootie and slaues. Hauing made this profitable and honourable bargaine; the Illyrians into their own Countrie by Land, sending their bootie away by Sea. At their comming , they found no such great trouble, as that which they brought, or had occasioned in this voyage. For in fulfilling the commandement of their Queene, they had taken many Italian Marchants, whilest they lay at Phoenice; and made them good prize. Hereof the complaints, made vnto the Roman Senate, were so frequcnt, that Embassadours were sent to require of Teuta, that she should abstaine from doing such iniuries. These Embassadours found her vcry iolly; both for the riches which her flect had brought in; and for that shee had, in short space, tamed her Rebels, and brought al to good order, saue only the towne of , which her forces held streightly besieged. Swelling with this prosperitie, shee could hard∣ly affoord a good looke to the vnmannerly Romans; that found fault with her do∣ings; and calling them by a true name, Pyracie, required amends. Yet when their speech was ended, she vouchsafed to tell them, That iniurie in publike shee would doe none: as for priuate matters, no account was to be made of them; neither was it the manner of Kings to forbid their Subjects to commoditie, how they best could, by Sea. But (said the yonger of the two Embassadours) we Romans haue a manner, and a very laudable one, to take reuenge in publike, of those priuate wrongs that are borne out by publike authoritic; therfore we shall teach you, God willing, to reforme your Kingly manners, and learne better of vs. These words the Queene tooke so impatiently, that no reuenge could satisfie her, but the death of him that had spoken them. Wherefore, without all regard of the common Law of Nations, shee caused him to be slaine: as if that had beene the way, to set her heart at rest; which was indeede the meane, to disquiet and afflict it euer after. The Romans, prouoked by this outrage, prepare two great Armies; the one by Sea, consisting of two hundred saile, commanded by C. ; the other by Land, led by A. Posthumus. They trouble not themselues any more, with requiring sa∣tisfaction; for this iniurie is of such nature, as must be requited with mortall warre. It is indeede contrarie to all humane Law, to vse violence towards Embassadours: the reason and ground whereof, seemes to this; that since without mediation, there would neuer be an end of warre and destruction, therforc it was equally recci∣ued by all Nations, as a lesson taught by Nature, that Embassadors should passe freely, and in safetie, betweene enemies. Neuerthelesse, as I take it, this generall Law is not without limitation. For if any King, or State, lay hold vpon Embassa∣dours sent by their enemies, not vnto themselues, but vnto some third, whom they should draw into the quarrell; then it is as lawfull, to vse violence to those Embas∣sadours (thus emploied, to make the warre more terrible) as it is to kill the men of warre, and subiects, of an enemie. And so might the Athenians hauc answered it, when they slew the Embassadours, that were sent to Xerxes, to draw him into a warre vpon the Athenians. Neither are those Embassadours, which pra∣ctise against the person of that Prince, in whose Countries they reside, warranted by any Law whatsoeuer. For whereas the true Office of an Embassadour residing, is the maintenance of amitie; if it be not lawfull for one Prince, to practise against the life of another, much lesse may an Embassadour doe it without incurring justly the same danger of punishment, with other Traitors; in which case, his place giues him no priuiledge at all. But we will leaue this dispute to the Ciuilians; and goe on with the reuenge; taken by the Romans, for the slaughter of their Embassadour Corun∣canus. The Illyrian Queene was secure of the Romans, as if they would not dare to against her. She was indeede in an errour; that hath vndone many of all sorts grea∣ter and lesse than she, both before and since: Hauing more regard vnto fame, than vn∣to the substance of things. The Greekes were at that time more famous than the Ro∣mans; the Aetolians and Epirots had the name of the most warlike people in Greece; these had shee easily vanquished; and therefore thought, that with the Romans she should be litle troubled. Had she considered, that her whole Armie, which wrought such wonders in Greece, was not much greater, than of ten thousand men; and that neuerthelesse, it preuailed as much, by oddes of number, as by valour, or skill in armes; shee would haue continued to vse her aduantage, against those that were of more fame than strength, with such good caution, that she should not haue needed to oppose her late-gotten reputation, against those that were more mightie than her selfe. But she was a woman, and did what she listed. Shee sent foorth a greater fleet than before, vnder Demetrius of Pharos; with the like ample commission to take all that could bee gotten. This fleet diuided it selfe; and one part of it fell with , sometime cal∣led Epidamus, and now Du∣razzo, seated vpon the Adri∣atick Sea, be∣tweene the Ilands of Pha∣ros and Corcyra. Dyrrachium; the other, with Corcyra. Dyrrachium was almost surprized by the Illyrians; yet was it by the stout Citizens. In Corcyra, an Iland of the Adriatick Sea, not farre from Durazzo: cal∣led now Corfu, and in the pos∣session of the . the Illyrians landed; wasted the Isle; and besieged the Towne. Hereupon the Aetolians and Achaeans were called in to helpe: who came, and were beaten in a fight at Sea; losing, besides o∣thers of lesse note, Marcus Carynensis, the first Praetor of Achaia, whom Aratus suc∣ceeded. The Towne of Corcyra, dismaied with is ouerthrow, opened the gates vnto Demetrius Pharius; who tooke possession of it, with an Illyrian Garrison: sen∣ding the rest of his forces to besiege Dyrrachium. In the meane season, Teuta was with her Captaine Demetrius: I know not why; but so, as he resolued to trie a∣ny other course, rather than to trust her. The Romans were euen readie to put to Sea, though vncertaine which way to take, when aduertisement was brought to C. Fuluius the Consull, of Demetrius his feare and discontent. Likely it was, that such an occasion might greatly helpe to ad∣uance the businesse in hand. Wherefore the Consull sailed thither; where hee found the Towne of Corcyra so well prepared to his hand by Demetrius, that it not only receiued him willingly, but deliuered into his power the Illyrian Garrison, and submitted it selfe vnto the Roman protection. After this good beginning, the Consull sailed alongst the coast, to , a Citie Dyrrachium, or Durazzo, vpon the Sea-coast. Pinetus calls it Sissopolis. Apollonia; ac∣companied with Demetrius, whom he vsed thence forth as his counsailer and guide. To came also Posthumus, the other Consull, with the Land-Armie, num∣bred at twentie thousand foot, and two thousand horse. Thence they hasten to∣wards Dyrrachium, which the Illyrians had besieged; but vpon newes of the Roman Armie, they disperse themselues. From thence the Romans enter Illyria, and take Parthenia; beat the by Sea, take twentie of their ships; and enforce the Queene Teuta to forsake the coast, and to couer her selfe in Rison, farre within the Land. In the end, part of the Romans haste them homeward, and leaue the best places of Illyria in the hands of Demetrius; another part slaies behinde, and prose∣cutes the warre, in such sort, that Teuta was forced to begge peace: which shee ob∣tained vpon miserable conditions; to wit, That shee should quit the better part of Illyria, & pay tribute for the rest; and from thenceforth, neuer send any of her ships of warre, towards the coasts of Greece, beyond the Iland of Lissa: cxcept it were some one or two vessels, vnarmed, and by way of Trade. After this Illyrian warre, the Romans sent Embassadours into diuers parts of Greece, signifying their loue to the Countrie, and how, for good will thereunto, they had made warre with good successe vpon Teuta, and her people. They hoped, be∣like, that some distressed Cities would take this occasion, to desire their patronage: which if it hapned, they were wise enough to play their owne games. But no such matter fell out. The Embassadours were only rewarded with thankes; and a de∣cree made at Corinth, That the Romans thenceforth might be partakers of the Isth∣mian pastimes. This was an idle courtesie, but well meant by the vaine Greekes, and therefore well taken by the Romans: who by this Illyrian Expedition got nothing in Greece, saue a little acquaintance, that shall be more hereafter. §. VIII. Of the warre betweene the Romans and Gaules, somewhat before the comming of HANNIBAL into Italie. THe Gaules that dwelt in Lumbardie, were the next, against whom the Romans tooke Armes. These were a populous Nation, and often mo∣lested Rome; sometimes with their owne forces, and sometimes with the assistance of those that inhabited France. Once their fortune was good; when they tooke Rome, and burnt it: though the issue of that warre proued not answerable to the beginning, if we may giue credit vnto Roman Historians. In following times, their successe was variable, and commonly bad. Ma∣ny ouerthrowes they receiued; and if they got any victorie, it yeelded them no pro∣fit, but was soone extorted out of their hands. They were indeede more fierce, than well aduised: lightly stirred vp to warre, and lightly giuing ouer. At the first brunt, they were said to be more than men; but when that was past, lesse than wo∣men. The Romans were acquainted with their temper, by long experience; and knew how to handle them: yet gaue alwaies carefull heede to their approch, were only bruited. For the danger of them was sudden, and vncertaine; by reason of their neighbourhood, and want of intelligence among them. Few of their attempts vpon Rome, were called warres, but tumultus Gallici; tumults of the Gaules; and right∣ly. For they gaue many alarms to Italie, and vsed to rise with great Armies: but after a few dayes march, and sometimes before their setting forth, any small occa∣sion serued to disperse them. Hauing receiued an ouerthrow; they would rest ten, or twelue yeeres, sometimes twentie or thirtie: till they were stirred vp againe, by yonger heads, vnacquainted with the danger. Whilest they rested; the state of Rome, that against these made only defensiue warre, had leisure to grow, by setting vpon others. Herein God prouided well for that Monarchie, which hee intended to raise: that the Gaules neuer fell vpon Italie, with a mighty power, in the time of any other great and dangerous warre. Had they attempted to conquer it, whilest Pyrrhus was trauailing in the same enterprise; or in either of the two former Punick warres: it may be doubted what would haue become of this imperious Citie. But it seemes that the Gaules had no better intelligence in the affaires of Italie, than stran∣gers had in Gaule. At least, they knew not how to vse their times: and were there∣fore like to smart, whensoeuer the enemies, whom they had much prouoked, and little hurt, should finde leisure to visit them at their owne home: which was now after the first Punick Warre. Once before this, the Romans had beene bold, to set vpon the Gaules in their owne Countrie: and that was three yeeres before the com∣ming of Pyrrhus into Italie. At that time the Senones, a Tribe of the Gaules, inuading Hetruria, and besieging Arretium, had wonne a great battaile and slaine L. Caecilius with the most of his Armie. Mannius Curius the new Consull, sent Embassadours to them, to treat about ransome of prisoners. But these Embassadours they slue. Therefore when fortune turned to the better, the Romans followed it so well, that they expelled these Senones out of their Countrie, and sent a Colonie of their owne to inhabit it. This caused the There were diuers nations of the ; as in , , Germanie, in in France, and in Aquitane; but these were of the French race, & dwelt at this time about the mouth of the Riuer of Po. Boij, another people of Gaule, to feare the like mea∣sure: who thereupon tooke armes, and drew the Hetrurians to their side. But the Ro∣mans ouerthrew them in two great battailes; and thereby made them sue for peace, which lasted vntill this cnd of the Illyrian warre. It vexed the Gaules, to see a Roman Colonie planted in their Countrie; who had beene accustomed to enlarge their bounds, by driuing out their Neighbours per∣force. Wherefore they laboured with the Transalpines (so the Romans called those in France, as lying from them beyond the Alpes, though to vs they are neerer; like as they called Cisalpines, or by- the Alpes, those who dwelt betweene them and the Mountaines) to draw them to their party: reasonably presuming, that as their disiunction had caused their losse, so their vnion might recompence it, with large a∣mends. But the businesse was so foolishly carried, that the Cisalpines and Transal∣pines, fell together by the cares, putting the Romans only to a tumult, without fur∣ther trouble of warre. Soone after, they were vrged by a greater indignitie, to goe more substantially to worke. For C. , a popular man in Rome, proposed a Decree which was ratified by the people; That, besides one Colonie already plan∣ted in the territorie of the Senones, as many more should be caried thither, as would serue to people the whole Countrie betweene Ancona and Ariminum: extermi∣nating vtterly those Gaules. an offer, were it made in England, concerning ei∣ther Virginia, or it selfe, would not ouer-joy the Multitude. But the Commo∣naltie of Rome tooke this in so good part, notwithstanding all danger joyned with the benefit, that Flaminius had euer after their good will. This dreadfull President extremely displeased the Boij: who being Neighbours to Ariminum, feared the like displantation. And because all the rest of the Gaules had reason to resolue, that themselues also should bee rooted out by degrees; the great Nation of the Insubrians, which inhabited the Duchie of Milan, joyned with the Boij, & vpon a common purse entertained the Gessates, Nations about Rhoda∣nus, wageable as the Switzers in these times. The Gessates hauing receiued a great Imprest, come to the field vnder the conduct of their Kings, Concolitanus & Aneroe∣stus: who with the Boij and Insubrians, compound an Armie of fiftie thousand foot, and twentie thousand horse, and those of the best men, and best appointed, that e∣uer inuaded the Roman Territoric; to whom, the Seno-galli, that had beene beaten out of their possessions, gaue a great increase of strength. On the contrarie side, the Venetians, and the Cenomanni, are the people about Bergamo, on the North∣side of the Riuer Po in . There were also of these in France, and inhabited the Countic of . Cenomanni, adhered to the Romans: as better beleeuing in their prosperitie and rising fortune. For feare of whose incursions therefore, the Gaules were forced to leaue a good part of their Armic, on the frontier of Milan: With the rest of their forces they entred into Tuscane. The Romans hearing of this danger, send Aemilius to Rimine, to stop their passage; and in the place of C. Atilius their o∣ther Consull, who then was in Sardinia, they imploy one of their Praetors, for the defence of Tuscane. Being at this time greatly troubled, with the consideration of this powerfull Ar∣mie, which the Gaules had assembled, they caused a view to bee taken, as well of all their owne forces, as of those of their Allies: who were no lesse willing than them∣selues, to oppose the incursions of the barbarous people; fearing, as they had cause, that their owne destruction could not bee preuented otherwise, than by the good fortune of Rome. The numbers, found in this Muster, deserue to be recorded: be∣cause they set out the power of the Romans in those dayes. With the Consulls they sent forth to the warre foure Legions of their owne: euery Legion consisting of fiue thousand two hundred foot, and three hundred horse; and of their Allies, thirtie thousand foot, and two thousand horse. There were also appointed for Supplies (if any misaduenture came to these) of the Sabines and Hetrurians fiftie thousand foot, & foure thousand horse; which Armie was to be lodged in the border of He∣truria. Of the Vmbri and Sarsinates, which inhabited the Apenines, there were twen∣tie thousand; and of the Venetians and Cenomans, other twentie thousand: which latter Armies were directed, to inuade the Boij, that forcing them to defend their owne Territories, the generall Armie of the Gaules should be thereby greatly dimi∣nished. There were besides these, to bee ready against all vncertaine chances of warre, thirtie thousand foot, and fifteene hundred horse, in Rome it selfe, of their owne people; and of their Allies, thirtic thousand foot, and two thousand horse. Ouer and aboue these great troupes; in the Roll of the Latines, that was sent vnto the Senate there were numbred fourescore thousand foot, and fiue thousand horse; in that of the Samnites, seuentie thousand foot, and of horse seuen thousand, in that of the and Messapyges seeme to be one Nation; who are also called , , , and . The Countrie is now , containing the Northermost head-land of Calabria. , and Messapyges, fiftie thousand foot, and sixteene thousand horse; the Lucans sent a list of thirtic thousand foot, and three thousand horse; the A people of the kingdome of . Marsi, cals them a people of Italie. Marrucini, A people of Campania, cal∣led to this day , saith Leander. Ferentani, and the Vestini, of twentie thousand foot, and foure thousand horse. The Romans had also two Legions in Sicil, and about Tarentum, containing eight thousand foure hundred foot, and foure hundred horse. So as of the Romans and Campans jointly, reckoning men armed, and fit to beare armes, there were registred two hundred and fiftie thousand foot; and of horse, three and twen∣tie thousand: of which, reckoning the Romans apart, there were an hundred and fif∣tie thousand foot and about sixe thousand horse. Casting vp the whole forces of all the Prouinces in Italie, both of the Romans and their Confederates, it amounted to seuen hundred thousand foot, and seuentie thousand horse. But the number is somewhat misse-cast by Polybius; not with a purpose to enrich himselfe by the dead paies: for where he reckons nine hundred horse too many, he falls short nine thou∣sand two hundred of the foot. How great soeuer this Muster was, it seemes to haue beene like vnto that, which Lodowick Sforza made, when Lewes the twelfth inuaded Milan: at what time, the bet∣ter to encourage himselfe, and his subjects, hee tooke a Roll of all persons able to beare armes, within the Duchie, though indeed he were neuer able to bring a tenth part of them into the field. Certaine it is, that the battailes of Trebia, , and Cannae, did not consume any such proportion, as was answerable to this large accompt. Yet were the Romans faine to arme their slaues, euen for want of other Souldiers, after their ouerthrow at Cannae. Wherefore the is not great, that the Carthaginians and others were little terrified, with report of such a multitude. For all heads are not fit for helmets: though the Roman Citizens were, in generall, as good fighting men, as elsewhere might be found. Notwithstanding all these counter-preparations, the Gaules keepe on their way: and entring into Tuscane, destroy, and put to fire and sword, all that lay before them. From thence they march directly towards Rome; hoping to finde the Romans, ra∣ther in deliberation, than in the field. But their intelligence sailes them. For the Roman Armie, sent into Tuscane, hauing taken some other way than they did, and finding that it had missed of them, came againe fast after them, to arrest them in their journie. Hereof when they heard the rumour, fearing to be charged on their backes, they turned head: and in the same euening discouered the Roman Armie, by whom they incamped. It was now a matter of apparant necessitie, that fight they must. Wherefore they helped themselues with a stratageme: that shewed no great finenesse of wit, but such, as well beseemed those that had none other occupation than warre; and stood them in good stead at the present. In the dead of the night, they cause their foot to march away, but not farre: leauing their horse in guard; to whom they giue order, to come off at the first light of day, with such a speede, as might rather argue a running away, than a retrait, as if they had not dared to abide battaile. The Romans, interpreting this their hastie departure, as the Gaules desired they should, follow them in disorder. The Gaules returne; charge them; and kill sixe thousand vpon the place; the rest take a of ground of aduantage, and de∣fend themselues, till L. Aemilius, being at Ariminum, comes to their succour. Vpon the comming of the Consull, the Gaules consult, whether they should giue the Ro∣mans battaile, or forbeare. In which dispute, Aneroestus, one of their Kings, per∣swades them, rather to returne into their owne Countries; where, after they had disposed of the great spoiles and riches which they had gotten, they should then re∣new the warre, being without carriage, pester, or other impediment. This aduice they all embrace; for seeing they that were Mercinaries, had obtained what they came for, to wit, the spoiles of their enemies; they thought it wisedome, to hazzard neither it, nor themselues, any further. This indeede had beene a good resolution, if they had taken it, before the enemie had beene in sight. But as well in the warres of these latter ages, as in former times, it hath euer beene found extreme dangerous, to make a retrait in the Head ofan e∣nemies Armie. For although they that retire, doe often turne head; yet in alwaies going on from the pursuing enemie, they finde within a few miles, either streight, hedge, ditch, or place of disaduantage, which they are inforced to passe in disorder. In such cases, the Souldier knowes it, as well as the Captaine, that he which forsakes the field, perceiues, and feares some aduantage of the Enemies. Feare, which is the betraier of those succours that Reason offereth, when it hath once possest the heart of man, it casteth thence both courage and vnderstanding. They that make the re∣trait, are alwaies in feare to be abandoned; they that leade the way, feare to be in∣gaged: and so the hindmost treads on his heeles that is foremost, and consequent∣ly, all disband, runne, and perish, if those that fauour the retrait, be not held to it by men of great courage. The miserable ouerthrow, that the French receiued in Na∣ples, in the yeere 1503. vpon a retrait made by the Marques of Sal, doth testifie no lesse. For although a great troupe of French horse, sustained the pursuing enemie a long time, and gaue the foot leisure to trot away; yet being retarded by often tur∣nings, the Spanish foot ouer-tooke, and defeated them vtterly. During the warres betweene the Imperialls, and the French; Boisi and Mont were lost at Brignolles, who in a brauerie would needes see the enemie, before they left the field. So was Strosi ouerthrowne, by the Marques of Marignan, because he could not be perswaded, to the night before the Marques his arriuall. Therefore did the French King Francis the first, wisely: when without respect of point of honour, he dislodged from before Landersey, by night; as many other, the most aduised Captaines, (not fin∣ding themselues in case to giue battaile) haue done. Ie ne trouue point (saith the Marshall MONLVC) au fait des armes chose si difficile, qu'vne retrait; I finde nothing in the arte of warre so difficult, as, to make a safe retrait. A sure Rule it is, that there is lesse dishonor to dislodge in the darke, than to be beaten in the light. And hereof M r . dela Noüe giues this judgement, of a daies retrait, made in France, presently be∣fore the battaile of Moncountour. For (saith he) staying vpon our reputation, in shew not to dislodge by night; we lost our reputation indeede, by dislodging by day: whereby we were forced to fight vpon our disaduantage, and to our ruine. And yet did that worthy Gentleman, Count Lodowick of Nassau, brother to the late famous Prince of Orange, make the retrait at Moncountour with so great resolution, as hee sa∣ued the one halfe of the Protestant Armie, then broken and disbanded, of which my selfe was an eye-witnesse; and was one of them that had cause to thanke him for it. Now the Gaule., embracing the safe aduice (as they take it) of one of their Kings; turne their backs to the enemie, & their faces homeward. Aemilius followes them, as neere as he can, without ingaging himselfe, attending his aduantage. In the meane while, C. Atilius the other Consull, with the Legions of Sardinia, lands at Pisa; so as the Gaules, inclosed betweene two Armies, are forced to fight. They therefore equally strengthen their Reare, and Front. To sustaine Aemilius, they appoint the Gessates, and the Milanois; in the Front, they range the , and the rest of the Gaules inhabiting vpon the Riuer of Po. The manner of the fight Polybius de∣scribeth at large: which was well fought of all hands. But in the end the Gaules fell; and so did Atilius the Consull: who died in the place, accompanied with the two Kings of the Gaules, Concolitanus and Aneroestus, with fortie thousand of their Vassalls. After this fatall ouerthrow, the Gaules lost courage; and, erc long, all that they held in Italie. For they were inuaded the yeere following this ouerthrow, by the new Consulls, Fuluius, and Manlius. The Romans knew well how to vse their vi∣ctorie: they gaue not ten, twentie, or thirtie yeeres time, to the Gaules, to repaire their forces, as the Gaules had done to them. These new Consulls beat the Boij; but by reason of the great raines that fell, and the great pestilence that raigned, they were compelled for that present to surccase. In the second yeere, Furius, and Flami∣nius, inuade the Milanois; and preuaile very farre, being strongly assisted by the Ce∣nomanni and the Venetians. Neuerthelesse these Consulls were reuoked out of their Prouince, by the Senate of Rome, and compelled to resigne their Office: because the Augures, or Soothsayers, had found, that some token or other of the Birds (in which, and all sorts of their diuination, the Romans were extremely superstitious) had not only foreshewed little good, when they were chosen, but had also nullified the ele∣ction. C. Flaminius, receiuing letters of this reuocation, from the Senate, and being otherwise aduertised of the contents, was not hastie to open them: but first gaue battaile vnto the enemies, vanquished them, and spoiled their Countric; then per∣vsed the letters; and returning home obtained a triumph, sore against the will of the Senate, and not altogether with good liking of the people, who yet bare him out, for that hee sided in faction with the Commonaltie, though a man of great Nobilitie. This was that Flaminius, who had propoūded the Decree, for diuiding the Coun∣trie of the Senones among the people of Rome. He was the first, or one of the first, that vnderstanding the Majestie of Rome to be indeed wholly in the people, and no otherwise in the Senate, than by way of Delegacie, or grand Commission; did not stand highly vpon his birth and degree, but courted the multitude, & taught them to know and vse their power, ouer himselfe, and his fellow-Senators, in reforming their disorders. For this, the Commons highly esteemed him, and the Senators as deeply hated him. But he had the surer side, and found imitatours, that rose by the same arte; which in processe oftime, grew the only or chiefe way to preferment. Flaminius and his Colleague, being deposed; M. Claudius Marcellus, and Cn. Cor∣nelius Scipio, were chosen Consulls, for the rest of that yeere. The Gaules about this time desired peace, and were like to haue obtained it: though the new Consulls were against it, as fearing to want worke. But when thirtie thousand of the Gessates, following their King Britomarus, were come ouer the Alpes, and joyned with the In∣subrians: all other discourse, than of present warre, was at an end. So the Consulls hasted into their Prouince, where they besieged Acerrae, a towne not farre from No∣uaro (so farre had the Romans pierced already) in the Duchie of Milan. To diuert them from this siege, Britomarus sate downe before Clastidium, a Towne in the same Tract, with great part of his forces: leauing the rest, with the Insubrians, to attend vpon the Consulls at Acerrae, and to looke to the defence of Milan. But this would not suffice, to make the Romans breake vp their siege. Marcellus, taking with him the greatest part of the horse, & hundred foot lightly armed; thought to deale well enough with those at Clastidium. Britomarus heard of the Consulls comming; and met him vpon the way: so suddenly, that the Romans had no leisure to rest them∣selues after their journie, but were compelled instantly to fight: Herein Britomarus had done well; if he had not forth with, in a rash brauerie, lost his game at a cast. He had aduantage enough in number, both of horse and foot: but he thought so well of his owne personall valour, that he rode out single before his Armie, prouoking a∣ny one to fight with him. Marcellus was no lesse daring, than the barbarous King: whether more wise in this action, I will not dispute; he was more fortunate, and that sufficed to commend him. He slue and disarmed Britomarus, in presence of both Armies: whereby his owne men tooke such courage, and his enemies were so dis∣maied, that without much trouble of fight, the Romans obtained a great victorie. This was the third and last time, that euer any Roman Generall slue the Generall of the enemies, with his owne hand. To this kinde of victorie, belonged a peculiar triumph; whereof only Romulus, Cossus, and this Marcellus, had the honour: yet I dare say, that the two Scipio's, and diuers other Roman Captaines, especially Caesar, were better men of warre than any of these three; though they neuer offered vp to IVPITER, Opima spolia; The Armour of a Generall slaine by themselues, when they were , nor perhaps affected so to doe. After this victorie, Acerrae was yeelded to the Romans; and Milan soone after: with all that belonged to the Cisalpines, or Gaules, that dwelt in . Thus was that valiant and mighty Nation, that had for so many yeeres vexed the State of Rome, and in former times taken the it selfe, brought to nothing in a short time, their pleasant and fertile Territorie possest by the Romans; and the remain∣der of their Nation, inhabiting, Italie, so many as would not subject their neckes to the Roman yoke, either forced to abandon their Countries, or to hide themselues in the cold and barren Mountaines, like Out-lawes and Thecues. And thus did the Romans spend the three and twentie yeeres, following the peace made with Car∣thage. In part of which time, they were at such leisure, that they closed vp the Tem∣ple of Ianus: which they neuer did before, (it standing alwaies open, when they had any warre) saue once, in the raigne of Numa; nor in long time after, vntill the raigne of Augustus. But this their present happinesse was not to last long: a dangerous warre, and perhaps the greatest that had euer beene, was to come vnto their gates; which being well ended, they might boldly vndertake, to extend their Monarchie as farre, as their ambition could reach. CHAP. III. Of the second Punick Warre. § I. The warres of HANNIBAL in Spaine. Quarrels between the Romans and Carthaginians. HANNIBAL besiegeth and taketh Saguntum, whilest the Romans are busied with the Illyrians. Warre proclaimed betweene Rome and Carthage. HANNIBAL, the fonne of Amilcar, was about sixe and twentie yeeres old, when hee was chosen Generall of the Carthaginian forces in Spaine. Hee was elected by the Armie, as soone as Asdrubal was dead: and the e∣lection was ratified by the state at Carthage; where∣with Hanno and his Complices were nothing pleased. This was now the third of the Barchine family (so cal∣led of Amilcar, whose surname was Barcas ) that had command in chiefe, ouer the men of warre. Which honour would perhaps haue beene lesse enuied, by these domesticall enemies; if the Allies and Friends of the Barchine house, had not also borne the whole sway in gouernment, and beene the only men regarded, both by the Senate and the people. This generall good∣will, as it was first purchased by the most worthy deserts of Amilcar, in sauing his Countrie from imminent ruine, enlarging the Dominion thereof, and enriching it with treasures and great reuenewes; so was it retained by the same good artes, a∣mong his friends and followers. Hanno therefore, and his Partisans, being neither able to taxe the vertue of their enemies, that was vnreproueable; nor to performe the like seruices vnto the Common-weale; had nothing left, whereby to value themselues, excepting the generall reprehension of Warre, and cautelous aduice of not prouoking the Romans. This they seasoned otherwhiles with detraction; say∣ing, that the faction went about to oppresse the libertie of the Citie. But their malicious words were vnregarded; and if it were factious, to beare ill will to Rome, then were all the Citizens (very few excepted) no lesse Barchine, than Hanni∣bal himselfe. For it was long since apparent, that the oath of the Romans, to the ar∣ticles of peace, affoorded no securitie to Carthage; were shee neuer so quiet, and offi∣cious; vnlesse she would yeeld to become their Subiect. Since therefore the peace was like to no longer, than vntill the Romans could find some good aduantage, to renew the Warre: it was rather desired by the Carthaginians, that whilest their owne state was in good case, the warre should beginne; than that in some vnhappie time of famine or pestilence, or after some great losse of Armie or Fleet, they should be driuen to yeeld vnto the impudent demands of their enemies; & to giue away basely their lands and treasures, as they had lately done; or miserably fight, vpon termes of disaduantage. This disposition of his Countrimen, Hannibal well vnderstood. Neither was he ignorant (for his father, and other friends, had long time deuised of this businesse) that in making warre with the Romans, it was no small aduantage to get the start of them. If once he could bring an Armie into Italic, without molestation; there was good hope, that he should finde friends and assistance, euen of those people, that helped to increase the Roman armies in forreigne wars. But this could neuer be effe∣cted, if the matter were openly disputed at Carthage. For it was to be doubted, that the Carthaginians, how glad soeuer they would be, to heare that he had set the war on foot, would neuerthelesse bee slow and timorous as commonly men are in the beginning of great enterprises, if the matter were referred to their deliberation. Which if it should happen; then were the Romans like to be made acquainted, not onely with the generalities of his purpose, but with such particulars as must be dis∣coursed of, in procuring allowance to his dessigne. This might suffice to disorder the whole Proiect. Wherfore, he resolued to lay siege vnto Saguntum; which might seeme not greatly to concerne the Romans; and would highly please the Carthagini∣ans, that had fresh in mind the indignitie of that Spanish Townes alliance with their false friends. So should hee assaie both the patience of his enemies, and the disposi∣tion of his owne Citizens. Hauing thus concluded, he neuerthelesse went faire and orderly to worke: and beginning with those that lay next in his way, approached vnto Saguntum by de∣grees. This he did (saith Liuie ) to giue some colour to his proceedings: as if he had not principally intended the warre against Saguntum, but had been drawne thither by course of businesse. Yet reason teacheth plainly, that without regard of such formalities, it was needefull to finish the conquest of the rest, before hee did any thing that should prouoke the Romans. First therefore he entred vpon the Territo∣rie of the A people (saith Stepha∣nus ) neere the Riuer of . But in the old description of Spaine, in Orte∣lius, they are found neere ; and by Suidas, not far from New Car∣thage. Olcades; and hauing besieged Althaea (Liuie calleth it Carteia ) their chiefe Citie, he became, in a few dayes, Master, not only therof, but of all the other townes of their Countrie. This Nation which he first vndertooke, being subdued, and the winter at hand; he rested his Armie in New Carthage, or Carthagena; and imparted liberally to the Souldiers, the spoiles he had gotten in his late conquest. In the Spring following, he pursued the warre against the A people of the old. Vaccaei: and without any great difficultie, wanne first Salmantica, now called Salamanca; and after it, Arbucala, or Albricala, an inland Citie of the in Aragon. Ar∣bucala, by assault: though not without a long siege, and great difficultie. But in his returne, he was put to the heighth, both of his courage, and of his Martiall iudge∣ment. For all such of the Vaccaei, as were able to beare armes, being made despe∣rate by the spoile of their Countrie, with those of Salamanca, and of the , that had escaped in the late ouer-throw, joyning themselues with the Toletans; com∣pounded an Armie of an hundred thousand able men: and stayed Hannibal on the bankes of the Riuer Tagus, which runneth to the Sea by Lisbourne in Portugale. These foure nations, hauing had experience of Hannibals inuincible courage, and that he neuer saw enemie, vpon whom he durst not giue charge; were throughly resolued, that his natural valour would at this time no lesse neglect the cold aduice of discretion, than at other times it had seemed to doe, when the like great occasion perswaded him to vse it. But he that makes himselfe a bodie of Crystall, that all men may looke through him, and discerne all the parts of his disposition; makes himselfe (withall) an Asse: and thereby teacheth others, either how to ride, or driue him. Wise men, though they haue single hearts in al that is iust and vertuous; yet they are like coffers with double bottomes: which when others looke into, be∣ing opened, they see not all that they hold, on the sudden, and at once. It is true, that this subtile Carthaginian, when he serued vnder , was, of al the men of marke in the Armie, the most aduenturous. But that which may beseeme a Cap∣taine, or inferiour Commander, doth not alwaies become a Chiefe; though it hath sometime succeeded well with such great ones, as haue beene found more fortu∣nate, than wise. At this time, our great Man of warre knew as well how to dissem∣ble his courage, as at other times to make it good. For he with-drew himselfe from the Riuer side, as if to foord it; thereby to draw ouer that great multi∣tude, from their bankes of aduantage. The Spaniards, apprehending this in such sort, as Hannibal desired that they should; thrust themselues in furic and disorder, into the swift streame, with a purpose to charge the Carthaginians, abandoning (as they thought for feare) the defences on the contrarie side. But when Hannibal saw them in their way, and well-neare ouer; he turned backe his to en∣tertaine them at their landing: and thrust his Horse-men, both aboue and beneath them, into the Riuer. These carrying a kind of Lance de gay, sharpe at both ends, which they held in the middest of the staffe; had such an aduantage ouer the foot, that were in the Riuer, vnder their strokes, clattered together, and vnable to moue or shift their bodies, as on firme ground: that they slew all those, (in a manner) without resistance, which were alreadie entred into the water; and pursued the rest, that fled like men amazed, with so great a slaughter, as from that forward, there was not any Spaniard, on that side the Riuer of Iberus, (the Saguntines excep∣ted) that had the daring to lift vp their hands against the Carthaginians. The Saguntines, perceiuing the danger towards them; cryed before they were hurt. They sent Embassadours to Rome, and bemoned themselues, as likely to suffer that, which afterwards they suffered ; only because of their alliance and friendship with this honorable Citie, which the Carthaginians hated. This tale moued the Senate: but much more a report, that Saguntum was alreadie besieged. Hereupon some crie out, that Warre should be proclaymed by Land and Sea; as also that the two Consuls should be sent with Armies, the one into Spaine, the other into Africk. But others went more Roman-like to worke; and carried it. So it was onely concluded; that Embassadours should be sent into Spaine, to view the state of their Confederates: which were indeede none other, than the Saguntines. For if Hannibal intended warre against Rome, it was likely, that he would giue-them, ere it were long, a more plausible occasion to take armes against him: if he had no such purpose; yet would it bee in their power, to determine what they listed themselues, vpon the report of these Embassadours; and this their grauitie, in being not too rash at first, would serue to countenance their following Decree. Of these Embas∣sadours Liuie reports, that they found Hannibal before Saguntum; but could not get audience of him, and therefore went to Carthage, where also they were not re∣garded, nor heard. But , an Historian of sinceritie lesse questionable, tels, that they found him at Carthagena; and had conference with him, though such as left them doubtfull. This is more agreeable to the rest of Hannibal his whole course. And surely we might wonder, why the Carthaginians should afterwards admit a more peremptorie Embassage (as Liuie confesseth) and fall to disputation about the couenants of peace; if they had rejected that which was sent vpon none other pre∣tence, than preuention of warre. Whilest the Embassadours passed to and fro, Hannibal prepared not onely his forces, but some Roman pretences, against Saguntum. He found out Mamertines, or people that should do as the Mamertines in Sicil had done for the Romans; and im∣plore his helpe against the Saguntines. These were the Turdetani; a Nation adjoy∣ning to Saguntum, and hauing many quarrells with them: (as happens commonly among Neighbours) of which, Hannibal himselfe had hatched some. Finding there∣fore such an occasion, whatsoeuer it was, as made him able to say, that the Sagun∣tines had first prouoked him, ere he meddled with them; he made no more ado, but sate downe with his whole power before their Towne. He was now more secure, than he had formerly been, of his own Citizens: for that they had not entertained the Roman Embassadours, with any trembling reuerence, as of late yeres they had beene wont. Neuerthelesse, hee was glad of any handsome colour, to shadow his actions, not only because the warre, which he so much desired, was not proclaimed; but that he might not be checked in his course, as an open enemy, before he could set foot in Italie. The Romans had the like, though desire. They were glad of the quarrell: as hoping, that Carthage, with all thereto belonging, should therby in short space become their own. Yet were they not hastie to threaten, before they were readie to strike; but meant to temporize, vntill they had an Armie in readi∣nesse to be sent into Spaine, where they thought to make Saguntum, the seat of the Warre. In the while, Demetrius Pharius, whom the Romans had made King ouer a great part of Illyria, rebelled against them: eitheir for that he himselfe ouer∣streightly tyed vp by them, with hard conditions; or rather because he was of an vnthankefull disposition. The commotion of the Gaules, and afterward, the fame of the Carthaginian warre, emboldened him to despise his and Patrons: whom he ought to haue defended and aided, in all perills, euen with the hazard of his whole estate, which he had receiued of their gift. But hee was a Traitor to his owne Queene; and therefore dealt according to his kinde, with those that had re∣warded him for being such. First, he built ships, and spoiled the of Greece: a∣gainst the couenants to which he was bound. Then he aduentured further and sei∣sed vpon some places, that the Romans kept in their owne hands. If he had begun sooner, or rather if he had staied somewhat longer, he might haue sped better. For the busines with the Gaules, was ended; with , not throughly begun: when he declared himselfe, by his doings, an enemie, and was vanquished. The Roman Consul, Aemilius, was sent against him: who in seuen daies wan the strong Towne of Dimalum; and thereby brought such vpon the Countrie round about, that Embassadors were sent from al places, to yeeld themselues, without putting him to further paines. Only the Citie of Pharus, in which lay, prepared to resist: which it might haue done long, if the hot-headed Rebel had not been too foolish. Aemilius landed a great part of his Armie, in the Isle of Pharus, by night; and be∣stowed them in couert; presenting himselfe the next morning, with twenty ships before the Towne, and offering to force the Hauen. Demetrius with all his power issued out against the Consul; and was soone from the Town, by those that lay in ambush. Wherefore he fled away through by-paths to a creeke, where he had shipping readie for him, and embarqued himselfe: leauing all his estate vnto them, of whose liberalitie he first had it. This businesse, though it were soone dispatched, yet preuented it not the siege of Saguntum; before which Hannibal sate downe, ere Aemilius was landed in Illyria. In the beginning of the siege, the were much discoraged, by reason of the braue sallies made by the Saguntines; in one of which, their Generall receiued a dan∣gerous wound in the thigh, that caused him to lie many daies vnable to moue. Ne∣uerthelesse he was not vnmindfull of his worke in the meane while; but gaue order to raise certaine moueable Towers, that might equal those which built on the walls of the Citie; and to prepare to batter the , and make a breach. These being finished and applied, had soone wrought their effect. A great & large breach was made, by the fall of diuers Towers, and a great length of wall; whereat an hot assault was giuen: but it was so well sustained by the Saguntines, as the Carthaginians were not only beaten from the breach, and out of some ground within the Town, which vpon the first furie they had won; but they were pursued euen to their own trenches and camp. Neuerthelesse the Carthaginian Armie, wherein were about an hundred and fiftie thousand men, did so wearie the townesmen with continual tra∣uaile, that at length it got within the walls; and was only hindred from taking full possession of the Citie, by some counter-works of the Saguntines, that were also rea∣die to be won. In this extremitie, there was one Alcon a Saguntine, that conueyed himselfe out of the Towne, to treat with Hannibal for some accord. But the condi∣tions which the Carthaginian offered, were so seuere, & without al compasse of ho∣nour, as Alcon durst not returne to propound them to his countrimen. For Hannibal demanded all that they had; gold, , plate, and other riches within the Citie: yea, the Citie it selfe to be abandoned by the Citizens; promising, that he would assigne some other place for their habitation: not allowing them, to carrie out with them any other thing, wherewith to sustaine themselues, than the clothes on their backs; or other armes to defend them, than their nailes and teeth. Yet might they farre better haue submitted themselues vnto this miserable appointment, (seeing thereby they might haue enioyed their liues, & saued the honor of their wiues and daughters) than to haue rested at the discretion of the Conquerour, as soone after they did: by whom their wiues and daughters were defloured before their faces; and all put to sword, that were aboue foureteene yeares of age. For it was a poore comfort, which a great number of them tooke; when not daring to fight, and their bloud at the dearest rate, they shut themselues vp like most wretched crea∣tures in their owne houses, and therein burnt themselues with all that they dying . The treasures found in , which were very great kept, therewith to pay his Armie: the slaues, and other bootie, hee his Sonldiers; reseruing some things of choice, wherewith to present his friends at Carthage, and to animate them vnto the Warre. These tidings exceedingly vexed the Romans; who had good cause to angry at their owne slownesse, in forbearing to send helpe vnto the Saguntines, that held out eight moneths, looking still for succour, in vaine. Wherefore they determined to repaire their honour, by taking sharpe reuenge. To this end they sent Embassa∣dours againe to Carthage: demanding onely, Whether it were by generall consent and al∣lowance of the Carthaginians, that HANNIBAL had made warre vpon Saguntum; which if they granted (as it seemed they would) then to giue them defiance. Hereunto answere was made, in the Senate of Carthage, to this effect: That this their second Embassage, howsoeuer qualified with mild words, was indeede more insolent then the former. For in that, they only required iustice against Hannibal; but in this, the very State and Common-wealth of Carthage, was vrged to pleade guiltie, or not guiltie. But (said the Carthaginian speaker) whether the Generall of our Armie in Spaine, in besieging Saguntum, haue only followed his owne counsaile; or whether he did it, by direction from vs: it is not the question which the Romans ought to ask vs. That which is indeed worthy examination or dispute, is; Whether it were law∣full, or vnlawfull, for HANNIBAL to doe as he hath done. For it belongs to vs, to call our owne Commanders in question, and to punish them according to their faults and errours; to you, to challenge vs, if wee haue done any thing contrary to our late League and Contract. It is true, that in our negotiation with Luctatius the , the Allies of both Nations were comprehended: but the Saguntines were not then of your Allies, and therefore no parties to the peace then made; for of your Allies in the future, or of ours, there was no dispute. As touching the last a∣greement, betweene you and Asdrubal, wherein you will say, that the Saguntines were comprehended by name; it is you that haue taught vs, how to answere that particular. For whatsoeuer you found in the Treatie betweene vs and Luctatius, to your owne disaduantage, you cast it vpon your Consuls presumption; as promi∣sing those things, for which he had no warrant from the Senate and People of Rome. If then it bee lawfull for the Romans, to disauow the actions of their Consuls and Commanders, concluding any thing without punctuall and precise warrant; the same libertie may we also assume, and hold our selues no way bound in honour, to performe those bargaines, which Asdrubal hath made for vs, without our com∣mandement and consent. This was an impertinent answere, and little better then a cauill. For Lu∣ctatius the Consull, in his Treatie of peace with the Carthaginians, had expresly re∣ferred the allowance thereof to the people of Rome. It had beene therefore much better, to haue dealt plainely; and to haue alleaged, That after this League was made, and confirmed on both parts, it was broken by the Romans, in robbing the Carthaginians of the Isle of Sardinia, and withall of twelue hundred talents: which perjurie the state of Carthage, being now growne able, would reuenge with open warre. As for the Saguntines; it little skilled that the Romans had admitted them in∣to confederacie, and forth with inserted their names into the Treatie of peace with Asdrubal: seeing that the Treatie with Asdrubal, and all other businesse betweene Rome and Carthage, following the violence and breach of peace, in taking away Sar∣dinia, were no better then Roman iniuries; as implying this commination, whatsoeuer we require, else will we make warre, without regard of our oath, which wee haue alreadie broken. But this the Carthaginians did not alleage, forgetting, in heat of contention (as Polybius takes it) the best of their Plea. Yet since Liuie himselfe doth remember and acknowledge, that the taking of Sardinia from the , did inflame the spi∣rit of Amilcar with desire of reuenge: we may reasonably thinke, that the mention of this iniurie was omitted, not so much vpon forgetfulnesse, as for that it was not thought conuenient, by ripping vp such ancient matter of quarrell, to shew that the warre, now towards, had long beene thought vpon, and like to be made with extra∣ordinarie force; in other manner than heretofore. In , the Carthaginian Senate moued the Roman Embassadours, to deliuer vnto them in plaine termes the purposes of those that sent them, and the worst of that, which they had long deter∣mined against them: as for the Saguntines, and the confining of their Armies within Iberus; those were but their pretences. Whereupon Q. Fabius gathering vp the skirt of his Gowne, as if somewhat had been laide in the hollow therof, made this short reply: I haue here (quoth he) in my Gown-skirt both Peace and Warre: make you (my Masters of the Senate) election of these two, which of them you like best, and purpose to embrace. Hereat all cryed out at once; Euen which of them you your selfe haue a fancy to offer vs. Marry then (quoth Fabius ) take the Warre, and share it among you. Which all the Assembly willingly accepted. This was plaine dealing. To wrangle about pretences, when each part had re∣solued to make warre, it was meerely friuolous. For all these disputes of breach of peace, haue euer been maintayned by the partie vnwilling, or vnable to sustaine the warre. The rustie sword, and the emptie purse, doe alwaies plead performance of couenants. There haue beene few Kings or States in the World, that haue other∣wise vnderstood the obligation of a Treatie, than with the condition of their owne aduantage: and commonly (seeing peace betweene ambitious Princes and States, is but a kinde of breathing) the best aduised haue rather begunne with the sword, than with the trumpet. So dealt the Arragonois with the French in Naples; Henrie the second, of France, with the Imperialls, when he wrote to Brisac, to surprise as ma∣ny places as he could, ere the warre brake out; Don Iohn, with the Netherlands; and Philip, the second, of Spaine, with the English, when in the great Imbarge he tooke all our ships and goods in his Ports. But , besides the present strength of Carthage, and the common feeling of injuries receiued from these enemies, had another priuate and hereditarie desire, that violently carried him against the Romans. His father Amilcar, at what time he did sacrifice, being ready to take his iourney into Spaine, had solemnely bound him by oath, to pursue them with immortall hatred, and to worke them all possible mischiefe, as soone as he should be a man, and able. Hannibal was then about nine yeeres old, when his father caused him to lay his hand vpon the Altar, and make this vow: so that it was no maruaile, if the impression were strong in him. That it is inhumane, to bequeath hatred in this sort, as it were by Legacie, it cannot be denyed. Yet for mine owne part, I doe not much doubt, that some of those Kings, with whom we are now in peace, haue receiued the like charge from their Predecessors, that as soone as their coffers shall be full, they shall declare themselues enemies to the people of England. §. II. HANNIBAL takes order for the defence of Spaine and Africke. His iournie into Italie. WArre being thus proclaimed, resolued, not to put vp his sword, which hee had drawne against the Saguntines, vntill hee had therewith opened his passage vnto the gates of Rome. So began the second Punick Warre; second to none, that euer the Senate and peo∣ple of Rome sustained. Hannibal wintred at Carthagena; where hee li∣censed his Spanish Souldiers to visit their friends, and refresh themselues the Spring. In the meane while he gaue instructions to his brother , the go∣uernement of Spaine in his absence. Hee also tooke order, to send a great many troups of Spaniards into Africk, to equall the numbers of Africans formerly drawne thence into Spaine; to the end, that so the one Nation might remaine as pledges and gages for the other. Of the Spaniards, hee transported into Africk thirteene thou∣sand, eight hundred, and fiftie foot, and twelue hundred horse; also eight hundred slingers of the Baleares. Besides these, he selected foure thousand foot, al yong men, and of qualitie, out of the best Cities of Spaine; which he appointed to be in Carthage it selfe, not so much in regard of their forces, as that they might serue for hostages: for among those foure thousand, the best of the Spanish Citizens, and those that swayed most in their seuerall States, had their Sonnes or Kinsmen. Hee also left with his brother, to guard the coast and Ports, fiftie and seuen Gallies; whereof thirtie seuen were presently armed, and appointed for the warre. Of Afri∣cans, and other Nations strangers, he left with him aboue twelue thousand foot, and two thousand horse, besides one and twentie Elephants. Hauing in this sort taken order for the defence of Spaine and Asrick; he sent before him, to view the passages of the Pyrenaean Mountaines, and of the Alpes. He also sent Embassadors to the Mountainers of the Pyrenes, & to the Gaules, to obtaine a quiet passage: that he might bring his Armie entire into Italie, and not be compelled to diminish his forces, by any warre in the way, till hee came to encounter the Romans. His Embassadors, & discouerers, being returned with good satisfaction; in the beginning of the Spring, he past ouer the Riuer of Iberus, with an Armie consisting of fourescore and ten thousand foot, and twelue thousand horse. All those parts of Spaine, into which he had not entred before, hee now sub∣dued: and appointed Hanno (not that old enemie of his house, who still at Car∣thage ) to gouerne Spaine on the East side of Iberus; to whom he left an Armie of ten thousand foot, and one thousand horse. Being arriued at the borders of Spaine, some of his Spanish Souldiers returned home, without asking leaue: which that o∣thers might not also doe, or attempt, he courteously dismissed many more, that see∣med willing to be gone. Hereby it came to passe, that the iournie seemed the lesse tedious vnto those that accompanied him; as being not enforced by compulsion. With the rest of his armie, consisting now but of fiftie thousand foot, and nine thou∣sand horse, he past the Pyrenees, and entred into Gaules. He found the Gaules that bor∣dered vpon Spaine, ready in Armes, to forbid his entrance into their Countrie: but wonne them, with gentle speech, and rich presents that he bestowed vpon their Leaders, to fauour his Expedition. So without any molestation, hee came to the banke of Rhodanus; where dwelt, on each side of the Riuer, a people called Volcae. These were vnacquainted with the cause of his comming; and therefore sought to keepe him from passing ouer the water. But he was greatly assisted by some of those Gaules, that inhabited on the West side of Rhodanus, to wit, by those of Viuaretz and Lionnois. For although many of them had transported themselues and their goods, into the Countrie of , thinking to defend the further banke against him: yet such as remained, being desirous to free their Countrie of so many ill guests, were better pleased to haue their Countriemen beaten, which had abandoned them, than to haue their owne store of corne and cattaile wasted, by the long stay of so great an Armie, as lay vpon them. For which reason, they helped him to make boates; informed him of another more easie passage, higher vp the Riuer; and lent him guides. When the vessells for transportation of his Armie were in readinesse; he sent Hanno, the sonne of Bomilcar, vp the Riuer: himselfe in the meane while ma∣king countenance to enter the Foorde below. The end of this labour was: that Hanno charging the Gaules vnawares vpon their owne side, and Hannibal, at the same time, passing the Riuer in their faces, the further banke was wonne, though with some difficultie; and the enemies dispersed. Yet was hee greatly troubled in con∣ueying ouer his Elephants; who maruailously feared the water. He was therefore driuen to make raffes of trees, and couer them with earth and turfe; whereof hee fastened one to each banke, that might serue as a bridge, to and from another of the same sort, but loose, vpon which the beasts were towed ouer. Hauing past this first brunt, and ouer come both the rage of the Riuer, and of those that defended it, he was visited by the Princes of the Gaules Cisalpines, that in∣habited Piemont and Milan, who lately had reuolted from the Romans. These in∣formed him of the passages of the Alpes, that they were not so difficult, as common report made them; & from these he receiued guides, with many other encourage∣ments. All which notwithstanding; hee found himselfe extremely incumbred by the Savoians: and lost, both of his carriages, and of his Carthaginians, more than wil∣lingly he would, or had formerly thought that he should. For he was twice maine∣ly assailed by them, before he could recouer the plaine Countries on the other side. And whereas this iournie ouer the Mountaines cost him fifteene dayes trauaile, he was euery day, more or lesse, not only charged by those Mountainers, but withall, extremely beaten with grieuous weather and snow: it being in the beginning of Winter, when he beganne, and ouer-came this passage. But the faire and fertile Plaines, which were now ready to receiue them; with the assistance and conduct of the Cisalpine Gaules, who by their proper forces had so often inuaded the Roman Territorie; gaue them great comfort, and encouragement to goe on: hauing no∣thing else of difficultie remaining, but that which from the beginning they made accompt to ouer-come, by their proper valour and resolution; namely the Roman Armies, and resistance. §. III. How the Romans in vaine sollicited the Spaniards and Gaules to take their part. The rebellion of the Cisalpine Gaules against the Romans. THe countries of Spaine and Gaule, through which the Carthaginians marched thus farre, had beene sollicited before, by the same Roman Embassadours, who had denounced the warre at Carthage. These, as they were instructed by the Senate, tooke Spaine in their way home∣ward from Carthage, with a purpose to draw into the Roman Alliance, as many of the Cities and Princes as they could; at least, to disswade them from contracting any friendship with the Carthaginians. The first which they attempted, were the Volcians, a people in Spaine; from whom, in open assembly, they receiued by one that spake for the rest, this vncomfortable answere. With what face (saith he) can yee Romans perswade vs to valew your Alliance, or to preferre it before the friendship of the Carthaginians; seeing we are taught by the example of the Sagun∣tines, to be more wise, than so? For they, relying on your faith and promised as∣sistance, haue beene vtterly rooted out, and destroied by the Carthaginians; whom they might else haue held their assured friends, and good neighbours, as we, and o∣ther the people of Spaine haue found them. Yee may therefore be gone, with this resolution from vs, That for our parts (and so I thinke, I may answere for the rest of our Countriemen) the Romans henceforth are not to expect any kindnesse at our handes: who are resolued, neuer to make accompt of their protection, nor amitie. From the Volcians, the Embassadours tooke their way towards the Gaules; vsing their best arguments to perswade them, not to suffer the Carthaginians to passe into Italie, through their Territorie: and withall greatly glorifying themselues, their strength, and large Dominion. But the Gaules them to scorne, and had hard∣ly the patience, to heare them speake. For shall we (said one of their Princes) by re∣sisting Hannibals passage into Italie, entertaine a war which is not meant to be made against vs? Shall we hold the warre among our selues, and in our owne Territorie, by force, which marcheth with a speedy pace from vs, towards our ancient ene∣mies? Haue the Romans deserued so well of vs, and the Carthaginians so ill, that wee should set fire on our owne houses, to saue theirs from burning? No, wee know it well, that the Romans haue already forced some Nations of ours, out of their pro∣per Territorie and inheritance; and constrained others, as free as themselues, to pay them tribute. We will not therefore make the Carthaginians, our enemies; who haue no way as yet offended vs, nor we them. With this vnpleasing answere the Embassadours returned home: carrying no good newes, of friends likely to helpe them; but rather some assurance from the people of Massilia, which were Confederates with Rome, that the Gaules were deter∣mined to take part with their enemie. Of this inclination, the Cisalpine Gaules gaue hastie proofe. For when the newes was brought into Italie, that the Carthaginians had passed Iberus, and were on the way towards Rome; this alone sufficed to stirre vp the Boij, and Insubrians, against the Romans. These people were lately offended at the plantation of new Roman Colonies, at Cremona, and Placentia, within their Ter∣ritories. Relying therefore vpon the Carthaginian succour, which they supposed to be now at hand; they laid aside all regard of those hostages, which they had giuen to the Romans, and fell vpon the new Colonies. The Townes it seemes that they could not winne; for Hannibal shortly after failed to get them. But they forced the Roman Commissioners, (who belike were abroad in the Country) to flie to Modena: where they besieged them. The siege of Modena had continued some small time; when the Gaules, hauing little skill in assaulting Cities, waxed wearie, and seemed de∣sirous to haue peace, and to come to some good accord with the Romans. This they did of purpose, to draw on some meeting; that they might therein lay hand vpon the Roman Deputies, thereby to redeeme their Hostages, in way of exchange. And it fell out, in part, according to their wish. For the Romans sent out Embassadours to treat with them, and to conclude a peace; whom they detained. Manlius the Praetor, who lay in these quarters with an Armie, hearing this outrage; marched in all haste to the reliefe of the besieged. But the Gaules, hauing laid a strong ambush in a wood ioyning to the way, fell vpon the Praetor so opportunely, as he was vtter∣ly ouerthrowne, and all his followers left dead in the place; a few excepted, that re∣couered, by fast running, a little village, but defencible, vpon the Riuer of Po. When this was heard at Rome, C. Atilius, another of the Praetors, was hastily sent, to relieue the besieged, with one Legion, and fiue thousand of the Roman associates: which forces were taken out of the Consuls Armie, and supplied by a new leuie. As the Gaules were too rash and hastie: so were the Romans too slow, and indeede too ill-aduised, in the beginning of this warre. They were not , that Carthage, which had almost seruilely endured so many indignities, in time of the late peace; would be so braue and couragious on the sudden, as to attempt the conquest of Italie it selfe. Wherefore they appointed one of their Consuls, to make warre in Spaine, the other in Africk: resting secure of all danger at home. Titus Sempronius tooke his way toward Africk, with an hundred & threescore Quinqueremes, or Gal∣lies, of fiue to an Oare; which preparation may seeme to threaten euen the Citie of Carthage, to which it shall not come neere. P. Cornelius Scipio, the other Consull, made all possible haste, by the way of Genoa, into Prouence; and vsed such diligence, hauing the winde also fauourable, as in fiue dayes he recouered Massilia. There hee was aduertised, of Hannibal his hauing passed the Riuer of Rhodanus; whom hee thought to haue found busie yet a while in Spaine. Hannibal had also newes of the Consuls arriuall: whereof he was neither glad, nor sorry; as not meaning to haue to doe with him. Each of them sent forth Scouts, to discouer the others number and doings: Hannibal, about fiue hundred Numidians; Scipio, three hundred of his better appointed Roman horse. These met and fought, and the Numidians were beaten: yet could not the Romans greatly bragge, hauing slaine only two hundred, and lost of their owne, one hundred and fortie. But when Scipio drew neere, to haue met with the Carthaginians; he found, that they were gone three dayes before; and that (as hee then found assuredly true) with an intent to looke vpon the walls of Rome. This interrupted his intended voiage into Spaine. Neuerthelesse hee sent a∣way thither his brother Cn. Cornelius Scipio, with the greatest part of his Fleet and Armie, to trie what might bee done against Asdrubal and the other Carthaginian Lieutenants in that Countrie. He himselfe, taking with him a few choice bands, re∣turned by Sea to Pisa; and so passing through Tuscane into Lumbardie, drew toge∣ther the broken troupes of Manlius and Atilius, that lately had beene beaten by the Gaules: with which forces he made head against the enemie, thinking to finde him ouer-laboured, with trauaile of his painefull journie. §. IIII. SCIPIO the Roman Consul ouer-come by HANNIBAL at Ticinum. Both of the Roman Consuls beaten by HANNIBAL, in a great battaile at Trebia. FIue moneths Hannibal had spent in his tedious journie from Carthage∣na; what great muster he could make, when hee had passed the Alpes, it is not easily found. Some reckon his foot at an hundred thousand, and his horse at twenty thousand; others report them to haue beene only twenty thousand foot, and sixe hundred horse. Hannibal him∣selfe, in his Monument which he raised, in the Temple of Iuno Lacinia, agreeth with the latter summe. Yet the Gaules, Ligurians, and others that joyned with him, are likely to haue mightily increased his Armie, in short space. But when he marched Eastward from the bankes of Rhodinus, he had with him eight and thirty thousand foot, and eight thousand horse; of which, all saue those remembred by himselfe in the Inscription of his Altar in Iuno's Temple, are like to haue perished, by diseases, enemies, Riuers, and Mountaines; which mischiefes had deuoured, each, their se∣uerall shares. Hauing newly passed the Alpes, and scarce refreshed his wearied Armie in the Countrie of Piemont; he sought to winne the friendship of the These dwelt about Turine, a goodly City, now subiect vnto the Duke of Savoy: which from them tooke the name of Taurinorum. Taurim, who lay next in his way. But the Taurini held warre at that time with the Insubrians, which were his good friends; and refused (perhaps for the same cause) his amitie. Where∣fore he assaulted their Towne; and wanne it by force in three dayes. Their spoile serued well to hearten his Armie; and their calamitie, to terrifie the Neighbour places. So the Gaules, without more adoe, fell vnto his side: many for feare, many for good-will, according to their former inclination. This disposition ranne through the whole Countrie: which joyned, or was all in a readinesse to joyne, with the Car∣thaginians; when the newes of Scipio the Consul his arriuall, made some to be more , than the rest. The name of the Romans was terrible in those quarters; what was in the Carthaginians, experience had not yet laid open. Since therefore the Ro∣man Consull was already gotten through the most defencible passages, ere any speech had been heard of his approch: many sate still, for very feare, who else would faine haue concluded a League with these new-come friends; and some, for grea∣ter feare, offered their seruice against the Carthaginians, whom neuerthelesse they wished well to speede. This wauering affection of the Prouince, whereinto they were entred, made the two Generals hasten to the triall of a battaile. Their meeting was at Ticinum, now called Pauia; where each of them wondred at the others great expedition: Hanni∣bal thinking it strange, that the Consul, whom he had left behind him on the other fide of the Alpes, could meet him in the face, before hee had well warmed himselfe in the Plaines; Scipio admiring the strange aduenture of passing those Mountaines, and the great spirit of his Enemie. Neither were the Senate at Rome little amazed, at Hannibals successe, and sudden arriuall. Wherefore they dispatched a Messenger in all haste vnto Sempronius, the other Consul, that was then in Sicilia, giuing him to vnderstand hereof: and letting him further know, that whereas he had beene dire∣cted to make the warre in Africa, it was now their pleasure that hee should forbeare to prosecute any such attempt, but that hee should returne the Armie vnder his charge, with all possible speede, to saue Italie it selfe. According to this order, Sem∣pronius sent off his Fleet from Lilybaeum; with direction to land the Armie at Arimi∣num, a Port Towne not farre from Rauenna: quite another way from Carthage, whither he was making haste. In the meane while, Scipio and Hannibal were come so neere, that fight they must, ere they could part asunder. Hereupon, both of them prepared the minds of their Souldiers, by the best arguments they had: vnto which Hannibal added the Rhetorick of a present example, that he shewed vpon certaine prisoners of the Savoyans, which he brought along with him, fitted for the purpose, into Italie. For these, hauing beene no lesse miserably fettered and chained, than sparingly fed; and withall so often scourged on their naked bodies, as nothing was more in their desire, than to be deliuered from their miseries by any kind of present death, were brought into the middle of the Armie: where it was openly deman∣ded, which of them would fight hand to hand with some other of his Companions, till the one of them were slaine, with condition being the Victor, to receiue his li∣bertie, and some small reward. This was no sooner propounded, than all of them together accepted the offer. Then did Hannibal cause lots to be cast, which of them should enter the List, with such weapons, as the Chieftaines of the Gaules were wont to vse in single combats. Euery one of these vnhappie men wished, that his owne lot might speede; whereby it should at least be his good fortune, to end his miseries by death, if not to get a reward by victorie. That couple, whose good hap it was to be chosen, fought resoluedly: as rather desiring, than fearing death; and hauing none other hope, than in vanquishing. Thus were some matched, it skilled not how equally: for all these poore creatures were , vpon whatsoe∣uer vneuen termes, to ridde themselues out of slauerie. The same affection that was in these Combatants, and in their fellowes which beheld ; wrought also vpon the Carthaginians, for whom the spectacle was ordained. For they happy, not only him, that by winning the victorie had gotten his , together with an horse and armour: but euen him also, who being slaine in fight, bad escaped that mi∣serable condition, vnto which his Companions were returned. Their Generall per∣ceiuing what impression this dumbe shew had wrought in them; beganne to admo∣nish them of their owne condition, speaking to this effect: That he had laid before them an example of their owne estates: seeing the time was at hand, wherein they were all to runne the same fortune, that these slaues had done; all to liue victorious and rich; or all to die, or (which these prisoners esteemed farre more grieuous) to liue in a perpetuall slauerie: That none of them all, in whom was common sense, could promise to himselfe any hope of life by flight; since the Mountaines, the Ri∣uers, the great distance from their owne Countries, and the pursuit of mercilesse E∣nemies, must needes retrench all such impotent imaginations. He therefore praied them to remember, that they, who had euen now praised the fortune both of the Victor, and of the vanquished, would make it their owne case; seeing there was ne∣uer any in the world, appointed with such a resolution, that had euer been broken, or beaten by their enemies. On the contrarie, he told them, that the Romans, who were to fight vpon their owne soile, and in view of their owne Townes; who knew as many waies to saue themselues by flight, as they had bodies of men to fight withall, could no way entertaine such a resolution as theirs: seeing the same neces∣sitie, (to which nothing seemes impossible) did no way presse them, or constraine them. In this sort did Hannibal, with one substantiall argument, That there was no meane betweene Victorie and Death, encourage his Companions. For (saith a great Captaine of France) la comodite de la retracte aduance lafuite; The commoditie of a retrait, doth greatly aduance a flat running away. Scipio, on the other side, after that he had giuen order for the laying of a bridge o∣uer the Riuer of Ticinus, did not neglect to vse the best arguments and reasons hee could, to encourage the Armie he led: putting them in minde of the great conquests and victories of their Ancestors; against how many Nations they had preuailed; and ouer how many Princes, their Enemies, they had triumphed. As for this Ar∣mie commanded by Hannibal, although it were enough to tell them, that it was no better than of Carthaginians, whom in their late warre they had so often beaten, by Land and Sea; yet he prayed them withall to consider, that at this time it was not only so diminished in numbers, as it rather seemed a troupe of Brigants and Theeues, than an Armie like to encounter the Romans; but so weather-beaten, and , as neither the men, nor horses, had strength or courage to sustaine the first charge that should be giuen vpon them. Nay (said he) yee your selues may make iudge∣ment what daring they haue now remaining, after so many and miseries; seeing when they were in their best strength, after they had past the Roane, their horse-men were not only beaten by ours, and driuen backe to the very Trenches of their Campe, but Hannibal him selfe, fearing our approch, ranne head-long towards the Alpes: thinking it a lesse dishonour, to die there by frost, famine, and precipita∣tion, than by the sharpe swords of the Romans, which had so often cut downe his people, both in Africa, and in Sicil. It was not long after this, ere the two Generalls met: each being farre aduanced before the grosse of his Armie, with his Horse; and the Roman hauing also with him some light-armed foot, to view the ground, and the enemies countenance. When they discouered the approch one of the other; Scipio sent before him his horsemen of the Gaules, to beginne the fight, and bestowing his in the void ground be∣tweene their troupes, to assist them: him selfe with his Roman men at armes, follow∣ing softly in good order. The Gaules (whether desirous to trie the metall of the Carthaginians, or hoping thereby to get fauour of the Romans ) behaued themselues couragiously, and were as couragiously opposed. Yet their foot that should haue aided them, shranke at the first brunt, or rather fled cowardly away, without casting a Dart; for feare of being troden downe by the enemies horse. This notwithstan∣ding, the Gaules maintained the fight, and did more hurt than they receiued; as pre∣suming that they were well backt. Neither was the Consull vnmindfull to relieue them: their hardinesse deseruing his aide; and the hastie flight of those that should haue stood by them, admonishing him that it was needfull. Wherefore hee aduen∣tured himselfe so farre, that he receiued a dangerous wound; and had beene left in the place, if his sonne (afterward surnamed Africanus ) had not brought him off: though others giue the honour of this rescue, to a Ligurian slaue. Whilest the Ro∣mans were busied in helping their Consull; an vnexpected storme came driuing at their backs, and made them looke about how to helpe themselues. Hannibal had appointed his Numidian light-horse, to giue vpon the Romans in flanke, and to com∣passe them about, whilest he with his men at armes sustained their charge, and met them in the face. The Numidians performed this very well: cutting in peeces the scattered foot, that ranne away at the first encounter; and then falling on the backs of those, whose lookes were fastened vpon Hannibal and Scipio. By this impression, the Romans were shuffled together, and rowted: so that they all betooke them to their speede, and left vnto their enemies the honour of the day. When Scipio saw his horse thus beaten, and the rest of his Armie thereby greatly discouraged; hee thought it a point of wisdome, hauing lost so many of his Fleet vpon the first puffe of winde, to take Port with the rest, before the extremest of the tempest ouer-tooke him. For he saw by the lowring morning what manner of day it was like to proue. Therefore his battaile of foot being yet vnbroken, hee in a manner stole the retrait; and recouered the bridge ouer Ticinus, which hee had for∣merly built. But notwithstanding all the haste that he made, he left sixe hundred of his Reare behinde him: who were the last that should haue passed, and staid to breake the bridge. Herein he followed this rule of a good man of warre, Si certamen quando{que} dubium videatur: tacitam miles arripiat : fuga enim aliquando laudanda: which must be vnderstood in this sort; If a Generall of an Armie, by some vnprospe∣rous beginnings doubt the successe; or find his Armie fearefull or ; it is more profitable to steale a safe retrait, than to abide the vncertaine euent of battaile. It was two daies after, ere Hannibal could passe the ; Scipio the whilest re∣freshing his men, easing him selfe of his wound in Placentia. But as soone as Han∣nibal presented his Armie before the Towne, offering battaile to the Romans, who durst not accept it, nor issue forth of their campe; the Gaules, that hitherto had fol∣lowed Scipio for feare, gathered out of his feare, courage to forsake him. They thought that now the long-desired time was come, in which better Chieftaines and Souldiers, than Aneroestus, Britomarus, and the Gessates, were come to helpe them: if they had the hearts to helpe themselues. Wherefore the same night they fell vp∣on the Roman campe; wounded and slue many; especially of those guards that kept watch at the gate; with whose heads in their hands, they ouer to the Car∣thaginians, and presented their seruice. Hannibal receiued them exceeding courte∣ously, and dismist them to their owne places: as men likely to bee of more vse to him, in perswading the rest of their Nation to become his Confederates, than in a∣ny other seruice at the present. About the fourth watch of the night following, the Consul stale a retrait, as hee had done before; but not with the like ease and securitie. Hannibal had a good eye vpon him; and ere he could get farre, sent the Numidians after him: following him∣selfe with all his Armie. That night the Romans had receiued a great blow, if the Numidians, greedie of spoile, had not staid to ransack their campe; and thereby gi∣uen time to all, saue some few in Reare, that were slaine or taken, to passe the Riuer of Trebia, and saue themselues. Scipio, being both vnable to trauaile by reason of his wound, and withall finding it expedient to attend the comming of his fellow-Con∣sul; incampes himselfe strongly vpon the bankes of Trebia. Necessitie required that he should so doe; yet this diminished his reputation. For euery day, more & more of the Gaules fel to the Carthaginian side; among whō came in the Boij, that brought with them the Roman Commissioners, which they had taken in the late Insurrecti∣on. They had hitherto kept them as Pledges, to redeeme their owne Hostages: but now they deliuer them vp to Hannibal, as tokens and pledges of their affections to∣wards him; by whose helpe they conceiued better hope of recouering their owne men and lands. In the meane while, Hannibal, being in great scarcity of victuals, attempted the taking of Clastidium, a Towne wherein the Romans had laid vp all their store and munition. But there needed no force; a Brundusian, whom the Ro∣mans had trusted with keeping it, sold it for a little monie. The newes of these disasters, brought to Rome, filled the Senate and People, ra∣ther with a desire of hastie reuenge, than any great sorrow for their losse receiued; seeing that, in a manner, all their , wherein their strength and hope consisted, were as yet entire. They therefore hasted away , that was newly arri∣ued, towards Ariminum, where the Armie, by him sent out of Sicil, awaited his comming. He therefore hasted hither; and from thence hee marched speedily to∣wards Colleague: who attended him vpon the bankes of Trebia. Both the Ar∣mies being joyned in one, the Consuls deuised about that which remained to bee done: Sempronius receiuing from Scipio the relation of what had passed since Han∣nibal: arriuall; the fortune of the late fight; and by what errour or misaduenture the Romans were therein foiled: which Scipio chiefly laid on the reuolt and treason of the Gaules. Sempronius, hauing receiued from Scipio the state of the affaires in those parts; sought by all meanes to trie his fortune with Hannibal, before Scipio were recouered of his wounds, that thereby he might purchase to himselfe the sole glorie of the vi∣ctorie, which he had alreadie, in his imagination, certainely obtayned. He also fea∣red the election of the new Consuls: his owne time being well-neere expired. But Scipio perswaded the contrarie; obiecting the vnskilfulnesse of the new-come Soul∣diers: and withal gaue him good reason, to assure him that the Gaules, naturally , were vpon termes of abandoning the partie of the Carthaginians; those of them inhabiting betweene the Riuers Trebia, and Po, being alreadie reuolted. Sempronius knew all this as well as Scipio: but being both guided and blinded by his ambition, he made haste to finde out the dishonour, which he might otherwise ea∣sily haue auoided. This resolution Sempronius was exceeding pleasing to Hanni∣bal: who feared nothing so much as delay and losse of time. For the strength of his Armie, consisting in strangers, to wit, in Spaniards and Gaules; he no lesse feared the change of affection in the one, than the impatiencie of the other: who being farre from their owne home, had many passions mouing them to turne their faces to∣wards it. To the desire of Sempronius, it fell out so, that about the same time, the Gaules inhabiting neere vnto Trebia, complayned of injuries done by the Carthaginians. They did not supply Hannibal with necessaries, as hee supposed that they might haue done; although he daily reprehended their negligence, telling them, that for their sakes, and to set them at libertie, he had vndertaken this Expe∣dition. therefore how little regarded his words, he was bold to bee his owne Caruer; and tooke from them by force, as much as he needed of that which they had. Hereupon they flie to the Romans for helpe: and, to make their tale the better, say that this wrong is done them, because they refused to joyne with Han∣nibal. Scipio cared not much for this: he suspected their falshood, and was assured of their mutability. But Sempronius affirmed, that it stood with the honor of Rome, to preserue the Confederates from suffering injurie: and that hereby might be won the friendship of all the Gaules. Therfore he sent out a thousand horse: which com∣ming vnlooked for vpon Hannibal his forragers, and finding them heauy loaden cut many of them in pieces, and chaced the rest euen into their owne campe. This in∣dignitie made the Carthaginians sallie out against them: who caused them to retire faster then they came. Sempronius was readie to back his owne men; and repelled the enemies. Hannibal did the like. So that at length, all the Roman Armie was drawne forth; and a battaile readie to bee fought, if the Carthaginian had not re∣fused it. This victorie (for so the Consul would haue it called) made the Romans in ge∣nerall desirous to try the maine chance in open field: all the perswasions of Scipio to the contrarie notwithstanding. Of this disposition Hannibal was aduertised by the , his spies, that were in the Roman Campe. Therefore he bethought him∣selfe how to helpe forward the victorie, by adding some stratagem to his forces: Hee found in the hollow a water-course, ouer-growne with high reede, a fit trench to couer an ambush. Thereinto he cast his brother Mago, with a thousand choice horse, and as many foot. The rest of his , after they had well warmed and well fed themselues in their campe, he led into the field, and marched towards the Consul. Earely in the morning, he had sent ouer Trebia some companies of Nu∣midian light-horse: to braue the enemie, and draw him to a bad dinner, ere he had broken his fast. Sempronius was ready to take any opportunitie to fight: and therefore not onely issued out of his campe, but the Riuer of Trebia, in a most cold and miserable day; his foot being wet almost to the arme-holes: which, together with the want of foode, did so enfeeble and coole their courages, as they wanted force to handle the armes they bare. Strong they were in foot, as well of their owne Nation, as of the Latines: hauing of the one, sixteene, of the other, twen∣tie thousand. The masse of these they ranged in a grosse Battalion, guarded on the flanks with three thousand horse: thrusting their light-armed, and Darters, in loose troups in the head of the rest, in the nature of a Vantguard. The Carthaginian num∣bers of foot, were in a manner equall to their enemies; in horse, they had by farre the better, both in number and goodnesse. When therefore the Roman horse, ran∣ged on the flankes of their , were broken by the Numidians; when their foot were charged both in front and flanke, by the Spaniards, Gaules, and Elephants; when finally the whole Armie was vnawares prest in the Reare, by Mago and his two thousand, that rose out of their place of ambush: then fell the Romans, by heapes, vnder the enemies swords; and being beaten downe, as well fighting in disorder, as flying towards the Riuer, by the horse-men that pursued them, there escaped no more of sixe and thirtie thousand, than ten thousand of all sorts, Horse and Foot. Three great errours Sempronius committed, of which euery one deserued to bee recompenced with the losse that followed. The first was, that hee fought with Hannibal in a Champaine, being by farre inferiour in horse, and withall thereby subiect to the African Elephants, which in inclosed or vn-euen grounds, and wood∣lands, would haue beene of no vse. His second errour was, that he made no disco∣uerie of the place vpon which he fought; whereby he was grossely ouer-reacht, and insnared, by the ambush which Hannibal had laid for him. The third was, that hee drencht his foot-men with emptie stomachs, in the Riuer of Trebia, euen in a most cold and frostie day, whereby in effect they lost the vse of their limbs. For as one saith well; There is nothing more inconuenient and perilous, than to present an Armie tyred with trauaile, to an enemie fresh and fed; since where the strength of bodie faileth, the generositie of minde is but as an vnprofitable vapour. The broken remainder of the Roman Armie, was collected by Scipio, who got therewith into Placentia; stealing away the same night, which was exceeding rainy, from the Carthaginians; who either perceiued him not, because of the shewres; or would not perceiue him, because they were ouer-wearied. Sempronius escaped with extreme danger; flying through the Countrie that was ouer-runne by the enemies horse. Hee was attended by more, than were requisite in a secret flight; yet by fewer, than could haue made resistance, if the enemie had met with him. Neuer∣thelesse he got away, and came to Rome, where hee did his office in choosing new Consuls for the yeere following: and then returned into his Prouince, with a fresh supply against Hannibal. §. V. The departure of HANNIBAL from the Cisalpine Gaules into Hetruria. FLAMINIVS the Roman Consul slaine; and his Armie destroyed by the Carthaginians, at the Lake of Thrasymen. THe Winter growing on apace, was very sharpe, and vnfit for seruice: to the great contentment of the Romans, who being not able to keepe the field, lay warme in Placentia, and Cremona. Yet Hannibal did not suffer them to rest very quiet: but vexed them with continuall a∣larmes; assayling diuers places; taking some; beating the Gaules their adherents; and winning the Lygurians to his partie, who presented him, in token of their faith full loue, with two Roman Quaestors or Treasurers, two Colo∣nels, and fiue Gentlemen the Sonnes of Senatours, which they had intercepted. These, and in generall all such prisoners as he had of the Romans, he held in streight places, loden with yrons, and miserably fed: those of their followers he not onely well entreated, but sent them to their Countries without ransome; with this pro∣testation, That he therefore vndertooke the Warre in Italie to free them from the oppression of the Romans. By these meanes he hoped, and not in vaine, to draw many of them to his partie and assistance. But the were not capable of such perswasions. They stood in feare, lest he should make their Countrie the scate of the Warre, and perhaps take it from them. They were also more grieued than reason willed them, at his feeding vpon them, and wasting their Territorie. Where∣fore some of them conspired against his life; others admonished him of the danger: and these that gaue him the aduice, were readie soone after to practise against him; but were in like sort detected. He was therefore glad to vse Perwigs of haire, and false beards of diuers colors, to the end that he might not be described, nor known, to those that should vndertake to make him away. Faine hee would haue passed the Apennines, vpon the first appearance of Spring; but was compelled by the violence of weather, to tarrie among the Gaules, till he had seene more Swallowes than one. At length, when the yeare was somewhat better opened, he resolued to take his leaue of these giddie Companions, and bring the warre to the gates of Rome. So away hee went, hauing his Armie greatly increased with Ligurians and Gaules; more seruiceable friends abroad, than in their owne Countrie. That the passage of the Apennine Mountaines was troublesome, I hold it needlesse to make any doubt. Yet since the Roman Armies found no memorable impediment, in their marches that way: the great vexation which fell vpon Hannibal, when hee was trauailing through and ouer them, ought in reason to be imputed rather to the extremitie of Winter, that makes all wayes foule, than to any intolerable difficul∣tie in that iournie. Neuerthelesse to auoide the length of way, together with the resistance and fortifications, which may not improbably be thought to haue beene erected vpon the ordinarie passages towards Rome: he chose at this time, though it were with much trouble, to trauaile through the Fennes and rotten grounds of . In those Marishes and bogges, he lost all his Elephants, saue one, together with the vse of one of his eyes; by the moystnesse of the aire, and by lodging on the cold ground, and wading through deepe mire and water. In briefe, after hee had with much adoe recouered the firme and fertile Plaines; he lodged about Arre∣tium: where he somewhat refreshed his wearied followers, and heard newes of the Roman Consuls. C. Flaminius, and Cn. Seruilius had of late beene chosen Consuls for this yeere: Seruilius, a tractable man, and wholly gouerned by aduice of the Senate; Flaminius, an hot-headed popular Orator; who hauing once beene robbed (as hee thought) of his Consulship, by a deuice of the Senators was afraid to be serued so againe, vn∣lesse he quickly finished the warre. This jealous Consul thought it not best for him to be at Rome, when he entred into his Office, lest his aduersaries, by fayning some religious impediment, should detaine him within the , or find other bu∣sinesse for him at home, to disappoint him of the honour, that hee hoped to get in the Warre. Wherefore he departed secretly out of the Towne; and meant to take possession of his Office, when the day came, at Ariminum. The Fathers (so the Se∣nators were called) highly displeased with this, reuoked him by Embassadors: but he neglected their injunction; and hasting to meet with the Carthaginians, tooke his way to Arretium, where he shortly found them. The fierie disposition of this Consul, promised vnto Hannibal great assurance of victorie. Therefore he prouoked, with many indignitics, the vehement nature of the Roman: hoping thereby to draw him vnto fight, ere Seruilius came with the rest of the Armie. All the Countrie betweene Fesulae and Arretium he put to fire and sword, euen vnder the Consuls nose; which was enough to make him stirre, that would not haue sitten still, though Hannibal had beene quiet. It is true, that a great Captaine of France hath said; Pays gaste v'este pas perdu; A wasted Countrie is not thereby lost. But by this waste of the Countrie, Flaminius thought his owne honour to be much impaired; and therefore aduanced towards the Enemie. Many adui∣sed him (which had indeede beene best) to haue patience a while, and stay for his Colleague. But of this he could not abide to heare: saying, that he came not to de∣fend Arretium, whilest the Carthaginians went, burning downe al Italie before them, to the gates of Rome. Therefore he tooke horse; and commanded the Armie to march. It is reported as ominous, that one of their Ensignes stucke so fast in the ground, as it could not be plucked vp by the Ensigne-bearer. Of this tale, whether true or false, Tullie makes a jeast: saying, that the cowardly knaue did faintly pull at it (as going now to fight) hauing hardily pitched it into the earth. Neither was the answere of Flaminius (if it were true) disagreeable hereto: for he commanded, that it should be digged vp, if feare had made the hands too weak to lift it: asking with∣all; whether letters were not come from the Senate, to hinder his proceedings. Of this jealousie both hee, and the Senate that gaue him cause, are likely to re∣pent. All the Territorie of Cortona, as farre as to the Lake of Tbrasymene, was on a light fire, which whilest the Consul thought to quench with his enemies bloud, he pur∣sued Hannibal so vnaduisedly, that he fell, with his whole Armie, into an ambush cunningly laid for him, betweene the Mountaines of Cortona, and the Lake. There was he charged vnawares, on all sides, (saue only where that great Lake of Perusia permitted neither his enemies to come at him, nor him to flie from them) knowing not which way to turne, or make resistance. So was hee slaine in the place, accom∣panied with fifteene thousand dead carkasses of his Countrimen. About sixe thou∣sand of his men, that had the Vantgard, tooke courage as for the most part happens, out of desperation; and breaking through the enemies, that stood in their way, re∣couered the tops of the Mountaines. If these had returned, and giuen charge vpon the Carthaginians backs, it was thought that they might haue greatly amended, if not wholly altered, the fortune of the day. But that violence of their feare, which kindled by necessitie, had wrought the effects of hardinesse; was well asswaged, when they ceased to despaire, of sauing their liues by flight. They stood still, in a could sweat, vpon the Hill-top; hearing vnder them a terrible noise, but not dis∣couering how things went, because of the great fogge that held all the morning. When it grew toward noone, the aire was cleared, and they might plainly discerne the lamentable slaughter of their fellowes. But they staid not to lament it: for it was high time, they thought, to be gone, ere they were descried, and attached by the enemies horse. This they should haue thought vpon sooner; since they had no minde to returne vnto the fight. For descryed they were, and Maharbal sent after them; who ouer-tooke them by night in a Village, which hee surrounded with his horse: and so they yeelded the next day, rendring their armes, vpon his promise of their liues and liberties. This accord Hannibal refused to confirme; saying, that it was made by Maharbal, without sufficient warrant, as wanting his authoritie to make it good. Herein hee taught them (yet little to his owne honour) what it was to keepe no faith: and fitted them with a tricke of their owne. For if it were lawfull vnto the Romans, to alter couenants, or adde vnto them what they listed; if the Car∣thaginians must be fain to pay certaine hundreds, and yet more hundreds of talents, besides their first bargaine; as also to renounce their interest in Sardinia, and bee li∣mited in their Spanish Conquests, according to the good pleasure of the Romans, whose present aduantage is more ample, than the conditions of the late concluded peace: then can Hannibal bee as Roman, as themselues; and make them know, that perfidiousnesse gaineth no more in prosperitie, than it looseth in the change of for∣tune. Fifteene thousand Italian Prisoners, or thereabout, hee had in his hands: of which all that were not Romans, hee set free without ransome; protesting, as he had done before, that it was for their sakes, and to free them and others from the Roman tyrannie, that he had vndertaken this warre. But the Romans hee kept in straight pri∣son, and in fetters; making them learne to eate hard meate. This was a good way, to breede in the people of Italie, if not a loue of Carthage, yet a contempt of Rome: as if this warre had not concerned the generall safetie, but only the preseruing of her owne neck from the yoke of slauerie, which her ouer-strong enemies would thrust vpon her in reuenge of her oppressions. But an ancient reputation, confirmed by successe of many ages, is not lost in one or two battailes. Wherefore more is to bee done, ere the Carthaginian can get any Italian Partisans. Presently after the battaile of Thrasymene, C. Centronius, with foure thousand Ro∣man horse, drew ncere vnto the Campe of Hannibal. Hee was sent from Ariminum, by Seruilius the other Consul, to increase the strength of Flaminius: but comming too late, hee increased only the misaduenture. Maharbal was imployed by Hannibal, to intercept this companie; who finding them amazed with report which they had newly heard of the great ouerthrow, charged them, and brake them: and killing al∣most halfe of them, draue the rest vnto an high piece of ground, whence they came downe, and simply yeelded to mercie, the next day. Seruilius himselfe was in the meane while skirmishing with the Gaules; against whom hee had wrought no mat∣ter of importance, when the newes was brought him, of his Colleagues ouer∣throw and death in Hetruria; that made him hasten backe to the defence of Rome. In these passages, it is easie to discerne the fruits of popular iealousie, which per∣swaded the Romans to the yeerely change of their Commanders in the wars; which greatly endangered, and retarded the growth of that Empire. Certaine it is, that all men are farre better taught by their owne errours, than by the examples of their fore-goers. Flaminius had heard, in what a trap Sempronius had bin taken vp but the yeere before, by this subtile Carthaginian; yet suffered he himselfe to be caught soone after in the same manner. Hee had also belike forgotten, how Sempronius, fearing to be preuented by a new Consul, and ambitious of the sole honour of beating Hanni∣bal in battaile, without helpe of his companion Scipio, had beene rewarded with shame and losse: else would he not, contrarie to all good aduice, haue beene so hasty to fight, before the arriuall of Seruilius. If Sempronius had beene continued in his charge, it is probable that he would haue taken his companion with him the second time, and haue searched all suspected places, proper to haue shadowed an ambush: both which this new Flaminius neglected. We may boldly avow it, that by being continued in his Gouernment of France ten yeeres, Caesar brought that migh∣tie Nation, together with the Heluetians and many of the Germans, vnder the Roman yoke; into which parts had there beene euery yeere a new , would hardly, if euer, haue beene subdued. For it is more than the best wit in the World can doe, to informe it selfe, within one yeeres compasse, of the nature of a great Nation, of the Factions, of the Places, Riuers, and of all good helpes, where∣by to prosecute a warre to the best effect. Our Princes haue commonly left their Deputies in Ireland three yeeres; whence, by reason of the shortnesse of that their time, many of them haue returned as wise, as they went out; others haue profited more, and yet when they beganne but to know the first rudiments of Warre, and Gouernement, fitting the Countrie, they haue beene called home, and new Ap∣prentices sent in their places; to the great preiudice both of this and that Estate. But it hath euer beene the course of the World, rather to follow old errours, than to examine them: and of Princes and Gouernours, to vp-hold their slothful ignorance, by the old examples and policie of other ages and people; though neither likenesse of time, of occasion, or of any other circumstance, haue perswaded the imitation. § VI. How QFABIVS the Roman Dictator, sought to consume the force of HANNIBAL, by lingring warre. MINVTIVS, the Master of the Horse, honoured and aduanced by the People, for bold and successefull attempting, aduentures rashly vp∣on HANNIBAL; and is like to perish with his Armie, but rescued by FABIVS. GReatly were the Romans amazed, at this their ill successe, and at the danger apparent; which threatned them in more terrible manner, than euer did warre, since Rome it selfe was taken. They were good Souldiers; and so little accustomed to receiue an ouerthrow; that when Pyrrhus had beaten them, once and againe, in open field, all Italie was strangely affected with his successe, and held him in admiration, as one that could worke wonders. But Pyrrhus his quarrell was not grounded vpon hate: hee only sought honour, and fought (as it were) vpon a : demeaning himselfe like a courteous enemie. This Carthaginian detested the whole Roman name; a∣gainst which he burned with desire of reuenge. Ticinum, Trebia, and Thrasymene, wit∣nessed his purpose, and his abilitie. Which to withstand, they fled vnto a remedic that had long beene out of vse, and created a Dictator. The Dictators power was greater than the Consuls, and scarcely subject vnto comptroll of the whole Citie. Wherefore this Officer was seldome chosen, but vpon some extremitie, and for no longer time than sixe moneths. He was to be named by one of the Consuls, at the appointment of the Senate: though it were so, that the Consul (if he stood vpon his prerogatiue) might name whom he pleased. At this time, the one Consul being dead, and the other too farre off; the People tooke vpon them, as hauing supreme authoritie, to giue the Dignitie by their election, to Q. Fabius Maximus, the best re∣puted man of warre in the Citie, Novum factum, novum consilium expetit; Contra∣rie winds, contrarie courses. Q. Fabius chose M. Minutius Rufus Master of the horse: which Officer was customarily, as the Dictators Lieutenant; though this Minutius grew afterwards famous, by taking more vpon him. The first act of Fabius, was the reformation of somewhat amisse in matter of re∣ligion: a good beginning, and commendable; had the Religion beene also good. But if it were true (as Liuie reports it) that the bookes of Sybil were consulted, and Liu. l. . gaue direction in this businesse of deuotion; then must we beleeue, that those books of Sybil, preserued in Rome, were dictated by an euill spirit. For it was ordayned, that some Vow, made in the beginning of this warre to Mars, should be made anew, and amplified; as hauing not been rightly made before: also that great Plaies should be vowed vnto Iupiter, and a Temple to Venus; with other such trumperie. This vehemencie of superstition, proceeds alwaies from vehemencie of feare. And surely this was a time, when Rome was exceedingly distempered with passion: whereof that memorable accident, oftwo women that suddenly died, when they saw their sonnes returne aliue from Thrasymene, may serue to beare witnesse; though it bee more properly an example of motherly loue. The walls and towers of the Citie were now repaired and fortified; the bridges vpon Riuers were broken downe; and all care taken, for defence of Rome it selfe. In this tumult, when the Dictator was newly set forth against Hannibal; word was brought, that the Carthaginian fleet had intercepted all the supply, that was going to Cn. in Spaine. Against these Carthaginians, Fabius commanded Seruilius the Consul to put to Sea; and taking vp all ships about Rome, and Ostia, to pursue them: whilest he, with the Legions, at∣tended vpon Hannibal. Foure Legions he had leuied in haste: and from Ariminum he receiued the Armie, which Seruilius the Consul had conducted thither. With these forth-with he followed apace after Hannibal; not to fight, but to af∣front him. And knowing well, what aduantage the Numidian horse had ouer the Romans, he alwaies lodged himselfe on high grounds, and ofhard accesse. Hannibal in the meane while, pursuing his victorie, had ranged ouer all the Countrie, and v∣sed all manner of crueltie towards the inhabitants; especially to those of the Roman Nation, of whom he did put to the sword, all that were able to beare armes. Passing by Spoletum and Ancona, he incamped vpon the Adriatick shores; refreshed his dis∣eased, and ouer-trauailed Companies; armed his Africans after the manner of the Romans; and made his dispatches for Carthage, presenting his friends, which were in effect all the Citizens, with part of the spoiles that hee had gotten. Hauing re∣freshed his Armie; fed his horses; cured his wounded Souldiers; and (as Polybius hath it) healed his horse heeles of the scratches, by washing their pasternes in old wine: he followed the coast of the Adriatick Sea towards Apulia, a Northerne Pro∣uince of the Kingdome of Naples; spoiling the Marrucini, and all other Nations ly∣ing in his way. In all this ground that he ouer-ranne, he had not taken any one Ci∣tie: only he had assaied Spoletum, a Colonie of the Romans; and finding it well de∣fended, presently gaue it ouer. The malice of a great Armie is broken, and the force of it spent, in a great siege. This the Protestant Armie foundtrue at Poictiers, a little before the battaile of Mon∣counter; and their victorious enemies, anon after, at S t . lean d'Angeley. But Hanni∣bal was more wise. He would not engage himselfe in any such enterprize, as should detaine him, and giue the Romans leaue to take breath. All his care was to weaken them in force and reputation: knowing, that when once hee was absolute Master of the field, it would not be long ere the walled Cities would open their gates, with∣out expecting any engine of battery. To this end he presented Fabius with battaile, as soone he saw him; and prouoked him with all manner of brauado's. But Fabius would not bite. Hee well knew the differences, betweene Souldiers bred vp, euer since they were Boyes, in warre and in bloud, trayned and hardened in Spaine, made proud and aduenturous by many victories there, and of late by some notable acts a∣gainst the Romans; and such, as had no oftner seene the enemie, than bin vanquished by him. Therefore he attended the Carthaginian so neere, as hee kept him from straggling too farre; and preserued the countrie from vtter spoile. He inured his men by little and little, and made them acquainted with dangers by degrees; and hee brought them first to looke on the Lyon a farre off, that in the end they might sit on his taile. Now Minutius had a contrarie disposition, and was as fierie as Flaminius; taxing Fabius with cowardise and feare. But all stirred not this well-aduised Commander. For wise men are no more moued with such noise, than with winde bruised out of a bladder. There is nothing of more indiscretion, and danger, than to pursue mis∣fortune: It wasteth it selfe sooner by sufferance, than by opposition. It is the inva∣ding Armie that desires battaile: and this of Hannibal, was both the invading, and the victorious. Fabius therefore suffered Hannibal to crosse the Apennines, and to fall vpon the most rich and pleasant Territorie of Campania; neither could he by any ar∣guments be perswaded, to aduenture the Roman Armie in battaile: but being too weake in horse, he alwaies kept the Hills and fast grounds. When Hannibal saw he could by no means draw this warie Dictator to fight, that the Winter came on; and that the towns stood firme for the Romans, whose Legions were in sight, though a-farre off; he resolued to rest his Armie, that was loaden with spoile, in some plen∣tifull and assured place, till the following Spring. But ere this can be done, he must passe along by the Dictators campe, that hung ouer his head vpon the Hills of Calli∣cula, and Casilinum: for other way there was none, by which hee might issue out of that goodly Garden-countrie, which hee had already wasted, into places more a∣boundant of prouision for his wintering. It was by meere error of his guide, that he first entred within these streights. For he would haue bin directed vnto Cassinum, whence he might both assay the faire Citie of Capua, which had made him friendly promises vnder hand, and hinder the Romans from comming neere it to preuent him. But his guide mis-vnderstood the Carthaginian pronunciation, and conducted him awry another way, from Cassinum to Casilinum, whence Fabius hoped that he should not easily escape. Now beganne the wisdome of Fabius to grow into credit; as if he had taken the Carthaginians in a trap, & wonne the victorie, without blowes. But Hannibal reformed this opinion, and freed himselfe, by a slight inuention, yet seruing the turne as well as a better. In driuing the country, hee had gotten about two thousand Kine; whose hornes he dressed with drie faggots, and setting fire to them in the darke night, caused them to be driuen vp the hills. The spectacle was strange, and therefore terrible; especially to those, that knew it to be the worke of a terrible enemie. What it should meane, Fabius could not tell: but thought it a de∣uice to circumuent him; and therefore kept within his Trenches. They that kept the hill-tops, were horribly afraid, when some of these fierie Monsters were gotten beyond them; and ran therefore hastily away, thinking that the enemies were be∣hind their backs, and fell among the light-armed Carthaginians, that were no lesse afraid of them. So Hannibal, with his whole Armie, recouered sure ground, without molestation: where he stayed till the next morning; and then brought off his light footmen, with some slaughter of the Romans, that began to hold them in skirmish: After this, Hannibal made semblance of taking his journie towards Rome: and the Dictator coasted him in the wonted manner; keeping still on high grounds, between him and the Citie, whilest the Carthaginian wasted all the Plaines. The Carthaginian tooke Geryon, an old ruinous Towne in Apulia, forsaken by the Inhabitants; which he turned into Barnes and Store-houses for winter, and incamped vnder the broken walls. Other matter of importance he did none: but the time passed idlely, till the Dictator was called away to Rome, about some businesse of Religion, and left the Armie in charge with Minutius, the Master of the horse. Minutius was glad of this good occasion to shew his owne sufficiencie. Hee was fully perswaded, that his Romans, in plaine field, would be too hard for the Africans and Spaniards: by whom if they had beene foiled already twice or thrice, it was not by open force, but by subtiltie & ambush, which he thought himselfe wise enough to preuent. All the Armie was of his opinion; and that so earnestly, as he was pre∣ferred by iudgement of the Souldiers, in worthinesse to command, before the cold and warie Fabius. In this jollitie of conceit, hee determined to fight. Yet had hee beene peremptorily forbidden so to doe, by the Dictator; the breach of whose command was extreme perill of death. But the honour of the victorie, which hee held vndoubtedly his owne; the loue of the Armie; and the friends that he had at home bearing Office in Rome, were enough to saue him from the Dictators rods and axes, tooke he the matter neuer so hainously. Hannibal on the other side was no lesse glad, that he should play with a more aduenturous gamester. Therefore hee drew neere: and to prouoke the Romans, sent forth a third part of his Armie to waste the Countrie. This was boldly done, seeing that Minutius incamped hard by him: but it seemes, that hee now despised those whom hee had so often vanquished. There was a peece of high ground betweene the two camps; which because it would bee commodious to him that could occupie it, the Carthaginians seized vpon by night with two thousand of their light-armed. But Minutius, by plaine force, wanne it from them the next day; and entrenching himselfe thereupon, became their neighbour. The maine businesse of Hannibal at this time was, to prouide abundantly, not on∣ly for his men, but for his horses, which hee knew to bee the chiefe of his strength; that he might keepe them in good heart against the next Summer: if besides this he could giue the Romans another blow, it would increase his reputation, encourage his owne men, terrifie his enemies, and giue him leaue to forrage the Countrie at will. Since therefore Minutius did not in many dayes issue forth of his campe, the Carthaginian sent out (as before) a great number of his men, to fetch in haruest. This aduantage Minutius wisely espied, and tooke. For he led forth his Armie, and setting it in order presented battaile to Hannibal, that was not in case to accept it, e∣uen at his owne Trenches. His horse, and all his light Armature, diuided into many companies, hee sent abroad against the forragers; who being dispersed ouer all the fields, and loaden with bootie, could make no resistance. This angred Hannibal, that was not able to helpe them; but worse did it anger him, when the Romans tooke heart to assaile his Trenches. They perceiued that it was meere weakenesse, which held him within his campe, & therefore were bold to despise his great name, that could not resist their present strength. But in the heat of the businesse, Asdru∣bal came from Geryon with foure thousand men, being informed of the danger, by those that had escaped the Roman horse. This emboldened Hannibal to issue forth against the Romans; to whom neuerthelesse hee did not such hurt, as hee had receiued. For this peece of seruice Minutius was highly esteemed by the Armie, & more highly by the People at Rome, to whom he sent the newes, with somewhat greater boast than truth. It seemed no small matter, that the Roman Armie had recouered spirit, so farre forth that it dared to set vpon Hannibal in his owne campe; and that in so doing, it came off with the better. Euery man therefore praised the Master of the horse, that had wrought this great alteration; and consequently, they grew as farre out of liking with Fabius, and his timorous proceedings, thinking that hee had not done any thing wisely, in all his Dictatorship: sauing that he chose such a wor∣thy Lieutenant; whereas indeede in no other thing hee had so greatly erred. But the Dictator was not so joyfull of a little good luck, as angry with the breach of di∣scipline; and fearefull of greater danger, thereon likely to ensue. Hee said that hee knew his owne place, and what was to be done; that he would teach the Master of the horse to doe so likewise; and make him giue account of what he had done, if hee were Dictator: speaking it openly, That good successe, issuing from bad counsaile, was more to be feared, than calamitie; for as much as the one bred a foolish confi∣dence; the other taught men to be warie. Against these Sermons euery one cryed out; especially Metellus, a Tribune of the people: which Office warranted him to speake, and doe what he list, without feare of the Dictator. Is it not enough (said he) that this our only Man, chosen to be Generall, and Lord of the Towne, in our grea∣test necessitie, hath done no manner of good, but suffered all Italie to bee wasted be∣fore his eyes, to the vtter shame of our State; vnlesse he also hinder others, from do∣ing better than himselfe can, or dares? It were good to consider what he meanes by this. Into the place of C. Flaminius hee hath not chosen any new Consul all this while; Seruilius is sent away to Sea, I know not why; Hannibal and Hee, haue as it were taken Truce; Hannibal sparing the Dictators grounds: (for Hannibal had in∣deede forborne to spoile some grounds of Fabius, that so hee might bring him into enuie & suspition) & the Dictator giuing him leaue to spoile all others, without im∣peachment. Surely his drift is euen this: He would haue the warre to last long, that he himselfe might be long in Office, and haue the sole Gouernement both of our Citie, and Armies. But this must not be so. It were better, that the Commonaltie of Rome, which gaue him this authoritie, should againe take it from him, and con∣ferre it vpon one more worthy. But lest, in the people hereto, I should seeme to doe him injurie; thus farre forth I will regard his honour: I will only pro∣pound, That the Master of the Horse may be joyned in equall authority with the Dictator; a thing not more new, nor lesse necessarie, than was the electing of this Dictator, by the People. Though all men, euen the Senators, were ill perswaded of the course which Fa∣bius had taken against Hannibal, as being neither plausible, nor seeming beneficiall at the present; yet was there none so injurious, as to thinke that his generall intent, and care of the Weale publike, was lesse than very honourable. Whereas therefore it was the manner, in passing of any Act, that some man of credit and authority, be∣sides the Propounder, should stand vp, and formally deliuer his approbation; not one of the principall Citizens was found so impudent, as to offer that open disgrace, both vnto a worthy Personage, and (therewithall) vnto that Dignitie, whose great power had freed the State at seuerall times, from the greatest dangers. Only C. Te∣rentius Varro, who the yeere before had beene Praetor, was glad of such an opportu∣nitie, to winne the fauour of the Multitude. This fellow was the sonne of a But∣cher; afterwards became a shop-keeper; and being of a contentious spirit, grew; by often brabblings, to take vpon him as a Pleader, dealing in poore mens causes. Thus by little and little he got into Office; and rose by degrees, being aduanced by those, who in hatred of the Nobilitie fauoured his very basenesse. And now hee thought the time was come, for him to giue an hard push at the Consulship; by do∣ing that, which none of the great men, fearing or fauouring one another, either durst or would. So he made an hot inuectiue, not only against Fabius, but against all the Nobilitie; saying, that it grieued them to see the people doe well, and take vpon them what belonged vnto them, in matter of Gouernement; that they sought to humble the Commons by pouertie, and to impouerish them by warre; especially by warre at their owne doores, which would soone consume euery poore mans li∣uing, and finde him other worke to thinke vpon, than matter of State. Therefore he bade them to be wise: and since they had found one, (this worthy Master of the horse) that was better affected vnto them and his Countrie, to reward him accor∣ding to his good deserts; and giue him authoritie, accordingly as was propounded by the Tribune, that so hee might be encouraged and enabled, to proceede as he had begunne. So the Act passed. Before this busie day of contention, Fabius had dispatched the election of a new Consul, which was M. Atilius Regulus, in the roome of C. Flaminius: and hauing finished all requisite businesse, went out of Towne, perceiuing well, that he should not bee able to withstand the Multitude, in hindering the Decree. The newes of Minutius his aduancement, was at the campe as soone as Fabius: so that his old Lieutenant, and new Colleague, beganne to treat with him as a Companion; as∣king him at the first, in what sort he thought it best to diuide their authoritie: whe∣ther that one, one day; and the other, the next; or each of them, successiuely, for some longer time, should command in chiefe. Fabius briefly told him, That it was the pleasure of the Citizens, to make the Master of the horse equal to the Dictator; but that he should neuer be his superiour: He would therefore diuide the Legions with him, by lot, according to the custome. Minutius was not herewith greatly plea∣sed; for that with halfe of the Armie he could not worke such wonders, as other∣wise he hoped to accomplish. Neuerthelesse hee meant to doe his best; and so ta∣king his part of the Armie, incamped about a mile and an halfe from the Dictator. Needfull it was (though Liuie seeme to taxe him for it) that he should so doe. For where two seuerall Commanders are not subordinate one vnto the other, nor ioy∣ned in Commission, but haue each entire & absolute charge of his owne followers there are the forces (though belonging vnto one Prince or State) not one, but two distinct Armies: in which regard, one campe shall not hold them both, without great inconuenience. Polybius neither findes fault with this disiunction; nor yet re∣ports, that Fabius was vnwilling to command in chiefe successiuely (as the two Con∣suls vsed) with Minutius, by turnes. Hee saith that Minutius was very refractarie; and so proud of his aduancement, that continually he opposed the Dictator: who thereupen referred it to his choice, either to diuide the forces betweene them, as is said before, or else to haue command ouer all by course. This is likely to bee true. For natures impatient of subjection, when once they haue broken loose from the rigour of authority, loue nothing more, than to contest with it: as if herein consisted the proofe and assurance of their libertie. It behoued the Master of the horse, to make good the opinion which had thus aduanced him. Therefore he was no lesse carefull, of getting occasion to fight, than was Fabius of auoiding the . That which Minutius and Hannibal equally , could not long be wanting. The Countrie lying betweene them was open and bare, yet as fit for ambush, as could be wished: for that the sides of a naked val∣ley adjoyning, had many, and spacious caues; able, some one of them, to hide two or three hundred men. In these lurking places, Hannibal bestowed fiue hundred horse, and fiue thousand foot; thrusting them so close together, that they could not be . But lest by any misaduenture they should be found out, and buried in their holes; he made offer betimes in the morning, to seize vpon a peece of ground that lay on the other hand: whereby he drew the and thoughts of the Romans, from their more needfull care, to businesse little concerning them. Like vnto this was the occasion, which, not long before, had prouoked Minutius, to aduenture vp∣on the Carthaginians. Hoping therefore to increase his honour, in like sort as hee got it; he sent first his light armature, then his horse, and at length (seeing that Hanni∣bal seconded his owne troupes with fresh companies) hee followed in person with the Legions. He was soone caught; and so hotly charged on all sides, that he knew neither how to make resistance, nor any safe retrait. In this dangerous case, whilest the Romans defended themselues, loosing many, and those of their best men: Fabius drew neere, in very good order, to relieue them. For this old Captaine, perceiuing a farre off, into what his new Colleague had rashly himselfe, and his followers; did the office of a good Citizen; and regarding more the benefit of his Country, than the disgrace which he had wrongfully sustained, sought rather to approue himselfe by hasting to doe good, than by suffering his enemie to feele the reward of doing ill. Vpon Fabius his approch, Hannibal retyred: to be well wetted with a showre, from the cloud (as he termed the Dictator) that had hung so long on the Hill-tops. Minutius forthwith submitted himselfe to Fabius; by whose benefit hee confessed his life to haue beene saued. So from this time forwards, the Warre proceeded coldly, as the Dictator would haue it; both whilest his Office la∣sted, which was not long, and likewise , when he deliuered vp his charge vnto the Consuls, that followed his instructions. Seruilius the Consul had pursued in vaine a Carthaginian fleet, to which he came neuer within kenning. He ranne along all the coast of Italie; tooke hostages of the Sardinians and Corsicans; passed ouer into Africk; and there negligently falling to spoile the Countrie, was shamefully beaten aboord his ships, with the losse of a thousand men. Weighing anchor therefore in all haste, hee returned home by Si∣cil; and (being so required by the Dictators letters) repaired to the campe, with his fellow-Consul, where they tooke charge of the Armie. §. VII. The Roman people, desirous to finish the warre quickly, choose a rash and vnworthie Consul. Great forces leuied against HANNIBAL. HANNIBAL ta∣keth the Romans prouisions in the Castle of Cannae. The new Consuls set forth against HANNIBAL. WIth little pleasure did they of the poorer sort in Rome, heare the great commendations, that were giuen to Fabius by the principal Citizens. He had indeed preserued them from receiuing a great ouerthrow: but he had neither finished the warre, nor done any thing in apparance thereto tending. Rather it might seeme, that the reputation of this his one worthy act, was likely to countenance the slow proceedings, or perhaps the cowardize (if it were no worse) of those that followed him, in protracting the work to a great length. Else, what meant the Consuls to sit idle the whole winter, contra∣rie to all former custome; it was neuer heard before, that any Roman Generall had willingly suffered the time of his command to run away without any perfor∣mance; as if it were honorable to doe iust nothing? Thus they suspected they knew not what; and were readie euery man, to discharge the griefe and anger of his own priuate losse, vpon the ill administration of the publique. This affection of the people, was very helpful to C. Terentius Varro, in his suit for the Consulship. It behoued him to strike, whilst the Iron was hot: his owne worth being little or none, and his credit ouer-weake, to make way into that high Dignity. But the Cōminaltie were then in such a moode, as abundantly supplied all his de∣fects. Wherein to help, he had a kinsman, Bibius Herennius, then Tribune of the Peo∣ple; who spared not to vse the libertie of his place: in saying what he listed, without all regard of truth, or modestie. This bold Orator stuck not to affirme, That Han∣nibal was drawn into Italie, and suffered therein to range at his pleasure, by the No∣blemen; That Minutius indeed with his two Legions, was likely to haue been ouer∣throwne, and was rescued by Fabius with the other two: but had al been joyned to∣gether, what they might haue done, it was apparent, by the victorie of Minutius, when he cōmanded ouer al as Master of the horse; That without a Plebeian Con∣sul, the warre would neuer be brought to an end; That such of the Plebeians, as long since been aduanced to honour by the people, were grown as proud as the old Nobilitie, and contemned the sort, euer since themselues were freed from contempt of the more mightie; That therefore it was needful to choose a Consul, who should be altogether a Plebeian, a meere new man, one that could boast of no∣thing but the Peoples loue, nor could wish more, than to keep it, by well deseruing of them. By such perswasions, the Multitude was won, to be wholly for : to the great vexatiō of the Nobles, who could not endure, to see a man raised for none other vertue, than his detracting from their honor; and therfore opposed him with al their might. To hinder the desire of the People, it fel out, or at least was alleaged, that neither of the two present Consuls could well be spared, from attending vpon Hannibal, to hold the Election. Wherefore a Dictator was named for that purpose: and he againe deposed; either (as was pretended) for some religious impediment, or because the Fathers desired an Inter-regnum, wherein they might better hope to preuaile in choice of the new Consuls. This Inter-regnum tooke name and being in Rome, at the death of Romulus; and was in vse at the death of other Kings. The or∣der of it was this. Al the Fathers, or Senators, who at the first were an hundred, parted themselues into Tens, or Decuries; and gouerned successiuely, by the space of fiue , one Decurie after another in order: yet so, that the Lictors, or Virgers, carrying the Fasces, or bundles of rods and axes, waited only vpon the chiefe of them with these Ensignes of power. This custome was retained, in times of the Consuls; and put in vse, when by death, or any , there wanted ordinary Magistrates of the old yeare, to substitute new for the yeare following. The aduantage of the Fathers herein was, that if the Election were not like to goe as they would haue it, there no more, than to let slip fiue daies, & then was all to begin anew: by which in∣terruption, the heat of the Multitude was commonly well asswaged. Vpon such change of those, that were Presidents of the Election; it was also lawfull vnto new Petitioners, to sue for the Magistracies that lay void: which otherwise was not al∣lowed; but a time limited, wherein they should publiquely declare themselues to seeke those Offices. But no deuice would serue, against the generall fauour borne vnto Terentius. One Inter-regnum passed ouer; and the malice of the Fathers, against the vertue (as it was belieued) of this meane, but worthie man, seemed so manifest, that when the People had vrged the businesse to dispatch, only Terentius was cho∣sen Consul: in whose hand it was left, to hold the election of his Colleague. Here∣vpon all the former Petitioners gaue ouer. For whereas men of ordinary marke had stood for the place before; it was now though meet, that, both to supply the de∣fect, and to bridle the violence of this vnexpert, and hot-headed man, one of great sufficiencie, and reputation, should be joyned with him, as both Companion and opposite. So L. Aemilius Paulus, he who few yeares since had ouer-come the Illyri∣ans, and chaced Demetrius Pharius out of his Kingdome, was vrged by the Nobility to stand for the place: which he easily obtained, hauing no Competitor. It was not the desire of this honourable man, to trouble himselfe any more in such great busi∣nesse of the Common-wealth. For, notwithstanding his late good seruice; He, and M. that had been his companion in Office, were afterwards iniuriously vexed by the People, and called vnto judgement: wherin Liuius was condemned, and Ae∣milius hardly escaped. But of this they shall put the Romans well in minde each of them in his second Consulship, wherein they shall honorably approue their worth; the one of them nobly dying, in the most grieuous losse; the other brauely winning, in the most happie victorie, that euer befell that Common-wealth. These new Consuls, Varro and Paulus, omitted no part of their diligence in pre∣paring for the warre: wherein though Varro made the greater noise, by telling what wonders he would worke, and that hee would aske no more, than once to haue a fight of Hannibal, whom he promised to vanquish the very first day; yet the proui∣dence and care of Paulus, trauailed more earnestly toward the accomplishment of that, wherof his fellow vainely boasted. He wrote vnto the two old Consuls and Atilius; desiring them to abstaine from hazard of the maine chance; but neuerthelesse, to ply the Carthaginians with daily skirmish, and weaken them by de∣grees: that when he and his Colleague should take the field, with the great which they were now leuying, they might find the foure old Legions well accusto∣med to the Enemie, and the Enemie well weakened to their hands. He was also ve∣ry strict in his Musters; wherein the whole Senate assisted him so carefully, as if in this Action they meant to refute the slanders, with which Tcrentius and his Adhe∣rents had burdened them. What number of men they raised it is vncertaine. Foure∣score thousand foot, at the least, and sixe thousand horse, they were strong in the field, when the day came, which Varro had so greatly desired, of looking vpon Han∣nibal. Hiero, the old King of Syracuse, as he had relieued the Carthaginians, when they were distressed by their owne Mercinaries; so did he now send helpe to Rome, a thousand Archers, and Slingers, with great quantity of Wheat, , and other prouisions: fearing nothing more, than that one of these two mighty Cities should destroy the other, whereby his owne would fall to ruine; that stood vpright, by hauing them somewhat euenly ballanced. He gaue them also counsaile, to send forces into Africa; if (perhaps) by that meanes they might diuert the warre from home. His gifts, and good aduice were louingly accepted; and instructions were giuen to Titus Octacilius the Praetor, which was to goe into Sicil, that he should ac∣cordingly passe ouer into Africk, if he fonnd it expedient. The great Leuies, which the Romans made at this time, doe much more serue to declare their puissance, than any, though larger accompt by Poll, of such as were not easily drawne into the field, and fitted for seruice. For besides these Armies of the Consuls, and that which went into Sicil; twentie fiue thousand, with L. Posthu∣mius Albinus another of the Praetors, went against the Gaules, to reclaime that Pro∣uince, which the passage of Hannibal through it, had taken from them. The con∣templation of this their present strength, might well embolden them to do as they did. They sent Embassadors to Philip the sonne of Demetrius, King of Macedon; re∣quiring him to deliuer into their hands Demetrius Pharius: who hauing been their subiect, and rebel, was fled into his Kingdom. They also sent to the Illyrians, to de∣mand their tribute; whereof the day of payment was alreadie past. What answere they receiued, it is not knowne: only this is known, that Demetrius Pharius was not sent vnto them; and that Philip hencefoorth beganne to haue an eye vpon them, little to their good. As for the Illyrian monie; by the shifts that they were driuen soone after to make, it will appeare, that the one halfe of it (how little soeuer) would haue beene welcome to Rome, and accepted, without any cauil about forfeiture for non paiment of the whole. Whilst the Citie was busied in these cares, the old Consuls lay as neere vnto Han∣nibal, as possibly as they could, without incurring the necessitie of a battaile. Many skirmishes they had with him; wherein their successe for the most part, was rather good than great. Yet one mischance not only blemished the honour of their other seruices, but was indeed the occasion, to draw on the following. Hannibal, for the most part of that time, made his abode at Geryon, where lay all his store for the Winter. The Romans, to be neere him lodged about Cannusium; and, that they might not be driuen to turne aside for all necessaries, to the losse of good opportu∣nities, they bestowed much of their prouisions in the Castle of Cannae: for the town was razed the yeere before. This place Hannibal wanne; and thereby not only fur∣nished himselfe, but compelled his enemies to want many needfull things, vnlesse they would be troubled with farre carriage. Besides this, and more to his aduan∣tage, he enabled himselfe to abide in that open Countrie, fit for the seruice of his horse: longer then the Romans, hauing so many mouthes to feed, could wel endure to tarrie; without offering battaile; which he most desired. Of this mishap when Seruilius had informed the Senate, letting them vnderstand, how this Peece, taken by Hannibal, would serue him to command no small part of the Country adjacent; it then seemed needfull, euen vnto the Fathers themselues, to aduenture a battaile with the Carthaginian, rather than suffer him thus to take roote in the ground of I∣talie. Neuerthelesse, answere was returned vnto Seruilius, that hee should haue pa∣tience yet awhile: for that the Consuls would shortly be there, with a power suffi∣cient to doe as need required. When all things were readie in the Citie, and the season of the yere commodious to take the field; the two Consuls, with their , set forth against Hannibal. This was alwaies done with great : especially, whensoeuer they went forth to warre against any noble or redoubted Enemie. For Sacrifices, and solemne Vowes, were made vnto Iupiter, and the rest of their gods, for good successe and victorie: which being performed; the Generals in warlike attire, with an honorable traine of the principall men, not only such as were of their kindred and alliance, or followed them to the warre, as Voluntaries, for loue, but a great number of others that meant to abide at home, were accompanied on their way, & dismissed with friendly leaue∣taking, and good wishes. At this time, all the Fathers, and the whole Nobility, wai∣ted vpon Aemilius Paulus, as the only Man, whom they thought either worthie of this honor, or likely to do his countrie remarkable seruice. Terentius his Attendants were the whole multitude of the poorer Citizens; a troupe no lesse in greatnes, than the other was in dignitie. At the parting; Fabius the late Dictator, is said to haue ex∣horted the Consul Paulus, with many graue words, to shew his magnanimitie, not onely in dealing with the Carthaginians, but (which he thought harder) in bridling the outragious follie of his fellow-Consul. The answere of Paulus was, That hee meant not againe to runne into danger of condemnation, by offending the multi∣tude; that he would doe his best for his countrie: but if he saw his best were likely to be ill taken, he would thinke it lesse rashnesse to aduenture vpon the Enemies sword, than vpon the malice of his Citizens. §. VIII. Dissension betweene the two Roman Consuls. Whether it be likely, that HANNIBAL was vpon point of flying out of Italie, when the Romans pressed him to fight. The great battaile of Cannae. THese new Generals, arriuing at the Camp, dismissed M. Atilius one of the last yeares Consuls, requesting it because of his age and weakenes: Seruilius they retained with them, as their Assistant. The first thing that Aemilius thought necessarie, was, to hearten his Souldiers with good words; who out of their bad successe hitherto, had gathered more cause of feare, than of courage. Hee willed them to consider, not only now, their victories in times past against the Carthaginians, and other more warlike Nati∣ons than were the Carthaginians, but euen their own great numbers: which were no lesse than all that Rome at the present was able to set forth. Hee told them in what danger their Countrie stood; how the state and safety thereof rested vpon their hands; vsing some such other common matter of perswasion. But the most effectual part of his Oration was, That Hannibal with this his terrible Army, had not yet ob∣tained one victorie by plaine force and valour: but that only by deceit and ambush he had stolne the honor, which he had gotten at Trebia and Thrasymene. Herewith∣all he taxed the inconsiderate rashnesse of Sempronius and Flaminius; of whom the one saw not his enemies, vntill he was surrounded by them; the other scarce saw them, when they struck off his head, by reason of the thick mist, through the darke∣nesse whereof he went groping (as it were blinde-fold) into their snares. Finally, de∣claring what aduantages they had against the Enemie; and how destitute the Ene∣mie was of those helps, by which he had hitherto preuailed against them; hee ex∣horted them to play the men, and doe their best. They were easily perswaded: for the contemplation of their owne multitude, and confidence of the Roman vertue in matter of armes, gaue them cause to thinke, that vnder a Captaine so well experien∣ced, and euery way sufficient, as Aemilius was knowne to bee, they should easily preuaile against the Carthaginians: that came farre short of them in all things else, craft; which would not alwaies thriue. But in one thing they mistooke the meaning of their Generall. It was his desire that they should haue heart to fight; not that they should lose the patience of awaiting a conuenient season. But they, hauing preconceiued a victorie, thought all delaies to be impediments: and there∣by sought to robbe themselues of their best helpe; which was, good conduct. They remembred what talke they had heard at Rome: and were themselues affected with the Vulgar desire, of ending the warre quickly; wherein since Aemilius had acknowledged, that the aduantage was theirs, why did he make them forbeare to vse it? Thus thought the common Souldier: and thus also thought the Consul Te∣rentius; who was no lesse popular in the Campe, than he had been in the Citie. Ex∣pectation is alwaies tedious; and neuer more, than when the is of most im∣portance. All men longed, both at Rome, and in the Armie, to be freed from the doubtfull passions of Hope and Feare: therfore Terentius, who hastned their desire to effect, was likely to winne more thankes, than should his Colleague, though greater in performance. Thus while the Romans thinke themselues to haue the better of their Enemies, they fall into an inconuenience, than which few are more dangerous; Dissension of their chiefe Commanders. Varro would fight: Aemilius would so too, but said that it was not yet time; why? because the must shortly dislodge, and re∣moue hence, into places lesse fit for his horse. But shall the Romans wait, till Hanni∣bal, hauing eaten vp his last yeares prouisions, returne into Campania to gather a se∣cond Haruest? This would (said Varro ) too much of Q. Fabius: And your haste (said Paulus ) doth sauour no lesse of C. Flaminius. Their deedes were like their wordes: for they commanded by turnes interchangeably euery day. Aemilius lod∣ged sixe miles from Hannibal, where the ground was somewhat vneuen. Thither if the Carthaginians would take paines to come; hee doubted not to send them away in such haste, as they should not leaue running till they were out of Italie. But they came not. Terentius therefore the next day descended into the Plaines; his Col∣league holding him, and beseeching him to stay. Neuerthelesse he sate downe close by Hannibal: who as an vnbidden guest gaue him but a rude wel come and inter∣tainement. The Carthaginian Horse, and light Armature, vpon the Roman Vant∣courrers; and put the whole Armie in tumult, whilest it was yet in march: but they were beaten off, not without losse, for that the Romans had among their Velites, some troupes weightily armed, whereas the Carthaginians had none. The day following, Aemilius, who could not handsomly withdraw the Army out of that leuel ground; incamped vpon the Riuer Aufidus; sending a third part of his forces ouer the wa∣ter, to lie vpon the Easterne banke, where they entrenched themselues. Hee neuer was more vnwilling to fight, than at this present: because the ground serued whol∣ly for the aduantage of his enemie; with whom he meant to deale, when occasion should draw him to more equal termes. Therefore he stirred not out of his Tren∣ches, but fortified himselfe; expecting when Hannibal should dislodge, and remoue toward Geryon, Cannae, or some other place, where his store lay, for want of neces∣saries: whereof an Armie forraging the country, was not likely to carrie about with it sufficient quantitie, for any long time. Here it would not be passed ouer with silence, That Liuie differeth much in his Relation from Polybius: telling many strange tales, of the miserie into which Han∣nibal had been driuen; and of base courses that he deuised to take, if the Romans could haue retained their patience a little longer. He had (saith Liuie ) but ten daies prouision of meat. He had not monie to pay his Souldiers. They were an vnruly Rabble, gathered out of seuerall Nations, so that he knew not how to keepe them in order; but that from murmuring, they fell to flat exclamations, first, about their Pay, and Prouant, and afterwards for very famine. Especially the Spaniards were readie to forsake him, and runne ouer to the Roman side. Yea Hannibal himselfe was once vpon the point, to haue stolne away into Gaule with all his horse, and left his foot vnto their miserable destinies. At length for lacke of all other counsaile, he re∣solued to get him as farre as he could from the Romans, into the Southermost parts of Apulia; to the end, that both his vnfaithfull Souldiers might the more dif∣ficultie in running from him; and that his hunger might be relieued with the more early haruest. But whilest he was about to put this in execution, the Romans pressed him so hard, that they euen forced him vnto that, which hee most desired; euen to fight a battaile vpon open Champaine ground: wherein hee was victorious: It was not vncommendable in Liuie, to speake the best of his owne Citizens; and, where they did ill, to say, That, without their owne great folly, they had done pas∣sing well. Further also he may be excused; as writing onely by report. For thus hee saith; HANNIBAL de fugâ in Galliam [ dicitur ] agitâsse; HANNIBAL [ is said ] to haue bethought himselfe of flying into Gaule: where he makes it no more then a matter of heare-say; as perhaps was all the rest of this Relation. As for the processe it selfe, it is very incredible. For if Hannibal, comming out of Gaule, through the Marishes and Bogs of Hetruria, could finde victuailes enough, and all things needfull vnto his Armie, the Summer forgoing: what should hinder him to doe the like this yeare; especially seeing he had plaid the carefull husband in making a great haruest; since he had long beene Master of the open field; and besides, had gotten, by surprise, no small part of the Romans prouisions? Suteable hereunto is all the rest. If Hannibal had taken nothing but corne and cattaile; his Souldiers might perhaps haue fallen into mutinic for pay. But he brought gold with him into Italie: and had so well in∣creased his stock, since he came into that Countrie, that hee had armed his African Souldiers, all Roman-like; and loaden his followers with spoile: hauing left where∣with to redeeme as many of his owne, as were taken by the ; when the Ro∣mans were not willing, as finding it not easie to doe the like. In this point therefore, we are to attend the generall agreement of Historians: who giue it as a principall commendation vnto Hannibal, That hee alwaies kept his Armie free from sedition, though it were composed of sundrie Nations; no lesse different in Manners, Reli∣gion, and almost in Nature, than they were in languages: and well might he so doe, hauing not only pronounced, That which of his men soeuer fought brauely with an Enemie, was thereby a Carthaginian; but solemnely protested and sworne, (be∣sides other rewards) to make as many of them, as should deserue and seeke it, free Citizens of Carthage. The running away into Gaule, was a senlesse deuice. Hanni∣bal, being there with his whole Armie, tooke so little pleasure in the Countrie and People, that he made all haste to get him out of it. And what should he now doe there with his horse? or how could hee bee trusted, either there or elsewhere? yea, how could he desire to liue; hauing betrayed all his Army; and relinquished his miserable foot, to the butcherie of their enemies? This tale therfore Plutarch omit∣teth; who in writing the life of Hannibal, takes in a maner al his directions from Li∣uie. But of this and the like it is enough to say, That all Historians loue to extoll their owne countrimen; and where a losse cannot be dissembled, nor the honour of the victorie taken the Enemie, and giuen vnto blind Fortune, there to lay all the blame on strange misgouernment of their own forces: as if they might easily haue wonne all, but lost all through such folly, as no Enemie can hope to find in them another time. Now let vs returne backe to the two Armies, where they lie emcamped on the Riuer Aufidus. Varro was perswaded, that it concerned him in honor, to make good his word vnto the people of Rome; and since he had thus long waited in vaine, to get the consent of Paulus, now at length to vse his owne authority; and, without any more disputing of the matter, to fight when his owne day came. When therefore it was his turne to command; at the first breake of day he beganne to passe the Riuer, without staying to bid his Colleague good morrow. But Paulus came to him; and sought, as in former times, to haue disswaded him, from putting the estate of his Countrie to a needlesse . Against whose wordes and substantiall arguments, Terentius could alleage none other, than point of Honour. Hannibal had presented them battaile at their Trenches: should they endure this Brauado? He had sent his Numidians ouer the Riuer but euen the day before, who fel vpon the Romans that were fetching water to the lesser Campe; and draue them shamefully to runne within their defences, which also they made offer to assaile: must this also be suffe∣red? He would not endure it: for it could not but weaken the spirit of the Roman Souldier; which as yet was liuely, and full of such courage, as promised assured vi∣ctorie. When Aemilius perceiued, that he could not hinder the obstinate resolution of his Companion; he tooke all care, that what he saw must be done, might be done well. Ten thousand Roman foot he caused to be left behind, in the greater campe, opposite vnto the Carthaginian; to the intent, that either Hannibal might bee com∣pelled, to leaue behind him some answerable number, for defence of his Trenches: (which out of his paucity he was lesse able to spare from the battaile, than were the Romans ) or that these ten thousand, falling vpon the Carthaginian Campe, when the fight beganne, and taking it with all the wealth therein, might therby (as common∣ly doe such accidents) terrifie and distract the Enemies in the heate of fight. This done; the two Consuls went ouer the water with their Armie to the lesser Cump, whence also they drew forth their men, and ranged them in order of battaile: the ground on the East part of the Riuer, seeming perhaps more fit for marshalling of their Armie. Hannibal was glad of this, as he had great cause; and, without any de∣lay, passed likewise ouer, somewhat higher vp the streame, which from the South; leauing in his owne campe so many, as he thought would to defend it, and no more. To encourage his men; He bade them looke about them, and view the ground well, vpon which they were to fight. They did so. And could you (said he) pray for any greater fortune, than to joyne battaile with the Romans vpon such a leuell ground, where the stronger in horse are to preuaile? They all assented to him; and shewed by their countenances, that they were very glad of it. Well then (said he further) ye are first of all to thanke the gods, that haue brought them hither; and then Vs, that haue trained them along, and drawne them into necessi∣tie of playing for their liues, where they are sure to loose them. As for these Ro∣mans, I was faine to encourage you against them, when yee met them first but now yee may euen encourage your selues, by calling to minde that they are the men, whom ye haue as often beaten as seene. Of one thing only I will put you in minde: That whereas hitherto you fought for other respects; as, to driue them before you out of Gaule; and to winne the open Countrie, and fields of Italie; both of which yee haue obtained: now are yee to fight for the Townes themselues, and all the riches within them; which this victorie shall make yours. Therefore play the stout Souldiers: and ere many houres passe, yee shall bee Lords of all that the Romans hold. When he had said this; his brother Mago came to him, whom hee had sent to view the countenance of the Enemie. Hannibal asked him, what newes; and what worke they were likely to haue with these Romans? Worke enough (answered Ma∣go ) for they are an horrible many. As horrible a many as they are (thus Hannibal replied) I tell thee, brother, that among them all, search them neuer so diligently, thou shalt not finde one man, whose name is Mago. With that hee fell a laughing, and so did all that stood about him: which gladded the souldiers, who thought their Generall would not be so merry, without great assurance. Whether it were so, that Hannibal, in the pride of his victories already gotten, valued one Mago aboue many thousand Romans; or whether he intimated, that the Romans were no lesse troubled with thinking vpon Mago and his Companions, than was Mago with beholding their huge multitude; or whether hee meant only to correct the sad moode of his brother with a jest, and shew himselfe merry vnto the Souldiers: this his answere was more manly, than was the relation of his discouerer. But if Hannibal himselfe had beene sent forth by Mago, to view the Romans; he could not haue returned with a more gallant report in his mouth, than that which Captaine Gam before the bat∣taile of Agincourt, made vnto our King Henrie the fift: saying, that of the Frenchmen, there were to bee killed; to bee taken prisoners; and to run away. Euen such words as these, or such pleasant jests as this of Hannibal, are not without their moment; but serue many times, when battaile is at hand, to worke vpon such passions, as must gouerne more of the businesse: especially, where other needfull care is not wanting; without which they are but vaine boasts. In this great day, the Carthaginian excelled himselfe; expressing no lesse perfe∣ction of his militarie skill, than was greatnesse in his spirit and vndertakings. For to omit the commodiousnesse of the place, into which hee had long before conceiued the meanes to draw his enemies to battaile; He marshalled his Armie in such con∣uenient order, that all hands were brought to fight, where euery one might doe best seruice. His Darters, and Slingers of the Baleares, hee sent off before him, to en∣counter with the Roman Velites. These were loose troupes, answerable in a manner to those, which we call now by a French name Enfans per dues; but when we vsed our owne termes, the forlorne hope. The grosse of his Armie following them, he ordered thus. His Africans, armed after the Roman manner, with the spoiles which they had gotten at Trebia, Thrasymene, or elsewhere; and well in the vse of those weapons, that were of more aduantage, than those where with they had formerly serued; made the two wings, very deepe in File. Betweene these hee ranged his Gaules and Spaniards, armed, each after their owne Countrie manner; their shields alike; but the Gaules vsing long broad swordes, that were forcible in a downe-right stroke; the Spaniards, short and well-pointed blades, either to strike or thrust; the Gaules, naked from their nauell vpwards, as confident in their owne fiercenesse: the Spaniards, wearing white cassocks embroidered with purple. This medley of two Nations, differing as well in habit and furniture, as in qualitie, made a gallant shew; and terrible, because strange. The Gaules were strong of body, and furious in giuing charge; but soone wearied, as accustomed to spend their violence at the first brunt, which disposition all that come of them haue inherited to this day. The Spaniards were lesse eager, but more warie; neither ashamed to giue ground, when they were ouer-pressed, nor afraid to returne, and renew the fight, vpon any small encourage∣ment. As the roughnesse of the one, and patience the other, serued mutually to reduce of them to a good and firme temper; so the place which they held in this battaile, added confidence joyntly vnto them both. For they saw themselues well and strongly flanked with Carthaginians and other Africans; whose name was growne terrible in Spaine, by their Conquests; and in Gaule, by this their present warre. Since therefore it could not bee feared, that any great calamitie should vpon them, whilest the wings on either side stood : these Barbarians had no cause to shrinke, or forbeare to imploy the vtmost of their hardines, as knowing that the Enemie could not presse farre vpon them, without further engaging himselfe than discretion would allow. Hereunto may be added that great aduantage, which the Carthaginian had in horse: by which he was able, if the worst had happened, to make a good retrait. The effect of contraries is many times alike. Desperation begetteth courage; but not greater, nor so liuely, as doth assured Confidence. Hannibal there∣fore caused these Gaules and Spaniards to aduance; leauing void the place wherein they had stood, and into which they might fall backe, when they should bee ouer∣hardly pressed. So, casting them into the forme of a Crescent; Hee made them as it were his Vantguard: the two points of this great halfe Moone, that looked toward the space from which he had drawne it, being narrow and thinne, as seruing only to guide it orderly backe, when neede should require; the foremost part of the Ring, swelling out toward the enemies, being well strengthned & thickned against all impression. The circle hereof seemeth to haue beene so great, that it shadowed the Africans, who stood behinde it: though such figures, cut in brasse, as I haue seene of this Battaile, present it more narrow; with little reason, as shall anon ap∣peare: as also in the same figures it is omitted, That any Companies of Africans, or others, were left in the , to second the Gaules and Spaniards, when they were driuen to retrait; though it be manifest, that Hannibal in person stood betweene the last rancks of his long battalions, & in the head of his Reare, doubtles well accom∣panied with the choice of his owne Nation. Betweene the left battalion and the Ri∣uer Aufidus, were the Gaules and Spanish horse, vnder the command Asdrubal: On the right wing, toward the wide Plaines, was ( Liuie saith ) with the Numidian light-horse. himselfe, with his brother , had the leading of the Reare. The whole summe of Armie in the field this day, was tenne thousand horse, and fourtie thousand foot; his enemies hauing two to one against him in foot; and Hee, fiue to three against them in horse. The Roman Armie was marshalled in the vsuall forme: but somwhat more nar∣row, and deepe, than was accustomed; perhaps, because this had beene found against the Carthaginians, in the warre. It was indeede no bad way of resistance against Elephants, to make the Ranks thick and short, but the Files long; as also to strengthen well the Reare, that it might stand fast compacted as a wall, vn∣der shelter whereof the disordered troupes might re-allie themselues. Thus much it seemes, that Terentius had learned of some old ; and therefore he now ordered his Battailes accordingly, as meaning to shew more skill, than was in his vnderstanding. But the Carthaginians had here no Elephants with them in the field: their aduantage was in Horse; against which, this manner of embattailing was very vnprofitable, forasmuch as their charge is bettersustained in front, than vpon a long flanke. As for Aemilius; it was not his day of command: He was but an Assistant; and in such cases it happens often, that wise men yeeld for very wearinesse vnto the more contentious. Vpon the right hand, and toward the Riuer, were the Roman horse-men, vnder the Consul Paulus: On the left wing, was C. Terentius the other Consul, with the rest of the horse, which were of the Latines, and other Asso∣ciates: Cn. Seruilius the former yeeres Consul, had the leading of the battaile. The Sunne was newly risen, and offended neither part; the Carthaginians hauing their faces Northward; the Romans toward the South. After some light skirmish, betweene the Roman Velites and Hannibal his Darters and slingers of the : Asdrubal brake vpon the Consul Paulus, and was rough∣ly encountred; not after the manner of seruice on horse-backe, vsed in those times, wheeling about Alman-like; but each giuing on in a right line, Pouldron to Poul∣dron, as hauing the Riuer on the one hand, and the shoulder of the foot on the o∣ther hand; so that there was no way left, but to pierce and breake thorow. Wher∣fore they not only vsed their Lances and Swordes; but rushing violently amongst the Enemies, grasped one another: and so, their horses running from vnder them, fell many to the ground; where starting vp againe, they beganne to deale blowes like foot-men. In conclusion, the Roman horse were ouer-borne, and driuen by plaine force to a staggering recoile. This the Consul Paulus could not remedy. For Asdrubal, with his boisterous Gaules and Spaniards, was not to bee resisted by these Roman Gentlemen, vnequall both in number, and in horsemanship. When the bat∣tailes came to joyning, the Roman Legionaries found worke enough, and more than enough, to breake that great Crescent, vpon which they first fell: so strongly, for the while, did the and Spanish foot make resistance. Wherefore the two points of their battaile drew towards the midst; by whose aide, these Op∣posites were forced to disband, and flie backe to their first place. This they did in great haste and feare: and were with no lesse haste, and pursued. Vpon the Africans, that stood behinde them, they needed not to fall foule; both for that there was void roome enough; and forasmuch as the Reare, or Hornes of this Moone, pointed into the safe retrait, where Hannibal with his Carthaginians was ready to re∣enforce them, when time should require. In this hasty retrait, or flight, of the Gaules and Spaniards; it hapned, as was necessarie, that they who stood in the limbe or vtter compasse of the halfe Moone, made the innermost or concaue surface thereof (disordered and broken though it were) when it was forced to turne the inside out∣ward: the hornes or points thereof, as yet, vntouched, only turning round, and re∣coiling very little. So the Romans, in pursuing them, were inclosed in an halfe-cir∣cle; which they should not haue needed greatly to regard, (for that the sides of it were exceeding thinne & broken; and the bottome of it, none other than a throng of men rowted, and vnable to make resistance) had all the enemies foot bin cast into this one great body, that was in a manner dissolued. But whilest the Le∣gions, following their supposed victorie, rushed on vpon those that stood before them, and thereby vnwittingly engaged themselues deepely within the principall strength of the Enemies, hedging them in on both hands; the two African Batta∣lions on either side aduanced so farre, that getting beyond the Reare of them, they inclosed them, in a manner, behinde: and forward they could not passe farre; with∣out remouing Hannibal and Mago; which made that way the least easie. Hereby it is apparent, That the great Crescent, before spoken of, was of such extent, as coue∣red the Africans; who lay behinde it vndiscerned, vntill now. For it is agreed, that Plut. in vit. Hannib. the Romans were thus empaled vnawares; and that they bchaued themselues, as men that thought vpon no other worke, than what was found them by the Gaules. Neither is it credible, that they would haue beene so mad, as to runne head-long, with the whole bulke of their Armie, into the throat of slaughter; had they seene those weapons bent against them at the first, which when they did see, they had lit∣tle hope to escape. Much might be imputed to their heat of fight, and rashnesse of inferiour Captaines: but since the Consul Paulus, a man so expert in warre, being vanquished in horse, had put himselfe among the Legions; it cannot bee supposed, that hee and they did wilfully thus engage themselues. Asdrubal, hauing broken the troupes of Roman horse, that were led by the Consul Paulus, followed vpon them along the Riuer side, beating downe and killing, as many as he could, (which were almost all ofthem) without regard of taking prisoners. The Consul himselfe was either driuen vpon his owne Legions, or willingly did cast himselfe among them; as hoping by them to make good the day, notwithstanding the defeat of his horse. But he failed of this his expectation. Neuerthelesse hee cheared vp his men as well as hee could, both with comfortable wordes, and with the example of his owne stout behauiour: beating downe, and killing many of the enemies with his owne hand. The like did Hannibal among his Carthaginians, in the same part of the battaile; and with better successe. For the Consul receiued a blow from a , that did him great hurt: and though a troupe of Roman Gentlemen, riding about him, did their best to saue him from further harme; yet was he so hardly laid at, that he was compelled, by wounds and weakenesse, to forsake his horse. Hereupon all his company alighted, thinking that the Consul had giuen order so to doe: as in many battailes, the Roman men at armes had left their horses, to helpe their foot in distres. When Hannibal (for he was neere at hand) perceiued this, and vnderstood that the Consul had willed his horse-men to dismount; He was very glad of it, and pleasant∣ly said, I had rather he would haue them vnto me, bound hand and foot: mea∣ning, that he had them now almost as safe, as if they were so bound. All this while C. Terentius Varro, with the horse of the Associates, in the left wing, was maruailously troubled by Hanno (or Maharbal ) and the Numidians: who beating vp and downe about that great sandy Plaine, raised a foule dust; which a strong Southwinde, blowing there accustomarily, draue into the eyes & mouthes the Romans. These, vsing their aduantage both of number and of lightnesse, wearied the Consul and his followers exceedingly: neither giuing, nor sustaining any charge, but continually making offers, and wheeling about. Yet at the first they seemed to promise him an happy day ofit. For when the battailes were euen ready to joyne; fiue hundred of these Namidians came pricking away from their fellowes, with their shields cast behinde their backes, (as was the manner of those which yeelded) and, throwing downe their armes, rendred themselues. This was good lucke to beginne withall, if there had beene good meaning. Varro had not leasure to examine them; but cau∣sed them, vnweaponed as they were, to get them behind the Armie, where he bade them rest quietly till all was done. These crafty aduentures did as hee bade them, for a while; till they found opportunitie to put in execution the purpose, for which they had thus yeelded. Vnder their Iackets they had short swords and ponyards; besides which, they found other scattered weapons about the field, of such as were slaine, and therewithall flew vpon the hindmost of the Romans, whilest all eyes and thoughts were bent another way: so that they did great mischiefe, and raised yet a greater terrour. Thus Hannibal, in a plaine leuell ground, found meanes to lay an ambush at the back of his enemies. The last blow, that ended all fight & resistance, was giuen by the same hand which gaue the first. Asdrubal, hauing in short space broken the Roman troupes of horse, and cut in peeces all, saue the Companie of Ae∣milius that rushed into the grosse of his foot, and a very few besides, thatrecouered some narrow passage, betweene the Riuer and their owne Battalions; did not stay to charge vpon the face of the Legions, but fell back behind the Reare of his owne, and fetching about, came vp to the Numidians: with whom hee joyned, and gaue vpon Terentius. This fearefull cloude, as it shewed at the first appearance what weather it had left behinde it, on the other side: so did it prognosticate a dismall storme vnto those, vpon whom it was ready now to fall. Wherefore Terentius his followers, hauing wearied themselues much in doing little, and seeing more worke toward, than they could hope to sustaine; thought it the best way, to auoide the danger by present flight. The Consul was no lesse wise than they, in apprehending the greatnesse of his owne perill; nor more desperate, in striuing to worke impossi∣bilities: it being impossible, when so many shranke from him, to sustaine the im∣pression alone, which he could not haue endured with their assistance. Now hee found, that it was one thing to talke of Hannibal at Rome; and another, to incoun∣ter him. But of this; or of ought else, excepting hasty flight, his present leisure would not serue him to consider. Close at the heeles of him and his flying troupes, fol∣lowed the light Numidians: appointed by Asdrubal vnto the pursuit, as fittest for that seruice. Asdrubal himselfe, with the Gaules and Spanish horse, compassing a∣bout, fell vpon the backes of the Romans; that were ere this hardly distressed, and in a manner surrounded on all parts else. He brake them easily; who before made ill resistance, being inclosed, & laid at on euery side, not knowing which way to turne. Here beganne a pittifull slaughter: the vanquished multitude thronging vp and downe, they knew not whither or which way, whilest euery one sought to auoide those enemies, whom hee saw neercst. Some of the Roman Gentlemen that were about Aemilius, got vp to horse, and saued themselues: which though it is hardly vn∣derstood how they could doe; yet I will rather belecue it, than suppose that Liuie so reporteth, to grace therby his Historie with this following tale. CN. CORNELIVS LENTVLVS, galloping along by a place, where he saw the Consul sitting all bloudied vpon a stone, entreated him to rise and saue himselfe; offering him his assistance and horse. But PAVLVS refused it; willing LENTVLVS to shift for himselfe, and not to loose time: saying, That it was not his purpose to be brought againe into iudgement by the People, either as an accuser of his Colleague, or as guiltie himselfe of that dayes losse. hee willed LENTVLVS to commend him to the Senate, and in particular to FABIVS: willing them to fortifie Rome, as fast and well as they could; and telling , that Hee liued and died mindfull of his wholesome counsaile. These words (peraduenture) or some to like purpose, the Consul vttered to Lentulus, either when against his will hee was drawne to that Battaile, or when hee beheld the first defeat of his Horse; at what time he put himselfe in the head of his Legions. For I doubt not, but Hannibal knew what he said a good while before this; when he thought the Consul and his troupe, in little better case than if they had beene bound. The whole Grosse of the Romans, was inclosed indeede as within a sacke; whereof the African Battalions made the sides; the Spaniards, Gaules, and Hannibal with his Carthaginians, the bot∣tome; and Asdrubal with his horse, closed vp the mouth: in which part, they first of all were shuffled together, and beganne the Rout, wherein all the rest followed. Aemilius therefore, who could not sit his horse, whilest the battaile yet lasted, and whilest the spaces were somewhat open, by which hee might haue withdrawne himselfe; was now (had hee neuer so well beene mounted) vnable to flie, hauing in his way so close a throng of his owne miserable followers, and so many heapes of bodies, as fell apace in that great Carnage. It sufficeth vnto his honour, That in the Battaile hee fought no lesse valiantly, than hee had warily before, both abstained himselfe, and disswaded his fellow-Consul, from fighting at all. If, when the day was vtterly lost, it had laine in his power to saue his owne life, vnto the good of his Countrie, neuer more needing it; I should thinke, that he either too much himselfe; or being too faintly minded, was wearie of the World, and his vn∣thankefull Citizens. But if such a resolution were praise-worthy in Aemilius, as proceeding out of Roman valour; then was the English vertue of the Lord Iohn Talbot Vicount Lisle, sonne to that famous Earle of , who died in the Bat∣taile of , more highly to be honoured. For Aemilius was old, grieuously, not mortally, wounded, and accomptable for the ouerthrow receiued: Talbot was in the flowre of his youth, vnhurt, easily able to haue escaped, and not answerable for that dayes misfortune, when he refused to forsake his father; who foreseeing the losse of the battaile, and not meaning to staine his actions past by flying in his old age, exhorted this his noble sonne to be gone, and leaue him. In this terrible ouerthrow died all the Roman foot, saue two or three thousand, who (as Liuie saith) escaped into the lesser campe; whence, the same night, about sixe hundred of them brake forth, and joyning with such of those in the greater campe, as were willing to trie their fortune, conueyed themselues away ere mor∣ning, about foure thousand foot, and two hundred horse, partly in whole troups, partly dispersed, into Cannusum: the next day, the Roman Camps, both lesse and greater, were yeelded vnto Hannibal by those that remained in them. Polybius hath no mention of this escape: only he reports, that the ten thousand, whom Aemilius had left on the West side of Aufidus (as was shewed before) to set vpon the campe of Hannibal, did as they were appointed; but ere they could effect their desire, which they had well-neere done, the battaile was lost: and Hannibal, comming ouer the water to them, draue them into their owne campe; which they quickly yeelded, hauing lost two thousand of their number. Like enough it is, that at the first sight of Hannibal, comming vpon them with his victorious Armie, a great number of these did flie; and thereby escaped, whilest their fellowes, making defence in vaine, retired into their campe, and held the Enemie busied. For about two Legions they Liu. 1. 19. were (perhaps not halfe full, but made vp by addition of others, whose fault or fortune was like) that hauing serued at Cannae, were afterwards extremely disgra∣ced by the State of Rome, for that they had abandoned their Companions fighting. Of the Roman horse what numbers escaped, it is vncertaine: but very few they were that saued themselues in the first charge, by getting behinde the Riuer; and Teren∣tius the Consul recouered Venusia, with threescore and ten at the most in his compa∣nie. That he was so ill attended, it is no maruaile: for Venusia lay many miles off to the Southward; so that his neerest way thither, had beene through the midst of Hannibals Armie, if the passage had beene open. Therefore it must needes be, that when once he got out of sight, he turned vp some by-way; so disappointing the Nu∣midians that hunted contre. Of such as could not hold pace with the Consul, but other waies, and were scattered ouer the fields; two thousand, or therabouts, were gathered vp by the , & made prisoners: the rest were slaine, all saue three hundred; who dispersed themselues in flight, as chance led them, and got into sundry Townes. There died in this great Battaile of Cannae, besides L. Aemilius Paulus the Consul; two of the Roman Quaestors or Treasurers, and one and twen∣tie Colonells or Tribunes of the Souldiers, fourscore Senators, or such as had borne Office, out of which they were to be chosen into the Senate. Many of these were of especiall marke, as hauing beene Aediles, Praetors, or Consuls: among whom was Cn∣Seruilius the last yeeres Consul, and Minutius, late Master of the horse. The num∣ber of prisoners, taken in this battaile, Liuie makes no greater than three thousand foot, and three hundred horse: too few to haue defended, for the space of one halfe houre, both the Roman camps; which yet the same Liuie saith, to haue beene ouer∣cowardly yeelded vp. We may therefore doe better, to giue credit vnto one of the prisoners, whom the same Historian shortly after introduceth speaking in the Se∣nate, and saying, That they were no lesse than eight thousand. It may therefore be, that these three thousand were only such as the Enemie spared, when the furie of Execution was past: but to these must be added about fiue thousand more, who yeelded in the greater campe, when their companie were either slaine or fled. So the reckoning falls out right: which the Romans, especially the Consul Varro, had before cast vp (as we say) without their Host; nothing so chargeable, as now they finde it. On the side of Hannibal there died some foure thousand , fifteene hundred Spaniards and Africans, and two hundred horse, or thereabouts: a losse not sensible, in the joy of so great a victorie; which if he had pursued, as Maharbal aduised him, and forthwith marched away towards Rome; it is little doubted, but that the Warre had presently beene at an end. But he beleeued not so farre in his owne prosperitie; and was therefore told, That he knew how to get, not how to vse, a victorie. § IX. Of things following the battaile at Cannae. NOt without good cause doth Polybius reprehend those two Histori∣ans, Fabius the Roman, and Philinus the Carthaginian: who regarding more the pleasure of them, vnto whose honour they consecrated their trauailes, than the truth of things, & information of posteritie, magnified indifferently, whether good or bad, all actions and procee∣dings, the one of his Carthaginians, the other of his Roman and Fathers con∣script. No man of sound judgement will condemne this libertie of censure, which Polybius hath vsed. For, to recompence his junioritie, (such as it was) he produceth substantiall arguments, to iustifie his owne Relation; and confuteth the vanitie of those former Authors, out of their owne writings, by conference of places ill co∣hering: which paines it is to be suspected, that he would not haue taken, had hee beene borne in either of these two Cities, but haue spared some part of his dili∣gence, and beene contented, to haue all men thinke better and more honourably than it deserued, of his owne Countrie. The like disease it is to be feared, that wee shall hereafter finde in others; and shall haue cause to wish, that either they were somewhat lesse Roman, or else, that some Works of their opposite Writers were ex∣tant, that so we might at least heare both sides speake: being henceforth destitute of Polybius his helpe, that was a man indifferent. But since this cannot be, we must be sometimes bold, to obserue the coherence of things; and beleeue so much only to be true, as dependeth vpon good reason, or (at least) faire probability. This atten∣tiue circumspection is needfull euen at the present: such is the repugnancie, or for∣getfulnesse, which we find in the best Narration, of things following the Battaile of Cannae. For it is said, that foure thousand foot and horse gathered together about the Consul Terentius at ; that others, to the number of ten thousand got in∣to Cannusium, choosing for their Captaines, yong P. Scipio, and Ap. Claudius; yet that the Consul Terentius Varro, joyning his companie vnto those of Scipio at Cannusium, wrote vnto the Senate, that he had now well-neere ten thousand men about him; that these letters of the Consul were brought to Rome, when the Senate was newly risen, that had bene taking order for pacifying those tumults in the Citie, which grew vpon the first bruit of the ouerthrow; and yet, that Embassadours from Ca∣pua (after some consultation, whether it were meet to send any, or, without further circumstance, to side with Hannibal ) were sent vnto Terentius, and found him at Venusia, a pretie while before he wrote those letters, which ouer-tooke (in a maner) at Rome the first newes of the ouerthrow. Among such incoherences, I hold it the best way, to omit so much as hath not some particular connexion with matter en∣suing: mutuall dependencie in things of this nature, being no small argument of truth. When Hannibal had sacked the Roman campe, and trussed vp the spoiles, forth∣with he dislodged, and marched away into Samnium; finding a disposition in the Hirpines, and many other people thereabout, to forsake the Roman partie, and make alliance with Carthage. The first Towne that opened the gates vnto him, was Cossa, where he laid vp his baggage: and leauing his brother Mago to take in other places, He hasted into Campania. The generall affection of the Multitude, in all the Cities of Italie, was inclinable vnto him; not only in regard of their grieuous losses, sustai∣ned abroad in the fields, which the Romans themselues, who could not hinder him from spoyling the Countrie, especially the poorer sort of them, did hardly endure; but in a louing respect vnto that great courtesie (as it seemed) which he vsed, vnto such of them as became his prisoners. For as at other times, so now also after his great victorie at Cannae, He had louingly dismissed as many of the Italian Confede∣rates of Rome, as fell into his hands: rebuking them gently for being so obstinate, a∣gainst him that had sought to deliuer them from bondage. Neither spared hee to winne their loue with gifts; pretending, to admire their valour; but seeking in∣deede, by all waies and meanes, to make them his, whilest all other motiues were concurrent. At this time also hee beganne to deale kindly (though against his na∣ture) with his Roman prisoners: telling them, that he bore no mortall hatred vnto their Estate; but being prouoked by iniuries, sought to right himselfe and his coun∣trie; and fought with them, to trie which of the two Cities, Rome or Carthage, should beare soueraigne Rule, not, which of them should be destroyed. So he gaue them leaue to choose ten of their number, that should be sent home to treat with the Fathers about their ransome: and together with these, he sent Carthalo a Noble∣man of Carthage, and Generall of his Horse, to the disposition of the Senate; whether it were bowed as yet by so much aduersitie, and could stoope vnto desire of peace. But with the Romans these artes preuailed not, as shall be shewed in due place. The people of Italie, all or most of them, saue the Roman Colonies, or the Latines, were not only weary of their losses past, but entertained a deceiuable hope, of changing their old Societie for a better. Wherefore not onely the Samnites, Lu∣cans, Brutians, and Apulians, ancient enemies of Rome, and not vntill the former ge∣neration vtterly subdued, beganne to re-assume their wonted spirits: but the Cam∣pans, a Nation of all other in Italie most bound vnto the state of Rome, and by many mutuall affinities therewith as streightly conjoyned, as were any saue the Latines, changed on a sudden their loue into hatred; without any other cause found, than change of fortune. Campania, is the most goodly and fruitfull Prouince of Italie, if not (as some then thought) of all the Earth: and the Citie of Capua, answerable vnto the Countrie, whereofit was Head, so great, faire, and wealthie, that it seemed no lesse conuenient a seat of the Empire, than was either Rome or Carthage. But of all qualities, brauerie is the least requisite vnto soueraigne command. The Campans were luxurious, idle, and proud: and valuing themselues like Iayes by their feathers, despised the vnfor∣tunate vertue of the Romans their Patrons and Benefactors. Yet were there some of the principall among them, as in other Cities, that bore especiall regard vnto the maiestie of Rome, and could not endure to heare of Innouation. But the Plebeian faction had lately so preuailed within Capua, that all was gouerned by the pleasure of the Multitude; which wholly followed the direction of Pacuvius Calauius an ambitious Noble-man, whose credit grew, and was vp-held by furthering al popu∣lar desires: whereof, the coniunction with Hannibal was not the least. Some of the Capuans had offred their Citie to the Carthaginian, shortly after the battaile of Thra∣symene: whereupon chiefly it was, that Hannibal made his iournie into Campania; the Dictator Fabius waiting vpon him. At that time, either the nerenes of the Roman Ar∣mie, or some other feare of the Capuans, hindred them from breaking into actual re∣bellion. They had indeed no leisure to treat about any article of new Confedera∣cie: or had leisure serued, yet were the Multitude (whose inconstant loue Hannibal had wonne from the Romans, by gentle vsage, and free dismissing, of some prisoners in good account among them) vnable to hold any such negotiation, without aduice of the Senate; which mainely impugned it. So they that had promised to yeeld vp their town to Hannibal, & to meet him on the way, with some of their nobility, that should assure him of all faithfull meaning; were driuen to sit still, in a great perplexi∣tie: as hauing failed to let in this their new friend, yet sufficiently discouered them∣selues, to draw vpon them the hatred of the Romans. In this case were no small number of the Citizens: who thereupon grew the more incensed against their Se∣nate; on whom they cast all the blame, easily pardoning their owne cowardize. The People holding so tender a regard of libertie, that euen the lawfull Gouerne∣ment of Magistrates grieued them, with an imaginarie oppression; had now good cause to feare lest the Senators would become their Lords indeed, and by helpe of the Romans, bring them vnder a more streight subiection, than euer they had endu∣red. This feare, being readie to breake into some outrage, Pacuvius made vse of, to serue his owne ambition. He discoursed vnto the , as they sate in Councell; about these motions troubling the Citie: and said, That he himselfe had both mar∣ried a Roman Ladie, and giuen his Daughter in marriage to a Roman: but, that the danger of forsaking the Roman partie was not now the greatest: for that the People were violently bent euen to murder all the Senate, and afterward to joyne them∣selues with Hannibal; who should countenance the fact, and saue them harmelesse. This he spake, as a man well known to be beloued himselfe by the People, and pri∣uie vnto their designes. Hauing throughly terrified the Senate, by laying open the danger hanging ouer them: He promised neuerthelesse to deliuer them all, and to set things in quiet, if they would put themselues into his hands; offering his oath, or any other assurance that they should demand, for his faithfull meaning. They all agreed. Then shutting vp the Court, and placing a Guard of his owne followers about it, that none might enter, nor issue forth, without his leaue; Hee called the People to assembly: and speaking as much ill of the Senate, as he knewe they would be glad to heare, he told them, that these wicked Gouernours were surprised by his policie, and all fast, readie to abide what sentence they would lay vpon them. Only thus much he aduised them, as a thing which necessitie required, That they should choose a new Senate, before they satisfied their anger vpon the old. So rehearsing vnto them the names of one or two Senators, hee asked what their judgement was of those. All cried out, that they were worthy of death. Choose then (said he) first of all some new ones into their places. Hereat the Mul∣titude, vnprouided for such an election, was silent; vntill at last, some one or other aduentured to name whom he thought fit. The men so nominated, were vtterly disliked by the whole Assembly; either for some knowne fault, basenesse, and in∣sufficiencie; or else euen because they were vnknowne, and therefore helde vnwor∣thie. This difficultie in the new Election appearing more and more, whilest more were to be chosen; (the fittest men to be substituted, hauing beene named among the first, and not thought fit enough) Pacuvius entreated, and easily preuailed with the people, that the present Senate might for this time be spared, in hope of amends hereafter; which (doubtlesse) they would make, hauing thus obtained pardon of all offences past. Henceforth, not only the People, as in former times, honoured Pacuvius, and esteemed him their Patron; but the Senators also were gouerned by him, to whom they acknowledged themselues indebted, for sauing all their liues. Neither did the Senate faile after this, by all obsequiousnesse, to court the People; giuing the reines vnto their lawlesse Wil, who else were likely to cast them downe: All the Citie being thus of one minde; onely feare of the Romans kept them from opening their gates to Hannibal. But after the Battaile at Cannae, this impediment was remoued: and few there were, that would open their mouthes to speake against the Rebellion. Yet forasmuch as three hundred principal Gentlemen of the Cam∣pans, did then serue the Romans in the Isle of Sicil: the Parents and Kinsmen of these preuailed so farre, that Embassadors were sent vnto Terentius the Consul; to see his present case, and what it could minister of Hope or Feare. These, wheresoeuer they found him, found him weakely attended, and as weake in spirit, as in followers. Yet they offered him formally the seruice of their State; and desired to know what he would command them. But he most basely lamented vnto them the greatnesse of the Roman misfortune: saying, that all was lost; and that the Campans must now, not helpe the Romans, who had nothing left wherewith to helpe themselues, but, make warre in their defence against the Carthaginians; as the Romans had sometimes done for the Campans against the Samnites. Hereunto hee is said to haue added a foolish Inuectiue, against & his : telling, How he had taught them to make bridges of slaughtered , and to feede vpon mans flesn; with such other stuffe, as onely bewraied his owne feare. As for the Campans themselues, He put them in minde of their present strength: they hauing thirty thousand foot, and foure thousand horse; with monie, and all prouisions, in a boundance. Thus he dismissed them, prouder then they came, and filled them with conceit of getting a great Lordship; whereas before, they were somewhat timorous, in aduenturing to seeke their owne libertie. Hauing reported this at Capua: the same Embassadors were dispatched away to Hannibal, with whom they easily made Alliance, vpon these conditions; That the Campans should be absolutely free, and ruled by their owne Lawes; That no Citizen of theirs should be subiect vnto any Carthaginian Magistrate, in what case soeuer, whether in Warre or Peace; and, That Hannibal should deliuer vnto the Campans three hundred Roman prisoners, such as they them∣selues would choose, whom they might exchange for their Gentlemen which were in . Against all this Negotiation, Decius Magius an Citizen opposed him∣selfe earnestly: vsing, in vaine, many perswasions, to the wilfull and head-strong Multitude; whom he put in minde of and the Tarentines, wishing them not to change old friends for new acquaintance. This did he, when they were sending Embassadors to Hannibal: and this also did he, when the new Alliance was conclu∣ded; but most earnestly, when a Carthaginian Garrison was entring the Towne: at which time he gaue aduice, either to keepe it out, or to fall vpon it and to cut it in pieces, that, by such a notable piece of seruice, they might make amends vnto the Romans, whom they had for saken. Aduertisement hereof was giuen to Hannibal: who lying about Naples not farre off, sent for Magius to come speake with him in the campe. This Magius refused: alleaging, that he was, by the late concluded Articles, free from subiection vnto any Carthaginian; and therefore would not come. Hannibal thereupon hasted himselfe towards Capua: forbearing to attempt any further vpon Naples; which he thought to haue taken in his way by Scalado, but found the walls too high, and was not well prouided, to lay siege vnto it. At Capua hee was entertained with great and pompe: all the people issuing forth of the Towne, to behold that great Com∣mander, which had wonne so many noble victories. Hauing taken his pleasure in the sight of that goodly Citie, and passed ouer his first Entertainements; He came into their Senate: where he commended their resolution, in shaking off the Roman yoke; promising, that ere long all Italie, and Rome it selfe, should bee driuen to ac∣knowledge Capua as chiefe, and receiue Law from thence. As for Decius Magius, who openly tooke part with the Romans their enemies; Hee prayed them, that they would not thinke him a Campan, but a Traitor to the State: and vse him according∣ly, giuing sentence out of hand vpon him, as he deserued. This was granted: and Magius deliuered vnto Hannibal; who vnwilling to offend the Capuans, at his first comming, by putting so great a man to death, yet fearing that they might sue for his libertie, if he kept him aliue, thought it best to send him away to . Thus Hannibal settled his friendship with the Campans: among whom, only this De∣cius Magius had openly dared to speake against him; being assisted by the sonne of Pacuvius. This Perolla would haue murdered Hannibal, whilest hee was at supper, the first night of his comming; had not his Fathers authoritie kept him from making any such attempt. All the Towne (besides) were so in the loue of their new Societie, that they are said to haue murdered all the Romans, vpon whom at the present they could lay hand; or, (which is all one) to haue smothered them to death in an hot Bath. The same course of fortune, with those of , ranne some other Townes thereabouts, which depended on this, as their Mother-Citie. Nola, Nuceria, Naples, Casiline, and Acerrae, were the Cities next adioyning, that stood out for the Romans. Against these Hannibal went, thinking to finde them weakely manned, as they were indeede, though stoutly defended. The Romans at this time were not in case, to put Garrisons into all their walled Townes; but were faine to leaue all places, except a few of the most suspected, vnto the faith and courage of the Inhabitants. Rome it selfe was in extreme feare of Han∣nibals comming, at the first report of the ouerthrow at : and the of that losse was so generall, and immoderate, that it much disturbed the prouision against apparent danger. It was hard to iudge, whether the losse alreadie receiued, or the feare of destruction presently threatning, were the more terrible. All the Senators found worke enough; to stint the noise and lamentable bewailings, whereof the ftreets were full. Courriers were sent forth, to bring assured tidings how all went: whereof when letters from the Consul Varro had throughly informed them, they were so amazed, that they ranne into barbarous superstition; and taking direction (as was said) from their fatall bookes, buried aliue two men and women Gaules and Greekes, in their Oxe-market. If the bookes of Sibyl gaue them such instructions; we may iustly thinke, that Sibyl herselfe was instructed by the Deuill. Yet is it not improbable, that extremity of feare caused them to harken to wicked Sooth∣sayers; whose detestable counsailes they afterwards, for their owne honour, (as ashamed of such Authors) imputed to the bookes of Sibyl. An Embassadour was sent to Delphi, to consult the Oracle of Apollo; and enquire with what prayers and supplications they might pacifie the gods, and obtaine an ende of these calamities. This is enough to discouer the greatnesse of their feare; though not seruing to giue remedie. At the same time came letters out of Sicil, from the Praetor Octacilius; whom the Senate had appointed, if he found it meet, to passe ouer into Africk. In these were contained newes, of one Carthaginian fleet, that wasted the Kingdome of Hieron their good friend and confederate; and of another fleet, riding among the Iles Aegateis, which was in readinesse to set vpon Lilybaeum, and the rest of the Ro∣man Prouince, if the Praetor stirred aside to the rescue of Hieron. In the middest of these extremities, it was thought needful to call home Terentius the Consul, that he might name a Dictator, to take soueraigne charge of the Weale publique, with absolute power, as necessitie required. It must needes seeme strange, that all sorts of people went forth to meet the Consul, & bid him welcome home, giuing him thankes for that he had not despaired of the Weale publique. But this was done (as may seeme) by order from the Senate: which therein (doubtlesse) proui∣ded wisely, for vpholding the generall reputation. If his comming into the Citie, had renewed the lamentations and out-cries of the people: what else would haue followed, than a contempt of their wretchednesse, among those that were subicct vnto their Dominion? Now in this occasion (though indeed he gaue it not) of bestowing vpon him their welcome, and thankes; they noysed abroad a fame, which came perhaps vnto the eares of Hannibal, of their Magnanimitie and Confi∣dence: that might seeme grounded on their remayning strength. This therefore was wisely done: But whereas Liuie would haue vs thinke, that it was done gene∣rously, and out of great spirit; let me be pardoned, if I beleeue him not. It was done , and to couer their griefe: had they dared to shew their indignation, they would haue struck off his head; as in few yeres after, On. Fuluius had his life brought . 26. into question, and was banished by them, being lesse blame-worthy, for a offence. M. , by appointment of the Senate, was nominated Dictator; and T. Sempronius, Master of the horse. These fell presently to mustering of Souldiers, of whom they raised foure new Legions, and a thousand horse: though with much . 22. difficultie; as being faine to take vp some, that were very Boies. These foure , are elsewhere forgotten, in accompt of the forces leuied by this Dictator; and two Legions only set downe, that had beene enrolled in the beginning of the yeere . l. 23. for custodie of the Citie. Wherefore it may be, that these two Legions being drawne into the field; foure new ones of Praetextati, or Stripplings, were left in their places. In such raw Souldiers, and so few, little confidence was to bee reposed; for which reason they increased their number, by adding vnto them eight thousand sturdie slaues, that were put in hope of libertie, if they should it by manfull seruice. This not sufficing; The Dictator proclaimed, that whosoeuer ought money and could not pay it, or had committed any capitall offence, should forthwith bee dis∣charged of his debt, or punishment, if he would serue in the Warre. To arme these Companies, they were faine to take downe, out of their Temples and Porches, the spoiles of their enemies that had beene there set vp: among which, were sixe thou∣sand Armours of the Gaules, that had beene carried in the Triumph of C. Flaminius, a little before the beginning of this Warre. To such had God brought the pride of the Romans, as a due reward of their insolent oppressions, that they were faine to issue forth of their own gates, in the habit of strangers, when Hannibal was readie to encounter them with his Africans, armed Roman-like. About the same time it was, that Carthalo, with the Agents of the prisoners taken at Cannae, came to Rome. Carthalo was not admitted into the Citie, but commanded, whilest he was on the way, to be gone ere night out of the Roman Territorie. To the messengers of the captiues, audience was giuen by the Senate. They made ear∣nest Petition, to be ransomed at the publike charge; not only the teares and lamen∣tation of their poore kins-folke, but the great neede, wherein the Citie then stood, of able Souldiers, commending their sute; which yet they obtained not. Besides the generall custome of the Romans (held by long Tradition, and strengthned by a notable Precedent, when Regulus was ouerthrowne, and taken prisoner in the for∣mer warre) not to bee too tender of such as had yeelded to the Enemie; much was alleaged against these who now craued ransome: but the speciall point was, that they were wilfully lost, since theymight haue saued them selues, as others did. It suf∣ficed not vnto these poore men, to say, that their offence was no greater than the Consuls: they were told, that this was great presumption. The truth was, the State wanted money: and therefore could not want excuses, whereby to auoid the disbursement: whether it were so, or not, that any such Plea was held about this matter of redemption, as wee find recorded. Neyther must wee regard it, that the slaues which were armed for the warre, are said to haue more, than the summe did amount vnto, that would haue ransomed these prisoners. For this is but a tale, deuised to countenance the Roman proceedings as if they had beene seuere; when as indeed they were suteable to the present fortune, poore, and somewhat begger∣ly. Hereof it is no little proofe, That Hannibal valued those Roman slaues, whom he had taken in the Campe among their Masters, at no more, than one the third part of a common Souldiers ransome: and likely it is, that hee offered them at the price, whereat hee thought them current. But wee should suppose, that by tra∣ding with Hannibal, a better bargaine for slaues might haue been made, than was by the State at home, in dealing with priuate men; yet must we withall consider, that these priuate men did only lend these slaues for a while vnto the Common-wealth, and were afterwards contented to forbeare the price of them (when by order from . l. 24. the Senate they were enfranchised) vntill the warre should be ended. If Hannibal would haue giuen such long day of paiment; it is likely that the Romans would haue beene his chapmen: but seeing he dealt only for ready monie, they chose rather to say, We will not giue, than, We cannot. The like , vpon the same reason, but contrarie pretence, was vsed toward the Souldiers that escaped from that great Battaile. These were charged for hauing fled: as the prisoners were, for not flying, when they might haue done so. True it is, that in such cases (if euer) that which they call raggione del Stato may serue for an excuse: when the Common-wealth being driuen to a miserable Exigent, is faine to helpe it selfe, by doing iniuries to priuate men. And so dealt the Romans now: condemning all those that had serued at Cannae, to be transported into Sicil; and there to serue, not as others did, vntill they had fulfilled twentie yeeres in the warres, or else were fiftie yeeres of age; but vntill this warre should be ended, how long socuer it lasted, and that without re∣ward. The same thriftie censure, was afterwards laid vpon others, for their misbe∣hauiour: but neuer vpon any man of qualitie, saue only (a good while after this, at better leisure) vpon Caecilius Metellus, and a few other hare-braind fooles his compa∣nions; who being frighted out of their wits, with the terrour of so great a losse, were deuising, after the battaile, which way to runne out of Italie, when Hannibal as yet had scarce one Towne within it. The inequalitie of this rigour grew shortly distast∣full to the Commonaltie: and was openly blamed by a of the People; . l. 25. it was quietly digested, the excuse being no lesse apparent than the fault. M. Iunius the Dictator, hauing dispatched all needfull businesse within the Ci∣tie, tooke the field with fiue and twentie thousand men. What he did with this Ar∣mie, I cannot finde: nor more of him, than this, That he spent the time about ; where (as may be presumed) he was not idle. To him therefore perhaps it may be ascribed, that Hannibal did no greater euill: for of any done to Hanni∣bal, by the Romans in this their weake estate, only Marcellus had the honour. Mar∣cellus, being then one of the Praetors, lay at Ostia with a fleet, ready to set saile for Si∣cil, hauing one Legion aboord his ships, & fifteene hundred other Souldiers newly taken vp: with which forces he was to defend that liand, and doe what harme hee could in Africk. But hearing of the ouerthrow at Cannae, hee sent these of his new Leuie to Rome, for defence of the ; and marched hastily with his Legion to∣ward Cannusium: deliuering the fleet, empty of Souldiers, to P. Furius his Colleague. Thence was he called by the Magistrates, & chiefe Citizens of , to helpe them: who were like to be forced by the Multitude (affected, as were the rest of the Cam∣pans ) to let in the Carthaginian; and knew not how to auoid this otherwise, than by seeming to deliberate about the Articles of this new Confederacie. Wherefore he made great journies thitherward; and arriued euen time enough to preuent the E∣nemie. Many idle walkes Hannibal made, betwixt Nola and Naples: by faire words, and terrible threats, the one and the other Citie. Naples was strong, and not infected with any the least touch of disloialtie: it had also a sure Hauen; whereby it stood in the lesse feare, of sustayning much inconuenience, by spoile of the Lands and Villages abroad in the Countrie. But at Nola it was thought a valuable conside∣ration, That Hannibal was Master of the field: which if he laid waste, all the poore people were vtterly vndone. So thought the Multitude: and such talke vsed some, that had little feare of their owne priuate want or pouertie, but a great desire to gra∣tifie the Carthaginian. Of these, one L. Bantius was chiefe; a stout yong Gentleman, and Souldier of especiall marke, well beloued in the Citie, and one that had done good seruice to the Romans: but was found by Hannibal, halfe dead at Cannae, and af∣ter much gentle vsage, good attendance, and cure of his wounds, friendly dismissed with liberall gifts. He therefore thought, that it concerned him in honour, to re∣turne the greatest thankes he could vnto so an Enemie. Mar cellus percei∣uing this, wrought vpon the same easie nature of the Gentleman: and taking notice of him, as if it had beene by chance, seemed to wonder, why one that had so well de∣serued of the Roman state, had not repaired vnto him the , who desired no∣thing more than such acquaintance. So with many commendations, gifts, and lo∣uing entertainement, being himselfe also a man highly reputed for his personall va∣lour, he made this Bantius so far in loue with him, that nothing could be attempted within Nola, against the Romans, whereof he had not aduertisement. At the comming of Marcellus, Hannibal remoued from about Nola; and assaied, as for∣merly he had done, the Neapolitans: but they had lately taken in a Roman Garrison; vpon confidence whereof they gaue him a peremptorie answere, to his discontent. Thence went he to Nuceria: which he tooke by composition, and so returned back againe to Nola. Hee was not ignorant, what good affection the common people of Nola bore vnto him: who although they durst not stirre in his quarrell, being ouer∣awed by the Roman Garrison; yet if they saw Marcellus hardly bestead, and forced to turne his care from watching them within, to repelling the enemies assailing him without, like enough it seemed, that they would not bee wanting vnto the accom∣plishment of their owne desires. Hee therefore brought his Armie close to the Towne, and skirmished often with Marcellus: not in hope thereby to doe much good, but only to make shew of a meaning to force the Towne; which hee sought in the meane while to take by intelligence. In the night-time there passed messages betweene him and the Citizens his partakers: whereby it was concluded, That if once Marcellus, with all his forces, could bee trained into the field, the Multitude within the Towne should presently rise; and seizing vpon the gates, exclude him as an Enemie. Of this Negotiation Marcellus was aduertised: and fearing, lest the Con∣spirators would shortly aduenture, euen to finde him busied within the Citie, whi∣lest the Carthaginians should scale the walls; he thought it the surest way, to cut off the enemies hope, and send him away betimes. Wherefore ordering his men in three Companies, within three seuerall gates looking towards the Enemie: He gaue a streight command, that all the Citizens should keepe their houses. Thus hee lay close a good part of the day, to the enemies great wonder; against whom he had cu∣stomarily issued forth before more early, euery day, to skirmish. But when it was further noted, that the walls were bare, and not a man appearing on them; then thought Hannibal, that surely all was discouered, and Marcellus now busied with the Citizens. Whereupon he bade his men bring ladders, and make ready for the as∣sault; which was done in all . But when the Carthaginians were at the very walls, and thought nothing Iesse, than that the Romans would meet them in the field: suddenly the middle gate was opened, wherat Marcellus, with the best and ol∣dest of his Souldiers, brake forth vpon them, with a great noise, to make his vnex∣pected sallie the more terrible. Whilest the Carthaginians, much out of order, were some of them flying before Marcellus, the rest making head against him: the other two gates opened, whereat in like sort issued they of the new-leuied Companies, vpon the enemies backes. The sudden terrour was more auaileable vnto the Ro∣mans, than their force: yet the Execution was so great, that this was accounted as a victorie, and reputed one of the brauest Acts performed in all that warre; foras∣much as hereby it was first proued, that Hannibal might be ouer-come. After this, Marcellus, being freed from his enemies that were departed, tooke a strict accompt of the Citizens of Nola: condemning aboue threescore and ten of high Treason, whose heads he struck off; and so leauing the Towne in quiet obedience vnto their Senate, went and incamped hard by about Suessula. Hannibal in the meane season was gone to Acerrae: where being excluded, he thought it no wisdome to loose time in perswasions, but laid siege vnto it, and beganne on all sides to close it vp. This ter∣rified the People, who knew themselues vnable to hold out. Therefore, before his Workes were finished, and they surrounded; they stole out by night, and left him the Towne emptie: which he sacked and burnt. Then hearing newes of the Dictator, that he was about Casiline, thither went Hannibal: as being vnwilling, that an Enemie so neere should disquiet him at Capua; where hee meant to Winter. It seemes, or rather indeede it is plaine, that the late victorie of Marcellus had nothing abated the spirit of the Carthaginian: who durst with a small part of his Armie secke out the Dictator, that had with him the heart of the Roman strength. Wherefore the joy of his Enemies, vpon so slight an occasion as the death of some two thou∣sand of his men, at the most, and those not slaine in plaine battaile, but by a sudden eruption; witnesseth chiefly, in what great feare they stood of Hannibal, and how Crest-fallen they were: that hauing three yeeres since demanded at Carthage, the body of Hannibal, to be deliuered vnto their pleasure, by his owne Citizens; could now please themselues, as with good newes, to heare, That in a skirmish not farre from Rome he appeared to be a man, and not resistlesse. At Casilinum the Dictator was not: but many Companies of Italians, Confederates of Rome, were gotten into the towne, and held it. Fiue hundred of the Praenestines there were, and aboue foure hundred of Perusia, with some of the Latines. All these had the good hap, to come too late to the Battaile of Cannae, being sent by their seuerall States to the campe: whither whilest they were marching, the tidings of that great encoun∣tred them, and sent them backe sorrowfull; for they loued well their Lords the Ro∣mans, vnder whose gouernement they liued happily. So came they all, one after another, to Casiline, where they met and staied. Neither had they staied there long, ere they heard newes from Capua, How that great Citie became the Ring-leader of all the Campans into rebellion. The people of Casiline were affected as they of Ca∣pua: and therefore sought how to rid their hands of those Praenestines and their fel∣lowes; but the Souldiers were too hard for them, and after many traines laid one for another, at last they slew all the Townesmen in a night, and fortisied the We∣sterne part of the Towne (for it was diuided by the Riuer Vulturnus ) against the E∣nemie. If they had runne away with the goods, and pretended, that these of Casi∣line were as the rest of the Campans, all Traitors; they themselues might haue been reputed, as no better than the Mamertines. But their constancie in defence of the place witnesseth, vpon what honest reasons they surprised it. Hannibal came thither, thinking to haue encountred with greater forces: but these few found him more worke than he expected. Diuers assaults hee gaue, but was still repelled with losse: and many sallies they made, with variable euent. The Enemie mined; and they countermined: opposing so much to his force, that he was driuen to close them vp, and to winne them by famine. T. Sempronius Gracchus, that was Ma∣ster of the horse, lay with the Roman Armie higher vp the Riuer: who faine would haue relieued Casiline, but that the Dictator, being gone to Rome about some mat∣ters of Religion, had giuen him expresse charge not to fight till his returne. Marcel∣lus from Suessula could not come: his way being stopped by the ouer-flowings of Vulturnus; the Nolans also beseeching him not to leaue them, who were in danger of the Campans, if he departed. Thus it is reported: but if the water staied his iournie, such entreaties were needlesse. Neither is it like, that the Dictator tarried at Rome so long, as till extreme famine had consumed the Garrison in Casiline. Wherefore it may be thought, that the Towne was lost, because the Romans durst not aduenture to raise the siege. Barrells of corne were sent by night, floting downe the Riuer; and when some of these, being carried awry by an Eddie of the water, stuck among the Willowes on the banke, whereby this manner of reliefe was discouered and preuented; Gracchus cast a great quantitie of Nuts into the streame, which faintly sustained the poore besieged men. At length, when all foode was spent, and what∣soeuer grew greene vnder the walls was gathered for sallets; the Carthaginians ploughed vp the ground: whereon the besieged presently sowed Rape-seede. Han∣nibal seeing this, admired their patience; and said, That he meant not to stay at Ca∣siline, vntill the Rapes were growne. Wherefore, though hitherto hee had refused to hearken vnto any Composition, as intending to make them an example to all o∣thers, by punishing their obstinacie; yet now he was content, to grant them their liues at an indifferent ransome, which when they had paid, hee quietly dismissed them according to his promise. Seuen hundred Carthaginians he placed in Casiline; as a Garrison for defence of the Campans; vnto whom he restored it. To the Praene∣stine Souldiers great thankes were giuen, and louing rewards; among which they had offer, in regard of their vertue, to be made Citizens of Rome. But their present condition pleased them so well, that they chose rather to continue, as they were, in Praeneste: which is no weake proofe, of the good cstate wherin the Cities flourished, that were subject to the Roman Gouernement. This siege of Casiline was not a little beneficiall to the Romans; as hauing long detained Hannibal, and consumed much of his time, that might otherwise haue beene better spent. For Winter ouer-tooke him, long before he could dispatch the businesse: which how to quit with his ho∣nor he knew not, when hee was once engaged. Therefore he wintered at Capua: where he refreshed his Armie, or rather corrupted it, as all Historians report, and made it effeminate; though, effeminate as it was, He there withall did often beate the Romans in following times, as shall appeare hereafter. §. X. Of the great supply that was decreed at Carthage to be sent to HANNIBAL in Italie. How by the malice of HANNO, and sloth or parsimonie of the Carthaginians, the supply was too long deferred. That the riches of the Carthaginians grew faster, than of the Romans. Of FABIVS and other old Roman Historians, how partiall they were in their writings. WHen Mago, the sonne of Amilcar, had spent some time about the ta∣king in of such Italians, as fell from the Romans after the battaile at Cannae; his brother Hannibal sent for him to Capua, and thence di∣spatched him away to Carthage, with the joyfull message of Victorie. He told the Carthaginian Senate, with how many Roman Generalls his brother had fought; what Consuls he had chaced, wounded, or slaine; how the stout Romans, that in the former war neuer shunned any occasion of fight, were now growne so calme, that they thought their Dictator Fabius the only good Cap∣taine, because he neuer durst aduenture to come to battaile; that, not without rea∣son, their spirits were thus abated, since Hannibal had slain of them aboue two hun∣dred thousand, and taken aboue fiftie thousand prisoners. He further told them of the Brutians, Apulians, Samnites, Lucans, and other people of Italie, that following the fortune of those great victories, had reuolted vnto the Carthaginians. Among the rest he magnified Capua, as a goodly Citie, and fit to be not only (as already it was) Head of all the Capuans, but the chiefe seat of their Dominion in Italie: and there he informed them, how louingly his brother had beene entertained, where he meant to rest that winter, attending their supply. As for the warre, He said it was euen at an end, if they would now pursue it closely, and not giue the Romans any breathing time, wherein to recollect themselues, and repaire their broken forces. Hee willed them to consider, that the warre was farre from home, in the Enemies Countrie; that so many Battailes had much diminished his brothers Armie; that the Soul∣diers, who had so well deserued, ought to be considered with liberall rewards; and that it was not good to burden their new Italian friends, with exactions of monie, corne, and other necessaries; but that these things must bee sent from Carthage: which the victorie would requite with large amends. Finally hee caused the golden rings, taken from the fingers of the Roman Knights that were slaine, to be powred out openly in the Court: which being measured, filled (as some say) three bushels, or (as others would rather haue it) no more than one; adding, that by this might ap∣peare the greatnesse of the Roman calamitie, forasmuch as none but the Thus Liuie reports it: and credible it is, that while Rome was poore, the bra∣uerie of pri∣uate men was not altogether so great, as the Law would haue permit∣ted; though otherwise Ius , The wearing of the King, was the generall pri∣uiledge of the Roman Equites. principall of that Order, were accustomed to weare that ornament. Whoso considers the former Punick Warre, may easily find, that the State of Car∣thage neuer did receiue, in all the durance thereof, any such hopefull aduertisements from their Captaines abroad. Wherefore it is no meruaile, if the Errand of Mago found extraordinarie welcome. In the vehemencie of this joy, Himilco, a Senator aduerse to the faction of Hanno, is said to haue demanded of that great perswader vnto peace with Rome, Whether he were still of opinion, that Hannibal should bee yeelded vp vnto the Romans; or whether he would forbid them to giue thankes vn∣to the gods, for this their good successe. Hereunto though it bee not likely that Hanno made the same formall answere, which Liuie puts into his mouth, calling the Carthaginian Senators Patres conscripti, by a terme proper to the Romans, and putting them in minde of his owne shamefull ouerthrow receiued at the Ilands Aegateis: yet the summe of his speech appeares to haue beene no lesse malicious, than it is set downe, forasmuch as Hannibal himselfe, at his departure out of Italie, exclaimed a∣gainst the wickednesse of this Hanno; saying, that his hatred against the Barchines, had oppressed their Familie, when otherwise it could not, with the ruine of Car∣thage. Therefore it may well be, that he made such a jest of these victories, as is re∣ported; saying, It ill beseemed him, who had vanquished the Romans, to call for more helpe, as if he had beene beaten; or him, that had taken their campe, filled forsooth with spoile, to make request for meat and monie. To these cauills, if an∣swere were needfull, it might be said, That other bootie than of horses and slaues; little was to be found in the Roman campe: the best of the Souldiers carrying no o∣ther wealth into the field, than a few Liu. l. 22. siluer studs in the bridles and trappings of their horses. If Hannibal had taken any maine conuoy of mony and prouisions, go∣ing to supply all wants of a great Armie in some other Prouince, (as the two Scipio's are afterwards said to haue done, when they wanne the campe of Asdrubal, that carried along with him all the wealth of Spaine, in his journie towards Italie ) then might such an objection more justly haue beene made vnto his demand of a supply. But the most likely part of Hanno his Oration, and wherein hee best might hope to preuaile, contained a perswasion to vse their fortune with moderation; and now to seeke peace, whilest they had so much the better in warre. What would haue beene the issue of this counsaile, if it had beene followed, it were not easie to say. For though it bee likely, that the Roman pride would haue brooked much indignitie, in freeing Italie from the danger of warre, yet it is not likely, that the faith, so often broken to the Carthaginians in former times, would haue beene kept entire, when any opinion of good aduantage had called for reuenge of so many shamefull ouerthrowes; since after this warre ended, and a new league concluded, no submissiue behauiour could preserue Carthage from ruine, longer than vntill such time, as Rome was at leisure from all other warres. This counsaile therefore of Hanno, though it might seeme temperate, was indeede very pestilent; and serued only to hinder the performance of a noble resolution. For it was conclu∣ded by a maine consent of the Senate, that fortie thousand Numidians, fortie Ele∣phants, and great abundance of siluer, should bee sent ouer to Hannibal: and that, besides these, twentie thousand foot, and foure thousand horse, should be leuied in Spaine; not only to supply, as neede should require, the Armies in that Prouince, but to be transported into Italie. This great aide, had it beene as carefully sent, as it was readily decreed, the Ro∣man Historians would not haue found cause, to taxe the rechlesse improuidence of Hannibal, in forbearing to march directly from Cannae to Rome, or in refreshing his Armie among the delights of Capua: the next yeeres worke would haue finished the businesse, with lesse dangerous aduenture, and the pleasures, which his men en∣joyed among the Campans, would haue beene commended, as rewards by him well thought vpon, where with to animate both them and others, that were to bee im∣ploied in the following warre. But either the too much carelesnesse of those, that were loth to make haste in laying out their monie, before extreme necessitie requi∣red it; or the craftie malice of Hanno, and his fellowes, working vpon the priuate humours of men, that had more feeling of their owne commoditie, than sense of the publike neede; vtterly peruerted, and made vnprofitable in the performance, the order that had beene so well set downe. The Liu. l. 26. Elephants were sent: and some monie peraduenture; vncertaine it is, how long after. But those great forces of threescore thousand foot, and foure thousand horse, came not into Italie, till much was lost of that which already had beene gotten, and a great part of the old Cartha∣ginian Armie, was first consumed by time, and sundry accidents of warre. Only some small numbers, no way answering vnto the proportion decreed, were sent in∣to Spaine; and the journie of Asdrubal thence through France into Italie much talked , but he not enabled therevnto, till many yeeres were past, and the Romans had recouered their strength. Heere wee may note, what great riches the Carthaginians drew into their Citie, both by the Tributes receiued from their subiects, and by their wealthy Trade of merchandize. For it is not long, since the warre of the Mercinaries; and the perfi∣dious tyrannie of the Romans, extorting in time of greatest necessity twelue hundred talents; had exceedingly impouerished Carthage: which was before brought into great want, euen by the expence of so much monie, as was to bee disbursed for re∣deeming of peace, after the losse at Aegateis. Yet we see, what great Armies of Nu∣midians, and Spaniards, besides those already on foot, are appointed to the seruice in , and how little the Carthaginians feare the want of mony in these chargeable vndertakings: whereas the Romans, on the other side, hauing three or foure yeeres together beene forced to some extraordinary cost, are to goe vpon credit, for the price of those slaues, which they bought of their owne Citizens to arme for their defence. Such aduantage, in meanes to enrich their Treasurie, had the weal∣thy merchants of Carthage, trading in all parts of the Mediterran Sea, euen from Ty∣rus their Mother-City in the bottome of the streights vnto the great Ocean, aboue the Romans: who liued on the fruits of their ground; and receiued their Tributes from people following the same course of life. When time therefore was come, that the hatred of Rome found leisure to shew it selfe, in the destruction of Carthage; the impudence of Roman falshood, in seeking an honest colour wherewith to sha∣dow the intended breach offaith, discouered plainely whence the jealousie was bred, that this mighty Citie would againe rebell. For the Carthaginians, hauing gi∣uen vp hostages, euen before the Roman Armie did set forth, to performe whatsoe∣uer should bee enjoyned them, with condition that their Citie might not bee de∣stroyed; and hauing accordingly, when they were so , yeelded vp all their weapons, and engines of warre; the Romans told them plainly, That the Citie of Carthage, which was the Bodie of the Citizens, should be friendly dealt withall, but the Towne must be demolished, and remoued into some other place, that should be twelue miles distant from the Sea. For (said the Romans ) this Trade of merchandize, by which ye now liue, is not so fit for peaceable men, such as yee pro∣mise to become hereafter, as is the Trade of husbandrie; an wholsome kind of life, and enduing men with many laudable qualities, which enable their bodies, and make them very apt for conuersation. This villainous dealing of the Romans, though sugred with glosing words, plainly shewes, what good obseruation the el∣der Cato had made of the hastie growth of Carthage in riches. For when, being de∣manded his opinion in the Senate about any matter whatsoeuer it were, added still this conclusion, Thus I thinke; and that Carthage should be destroied; Hee may seeme, not only to haue had regard vnto that present wealth, which at his being there hee had found in the Citie, but much more vnto these times, & the great height wher∣vnto it rose, euen suddenly as wee see, out of many calamities, whilest the Romans thought, that it had not beene in case to dare so terrible a warre. But as the , in gathering wealth, were more industrious and skilfull than the ; so came they farre short of them, in the honourable care of the publike good: hauing euery one, or most of them, a more principall regard of his owne priuate benefit. This made them (besides the negligence commonly found in victors) when the first heat of their affection, wherein they concluded to pursue the warre strongly, was ouer-past, goe more leisurely to worke, than had beene re∣quisite in the execution. It was easie for Hanno to perswade couetous men, that they should first of all defend their owne in Spaine. This might be done with little char∣ges. Afterwards, when that Prouince was secured, they might send an Armie into Italie; so going to worke orderly by degrees. For it were no wisedome, to commit all the strength of the Common-wealth to one hazard of fortune, against the Ene∣mies; or (which perhaps were worse) to the Gouernment of an ambitions man, and his brethren; who hauing once (if they could so doe) finished the warre, might easily make Of such am∣bition Hanno directly accu∣sed Hannibal, saying that he made warre that so hee might liue compassed with Legions, as knowing no other way to make himselfe a King. Liu. lib. . Hannibal a King, and subdue Carthage, with the forces that he had gi∣uen them to the conquest of Rome. By such malicious working of Hanno, and by their owne slacknesse, incredulitie, dulnesse, or niggardize, the Carthaginians were perswaded rather to make small dis∣bursements in Spaine, than to set vp all their rest at once in Italie. Yet was it indeed impossible, to hold a Countrie of so large extent, and so open a coast as that of Spaine, free from all incursion of the Enemie: especially the affection of the Natu∣ralls being (as in a new Conquest) ill established. A better way therfore it had been to make a running warre, by which the Romans might haue beene found occupied, euen with the ordinarie Carthaginian Garrisons, or some little addition thereunto. For if it were thought meet, to deferre the prosecution of their maine intendment against Rome it selfe, vntill such time as euery little thorne were pulled out of the sides of so great a Prouince, then must Emporiae haue bin besieged & forced: which by reason of alliance with the Massilians, gaue vnto the Romans, at all times when they pleased, a readie and secure Harbour. But the Towne of Emporiae was too strong to be wonne in haste: it had long defended it selfe against the Barbarians; ha∣uing not aboue foure hundred paces of wall to the maine Land, and exceedingly well fortified; a great Spanish Towne of the same name, lying without it, that was three miles in compasse, very strong likewise, and friend vnto the Graecians, though not ouer-much trusted. Wherefore to force this Towne of Emporiae, that was, be∣sides the proper strength, like to be so well assisted by the Massilians, Romans, and some Spaniards; would haue been a worke of little lesse difficultie, than was the Ro∣man warre (in appearance) after the battaile at Cannae: yea it had bin in effect none other, than to alter the seat of the warre; which Hannibal had already fixed, with better iudgement, neere vnto the gates of Rome. The difficultie of this attempt being such as caused it altogether to be forborne; great follie it was, to bee much troubled about expelling the Romans vtterly out of Spaine: whom they might more easily haue diuerted thence, and drawne home to their owne doores, by ma∣king strong warre vpon their Citie. For euen so the Romans afterwardes remoued Hannibal into Africk, by sending an Armie to Carthage; & by taking the course, they now to change the seat of the warre, transferring it out of Italie into Spaine. But the priuate affections of men, regarding the common good no o∣therwise, than as it is accessary to their owne purposes, did make them easily winke at opportunities, and hope, that somewhat would fall out well of it selfe, though they set not to their helping hands. Hanno was a malicious wretch: yet they that thought him so, were wel enough contented to harken vnto his discourses, as long as they were plausible, and tended to keepe the purse full. In the meane while they suffered Hannibal, and all the noble house of Amilcar, to wearie themselues in tra∣uaile for the Common-wealth: which all Carthage in generall highly commended, but weakely assisted; as if the industrie of these Barchines had been somewhat more than needfull. Surely the Carthaginians, in general, were farre lesse honourable than the people of Rome: not only in gouernement of their subiect Prouinces, but in ad∣ministration of their owne Estate; few of them preferring the respect of the Weale publike aboue their priuate interest. But as they thriued little in the end, by their parsimonie vsed toward their own Mercinaries, when the former Roman warre was finished: so the conclusion of this warre present, will make them complaine, with feeling sighes, of their negligence in supplying Hannibal, after the victorie at Can∣nae; when gladly they would giue all their Treasures, to redeeme the opportuni∣tie, that now they let passe, as if it were cost enough to send a few handfulls into Spaine. That both the Spanish businesse, and the state of Africk it selfe, depended whol∣ly, or for the most part, vpon successe of things in Italie; the course of actions fol∣lowing will make manifest. Particularly how matters were ordered in Spaine by the Carthaginian Gouernours, it is very hard, and almost impossible, to set downe. For though we must not reprehend, in that worthy Historian Liuie, the tender loue of his owne Country, which made him giue credit vnto Fabius and others: yet must we not, sor his sake, beleeue those lies, which the vnpartiall iudgement of Polybius hath condemned, in the Writers that gaue them originall. It were needlesse to re∣hearse Pol. lib. 1. all that may be found in Polybius, concerning the vntruth of that Roman Hi∣storian Fabius. One example may suffice. He saith of Amilcar and his men at E∣ryx, in the former warre, That hauing cleane spent their strength, and being euen broken with many miseries, they were glad to submit themselues vnto the Romans. Contrarie hereunto we finde in the life of AMILCAR, set downe by Aemilius Pro∣bus, That Eryx was in such sort held by the Carthaginians, that it seemed to be in as good condition, as if in those parts there had not beene any warre. These wordes, being referred to the braue resolution of the Carthaginian Souldiers, and the singu∣lar vertue of their General infusing such spirit into them; may be taken as not ouer∣liberall. For in the treatie of peace betweene Amilcar and , when the Ro∣man first of all required, that this Garrison of Eryx should lay downe their Armes, and forsake Sicil, threatning, that otherwise he would not talke of any composition: Amilcar boldly bade him choose, whether he would talke of it, or no; for that the Armes, which his Countrie had put into his hands to vse against her Enemies, it was not his purpose to yeeld vp vnto them. Now since the Romans, contrarie to their custome vpon like aduantages, were content to let Amilcar haue his will, and not to stand with him vpon point of honour, whilest otherwise they might quietly rid their hands of him; plaine enough it is, that they were farre from thinking him a man consumed with miseries; as Fabius would haue him seeme. Hereunto agrees the relation of Polybius: who flatly, and by name, chargeth Fabius with vntruth; saying, that howsoeuer Amilcar, and his Souldiers, had endured all extremitie, yet they behaued themselues as men that had no sense thereof; and were as farre from being either vanquished, or tired, as were their Enemies. Such being the difference betweene Fabius (as also perhaps betweene other old Writers of the Roman storie) and those that had more regard of truth, than of flattering the mightie Citie of Rome: we must take it in good part, that howsoeuer Liuie introduceth Hanno, in one place, ioyning very foolishly his owne shamefull ouerthrow at the Ilands, Aegateis In∣sulas, ; oculos pro∣ponite, &c. Liu. lib. 21. Aega∣teis, with the great seruices of Amilcar at Eryx, as if both of them had had a like e∣vent; yet Liu. lib. 23. elsewhere he forbeareth not to put a more likely tale (though with as impudent a commemoration of his owne vnhappie conduct) into the same Hanno his mouth, making him say, That the affaires of Carthage went neuer better, than a little before the losse of their fleet in that battaile at Sea: wherein himselfe was Ge∣nerall. Now, concerning the doings of the Scipio's in Spaine, there is cause to wish, that this Fabius, with Val. Antias, and others of the like stampe, had either written (if they could not write more temperately) nothing at all; or that the tender affe∣ction of Liuie to his Rome, had not caused him to thinke too well of their relations: which are such as follow. § XI. Strange reports of the Roman victories in Spaine, before ASDRVBAL the sonne of AMILCAR followed thence his brother HANNIBAL into Italie. IT hath beene shewed already, how P. Scipio the Consul, re∣turning from Gaule into Italie, to encounter with Hannibal at his dis∣cent from the Alpes, sent before him his brother Cneus, with part of his Fleet and Armie, into Spaine. Two Roman Legions, with foure∣teene thousand foot of the Confederates, and twelue hundred horse, had beene alotted vnto this Consul, therewith to make warre in Spaine against Han∣nibal: who since he was marching into Italie with the strength of his Armie, P. Scipio beleeued, that a good part of these his owne forces might well be spared from the Spanish Expedition; and therefore made bold to carrie some of the number backe with him, sending on his brother with the rest, as his Lieutenant. Publius himselfe remayned in Italie all the time of his Consulship: which being expired, He was sent Proconsul into Spaine by the Senate, with an Armie of eight thousand men, and a fleet of thirtie Gallies. The Acts of these two Brethren in their Prouince, were very great; and, as they are reported, som what maruailous. For they continually preuailed in Spaine, against the Carthaginians: whom they vanquished in so many battailes, & with-drew from their Alliance so many of the Spaniards their Confederates; that we haue cause to wonder, how the Enemie could so often finde meanes to repaire his forces, and re∣turne strong into the field. But as the Romans, by pretending to deliuer the Coun∣trie from the tyrannie of Carthage, might easily winne vnto their Confederacie, as many as were galled with the African yoke, and durst aduenture to breake it: so the ancient reputation of the first Conquerours might serue to arme the Naturalls a∣gainst these Inuaders; and to reclaime those, that had reuolted vnto the Romans, were it onely by the memorie of such ill successe, as the like rebellions in former times had found. Hereto may be added the Carthaginian treasure: which easily rai∣sed souldiers, among those valiant, but (in that Age) poore, and gold-thirstie Na∣tions. Neither was it of small importance, that so many of the Spaniards had their children, kinsmen, and friends, abroad with Hannibal in his Italian warres; or seruing the Carthaginians in Africk. And peraduenture, if we durst be bold to say it; the vi∣ctories of the Scipio's were neither so many, nor so great, as they are set out by Liuie. This we may be bold to say, That the great Captaine Fabius, or Liuie in his person, maketh an obiection vnto Scipio, which neither Scipio, nor Liuie for him, doth an∣swer, That if ASDRVBAL were vanquished, as SCIPIO would say, by him in Spaine: Liu. lib. . strange it was, and as little to his honour, as it had beene extremely dangerous to Rome, that the same vanquished man should inuade Italie. And it is indeede an incredible narrati∣on, That Asdrubal being closed in on all sides, and not knowing how to escape out of a battaile, only by the descent of Rocks, ouer a great Riuer that lay at his backe, ranne away with all his monie, Elephants, and broken troups, ouer Tagus, directly towards the Pyrences, and so toward Italie; vpon which he fell with more than threescore thousand armed Souldiers. Neither doe I see, how it hangs wel together, That he chose a piece of ground very defensible, but most incommo∣dious for his retrait, if he should happen to be vanquished; and yet, that he sent al his monie and Elephants away before him, as not intending to abide the Enemie: Or how it could be true, that these his Elephants, being so sent before, could hinder the Romans (for so are they said to haue done in the last battaile betweene him and Scipio ) from breaking into his camp. Wherfore we can no more than be sorry, that all records of this warre, and Spanish, (if there were any) being vtterly lost, we can know no more thereof, than what it hath pleased the Romans to tell vs: vnto whom it were no wisdome to giue too much credit. In this regard, I will sum∣marily runne ouer the doings of the Scipio's in Spaine; not greatly insisting on parti∣culars, whereof there is no great certaintie. Cn. Cornelius landed at Emporiae, an Hauen-towne, not farre within the Pyrenees, retaining still the same name with little inflexion. That by the fame of his he allured many Nations to become subiect vnto Rome, as the storie beginnes of him, I could easily beleeue, if I vnderstood by what occasion they had need to vse his clemencie, or he to giue such famous example thereof, being a meere stranger, and hauing no iurisdiction in the Countrie. Yet is it certaine, that he was a man ve∣rie courteous, and one that could well insinuate himselfe into the loue of the Barba∣rians; among whom, his dexteritie in practice had the better successe, for that hee seemed to haue none other errand, than setting them at libertie. This pretext auai∣led with some: others were to be hired with monie: and some hee compelled to yeeld by force or feare; especially, when he had wonne a battaile against Hanno. In∣to all Treaties of accord, made with these people, likely it is that he remembred to insert this Article, which the Romans in their Alliances neuer forgate, vnlesse in long times past, and when they dealt with the Carthaginians, or their Superiours; Maiestatem Pop. Rom. comiter conseruent, which is, as Tullie interprets it, That they Orat. pro Con. . should gently (or kindely ) vphold the Maiestie of the People of Rome. This was in ap∣pearance nothing troublesome: yet implied it indeed an obscure couenant of sub∣iection. And in this respect it may be true, That the Spaniards became ditionis of the Roman iurisdiction; though hereafter they will say, they had no such Liu. lib. . meaning. That part of the Countrie wherein Scipio landed, was newly subdued by Hannibal in his passage toward Italie; and therefore the more easily shaken out of obedience. Particularly in the Bargutians; Hannibal had found, at his comming a∣mong them, such an apprehension of the Roman greatnesse, as made him suspect, that any light occasion would make them start from the Carthaginians. Wherefore he not only appointed Hanno Gouernor ouer them, as ouer the rest of the Prouince betweene Iberus and the Pyrenees, but made him also their Lord; that is, (as I con∣ceiue Pol. lib. 3. it; for I doe not thinke he gaue the Principalitie of their Countrie vnto Hanno and his Heires,) He made him not only Lieutenant generall ouer them, in matters of warre, and things concerning the holding them in obedience to Carthage; but tooke from them all inferiour Officers of their owne, leauing them to be gouerned by Hanno at his discretion. These therefore had good cause to reioyce the com∣ming of Scipio: with whom, others also (no doubt) found reasons to ioyne; it be∣ing the custome of al conquered Nations, in hatred of their present Lords, to throw themselues indiscreetly into the protection of others, that many times proue worse than the former. So were the Neapolitans, and Milanois, in the age of our Grand-fa∣thers, wearie by turnes of the Spaniards and French; as more sensible still of the pre∣sent euil which they felt, than regardfull of the greater mischiefe, whereinto they ranne by seeking to auoide it. This bad affection of his Prouince, would not suffer Hanno to temporize. Ten thousand foot, and a thousand horse, Hannibal had left vnto him: besides which it is like, that some forces he was able to raise out of his Prouince. Therefore he aduentured a battaile with Scipio; wherein he was ouer∣throwne and taken. Following this victorie, Scipio besieged Stissum, a Towne hard by, and wanne it. But Asdrubal hauing passed Iberus, and comming too late to the reliefe of Hanno, with eight thousand foot and a thousand horse, fel vpon the Roman Sea-forces, that lay not farre about Tarracon, whom he found carelesse, as after a vi∣ctorie, rouing abroad in the Countrie; and with great slaughter draue them aboord their ships. This done, he ranne vp into the , where he with-drew the Il∣lergetes from the Roman partie, though they had giuen hostages to Scipio. Scipio in the meane season was gone to visit and aide his fleet: where hauing set things in or∣der, he returned backe, and made toward Asdrubal; who durst not abide his com∣ming, but with-drew himselfe againe ouer Iberus. So the Illergetes were compelled by force, hauing lost Athanagia their chiefe Citie, to pay a fine to the Romans, and increase the number of their hostages. The Ausetani likewise, Confederates of the Carthaginians, were besieged in their chiefe Towne: which they defended thirtie dayes; hoping in vaine, that the sharpe Winter, and great abundance of snow that fell, would haue made the Romans to dislodge. But they were faine at length to yeeld: and for this their obstinacie, they were amerced twentie Talents of . During the siege, the Lacetani came to helpe their distressed Neighbours; and were beaten home by Scipio, leauing twelue thousand of their Companie dead behinde them. I cannot but wonder, how these Lacetani, that are said to be the first which embraced the friendship of Scipio, should without any cause remembred, become Carthaginian on the sudden, in the next newes that we heare of them. As also it is strange, that all the Sea-coast Nothward of Iberus, hauing lately become voluntari∣ly ditionis Romanae; subiect vnto Rome, should in continuance of the Storie, after a Liu. lib. 21. few lines, hold warre against Scipio, without any assistance of the Carthaginians. Nei∣ther can I beleeue, that Asdrubal, as it were by a charme, stirred vp the Illergetes, making them lay aside all care of their Hostages, and take Armes in his quarrell; whilest himselfe had not the daring to stand against Scipio, but ranne away, and sa∣ued himselfe beyond Iberus. Philinus perhaps, or some Carthaginian Writer, would haue told it thus: That Scipio aduenturing too farre into the Countrey, was beaten by Asdrubal back to his ships, whence he durst not stirre, vntill Winter came on: at what time this Carthaginian returned into the heart of his Prouince, leauing some few Garrisons to defend those places, that after Scipio wanne, by returning vpon them, vnlooked for, through a deep snow. As for the Lacetani, Illergetes, and the rest, we may reasonably thinke, that they sought their owne benefit: helping them∣selues one while by the Romans against the Carthaginians; and contrariwise, vpon sense of iniuries receiued, or apprehension of more grieuous tyrannie, vnder which they feared to be brought by these new Masters, harkning againe vnto the comfor∣table promises of those, that had ruled them before. For that it was their intent to liue vnder their owne Countrey Lawes, and not vnder Gouernours sent from Rome or Carthage, their demeanour in all Ages following may : euen from henceforth vnto the dayes of Augustus Caesar; till when they were neuer through∣ly conquered. The yeere following this, Cn. Scipio had a victorie against the Carthaginians in fight at Sea; or rather came vpon them vnlooked for, while they rode at Anchor, most of their men being on shore. All their ships, that ranne not too far on ground, he tooke: and thereby grew Master of the whole coast; landing at pleasure, and do∣ing great hurt in all places that were not well defenced. After this victorie, aboue one hundred and twentie Nations, or pettie Estates, in Spaine, are said to haue sub∣mitted themselues vnto the Romans, and giuen Hostages: whereby Asdrubal was compelled to flie into the vtmost corners of the land, and hide himselfe in Lusitania. Yet it followes; that the Illergetes did againe rebell; that Asdrubal hereupon came ouer Iberus; and that Scipio (though hauing easily vanquished the Illergetes ) went not forth to meet him, but stirred vp against him the Celtiberians, that lately were become his subiects and had giuen him Hostages. These tooke from the Carthagi∣nian three Townes, and vanquished him in two battailes; wherein they slue fifteen thousand of his men, and tooke foure thousand Prisoners. Then arriued P. Scipio, with the supply before mentioned: and henceforward the two brethren ioyntly administred the businesse in Spaine. The Carthaginians being occupied in the Celtiberian Warre; the two Scipio's did, haud ; without feare or doubt, passe ouer Iberus, & besiege Saguntum. Little cause of doubt had they, if Cn. had alreadie subdued many Nations beyond it, and, among many others, the same Celtiberians, that with their proper forces were able to vanquish Asdrubal. Bostar, the Gouernour of Saguntum, a simple man, suffered himselfe to be perswaded by one Acedux a Spaniard, that the only way to get the fa∣uour and hearty good will of the Countrie, was by freely restoring vnto them their Hostages; as resting, without any pledge, assured of their faith. But the Spa∣niard, being trusted with this message and restitution of the Hostages, carried them all to the Roman Generalls: perswading them, as hee had done Bostar, to make the Liberalitie their owne. Hereby the Romans purchased much loue: if the tale were true; and if it were not rather true, as afterward and ere this we finde, that all the Spanish Hostages were left in new Carthage. I am wearie of rehearsing so many par∣ticularities, whereof I can beleeue so few. But since wee finde no better certainties, we must content our selues with these. The yeere following was like vnto this: Asdrubal must be beaten againe. The two Scipio's diuide their forces: Cn. makes warre by Land; P. by Sea. Asdrubal, with much labour and entreatie, hath gotten foure thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse, out of Africk: He repaires his fleet; and prouides euery way to make resi∣stance. But all his chiefe Sea-men, and Masters of his ships, reuolt vnto the Romans: because they had beene chidden the last yeere for their negligence, which had be∣traied the Nauie. The reuolt of these ship-masters animates to rebellion the Carpe∣tians, or Carpetani, an In-land people about Toledo, in the very Center of Spaine. These doe much mischiefe, so that Asdrubal is faine to make a iourney to them. His sudden comming cuts off some of them, that were found scattered abroad in the fields. But they, making head, so valiantly assaile him, that they driue him, for very feare, to in∣campe himselfe strongly on an high piece of ground; whence he dares not come forth to giue them battaile. So they take a Towne by force, wherein he had laide vp all his prouisions; and shortly make themselues Masters of the Countrie round about. This good successe breeds negligence; for which they dearely pay. Asdru∣bal comes vpon them, takes them vnprepared, beats them, kills the most of them, and disperseth the rest; so that the whole Nation yeeldeth to him the next day. Then come directions from Carthage; that Asdrubal should leade his Armie forth∣with into Italie: which we may wonder, why the Carthaginians would appoint him to doe, if they had beene informed by his letters in what hard case he was; and had so weakely supplyed him, as is shewed before. But thus we finde it reported: and that vpon the very rumour of this his iournie, almost all Spaine was readie to fall to the Romans. Asdrubal therefore sends word presently to Carthage, That this must not be so: or, if they will needes haue it so, that then they must send him a Succes∣sour, and well attended with a strong Armie, which to imploy they should finde worke more than enough; such notable men were the Roman Generalls. But the Senate of Carthage is not much moued with this excuse: Asdrubal must needes be gone; and Himilco, with such forces as are thought expedient for that seruice both by Land & Sea, is sent to take the charge of Spaine. Wherfore Asdrubal hath now no more to doe, than to furnish himselfe with store of monie, that hee might haue wherewithall to winne the friendship of the Gaules; through whose Countries hee must passe, as Hannibal had done before him. The Carthaginians were greatly too blame, for not remembring to ease him of this care. But since it can bee no better, he laies great Impositions vpon al the Spaniards his subiects: & hauing gotten toge∣ther as much treasure as he could, onward he marcheth toward Iberus. The Scipio's hearing these newes, are carefull how to arrest him on the way. They besiege Ibera (so called of the Riuers name running by it) the richest towne in all those quarters, that was confederate with Asdrubal: who thereupon steps aside to relieue it. The Romans meet him, and fight a battaile with him: which they winne the more easily, for that the Spaniards, his followers, had rather bee vanquished at home; than get the victorie, and afterwards be haled into Italie. Great numbers are slaine: and few should haue escaped, but that the Spaniards ranne away, ere the battailes were throughly ioyned. Their campe the Romans take, and spoile: whereby (question∣lesse) they are maruailously enriched; all the monie that could bee raked together in Spaine, being carried along in this Italian Expedition. This dayes euent ioynes all Spaine to the Romans, if any part of the Countrie stood in doubt before; and puts Asdrubal so farre from all thought of trauailing into Italie, that it leaues him small hope of keeping himselfe safe in Spaine. Of these exployts aduertisement is sent to Rome: and Letters to the Senate, from P. and Cn. Scipio, whereof the Contents are; That they haue neither monie, apparrell, nor bread, where with to their Liu. l. 23. Armie and Fleet; That all is wanting; so as vnlesse they may bee supplied from Rome, they can neither hold their forces together, nor tarrie any longer in the Pro∣uince. These Letters come to Rome in an euill season; the State being scarcely able, after the losse at Cannae, to helpe it selfe at home. Yet reliefe is sent: how hard∣ly, and how much to the commendations of that loue and care, which the priuate Citizens of Rome bare vnto the Common-wealth, shall be inserted elsewhere, into the Relation of things whereof the truth is lesse questionable. At the comming of this supply, the two Scipio's pursue Asdrubal, and hunt him out of his lurking holes. What else can we thinke; that remember the last newes of him, and how fearefully he mistrusted his owne ? They finde him, and Mago, and Amilcar the sonne of Bomilcar, with an Armie of threescore thousand men, besieging Illiturgi: (which the learned Ortelius, & others, probably conjecture to haue stood, where Carinnena is now, in the Kingdome of Aragon; for there was Illiturgis, afterward called Forum Iulij, quite another way) a Towne of the Illergetes their neerest Neighbours, for ha∣uing reuolted vnto the Romans. The Towne is greatly distressed; but most of all, for want of victuailes. The Romans therefore breake through betweene the Ene∣mies camps, with terrible slaughter of all that resist them: and hauing victuailed the place, encourage the townsmen to defend their walls as stoutly, as they should anon behold them fighting manfully with the besiegers, in their behalfe. So they issue forth, about sixteen thousand against threescore thousand: and killing more of the Liu. l. enemies, than themselues were in number, driue all the three Carthaginian Com∣manders, euery one, out of his quarter; and tooke that day, besides prisoners and other bootie, fiftie and eight Ensignes. The Carthaginian Armie, being thus beaten from Illiturgi, fall vpon Incibili, that stood a little Southward from the mouth of I∣berus. The Spaniards are blamed, as too greedy of earning monie by warre, for thus re-enforcing the broken Carthaginians. But it may be wondred, whence the Cartha∣ginians had monie to pay them: since Asdrubal was lately driuen to poll the Coun∣trie, wanting monie of his owne; and being beaten in this journie, had lost his wealthy carriages, when his campe was taken after the battaile by Ibera. How soe∣uer it happens, the Carthaginians (according to their custome) are beaten againe at Incibili: where there were of them aboue thirteene thousand slaine, & aboue three Liu. l. 23. thousand taken; besides two and forty Ensignes, and nine Elephants. After this, (in a manner) all the people of Spaine fell from them vnto the Romans. Thus could Fabius, Valerius Antias, or some other Historian, to whom Liuie gaue credit, conquer all Spaine twice in one yeere, by winning famous victories; whereof these good Captaines, P. and Cn. Scipio, perhaps were not aware. The Romans, notwithstanding this large accesse of Dominion, winter on their owne side of Iberus. In the beginning of the next yeere, great Armies of the Spa∣niards rise against Asdrubal; and are ouerthrowne by him. P. Scipio, to helpe these his friends, is forced to make great haste ouer the Riuer. At Castrum altum, a place in the mid-way betweene new Carthage and Saguntum, famous by the death of the great Amilcar, P. Scipio incampeth: and stores the place with victuailes, being strong and defencible; as intending to make it his seat for a while. But the Countrie round about is too full of Enemies: the Carthaginian horse haue charged the Romans in their march, and are gone off cleare; falling also vpon some stragglers, or such as lag∣ged behinde their fellowes in march, they haue cut off two thousand of them. Hereupon it is thought behouefull, to retire vnto some place more assured. So Pub. withdrawes himselfe vnto Mons Victoriae: that rising somewhat Eastward from Inci∣bili, ouer-lookes the Southerne Out-let of Iberus. Thither the Carthaginians pursue him: His brother Cn. repaires vnto him; and Asdrubal the sonne of , with a full Armie, arriues to helpe his Companions. As they lie thus neere incamped to∣gether, P. Scipio, with some light-armed, going closely to view the places therabouts, is discouered by the enemies: who are like to take him, but that he withdrawes him∣selfe to an high peece of ground; where they him, vntill his brother Cn. fetch him off. After this (but I know not why) Castulo, a great citie of Spaine, whence Hannibal had taken him a wife, joyneth with the Romans; though being farre di∣ftant from them, and seated on the head of the Riuer Boetis. the Car∣thaginians passe ouer Iberus, to besiege Illiturgi againe, wherein lodgeth a Roman gar∣rison; hoping to winne it by famine. Wee may justly wonder, what should moue them to neglect the rebellion of Castulo, yea and the Roman Armie lying so close by them, and to seeke aduentures further off, in that very place, wherein they had beene so grieuously beaten the yeere before. But thither they goe: and thither fol∣lowes them Cn. Scipio with one Legion: who enters the Towne by force, breakes out vpon them the next day, and in two battailes kills aboue twelue thousand, and takes more than a thousand of them prisoners, with sixe and thirtie Ensignes. This victorie (doubtlesse) is remarkeable: considering that the greatest Roman Legion at this time, consisted of no more than fiue thousand men. The vanquished Cartha∣ginians besiege Bigarra: but that siege is also raised by Cn. Scipio. Thence the Cartha∣ginians remoue to Munda; where the Romans are soone at their heeles. There is a great battaile fought, that lasteth foure houres, wherein the Romans get a notable victorie; and a more notable would haue gotten, had not Cn. Scipio beene woun∣ded. Thirtie nine Elephants are killed; and twelue thousand men; three thou∣sand prisoners taken, and seuen and fiftie . The Carthaginians flie to ; and the Romans pursue them. Cn. Scipio in a Litter is carried into the field, and vanquisheth the Carthaginians againe: but kills not halfe so many of them, as be∣fore; good cause why, for there are fewer of them left to fight. Notwithstanding all these ouerthrowes, the Spaniards, a people framed euen by nature to set warre on Liu. l. 24. foot quickly fill vp the broken troupes of Asdrubal: who hauing also hired some of the Gaules, aduentures once more to trie his fortune with the Romans. But he is bea∣ten againe, and looseth eight thousand of his men; besides Prisoners, Elephants, Ensignes, and other appurtenances. After so many victories, the Romans are euen ashamed, to leaue Saguntum enthralled vnto the Carthaginians; since, in behalfe of that Citie, they had at first entred into this warre. And well may wee thinke it strange, that they had not recouered it long before, since wee may remember, that long before this they had wonne all the Countrie once and againe. But it must not be forgotten, that they had ere now besieged Saguntum; and were faine (as appears) to goe their way without it: so as they neede not to blush, for hauing so long for∣borne to do that, which ere now they had attempted, but were vnable to performe. At the present they winne Saguntum: and restore the possession thereof vnto such of the poore dispersed Citizens, as they can finde out. They also waste and destroy the Countrie of the Turdetani, that had ministred vnto Hannibal matter of quarrell against the Saguntines. This last action (questionlesse) was much to their honour; and wherin we may be assured, that the Carthaginians would haue disturbed them, if they had beene able. But ouer-looking now this long continuance of great victories, which the Ro∣mans haue gotten in Spaine, other print or token of all their braue exploits, wee can perceiue none, than this recouerie of Saguntum: excepting the stopping of Asdrubals journie; which was indeede of greatest importance, but appertaining to their owne defence. For they haue landed at Emporiae, an Hauen towne, built and peo∣pled by a Colonie of the , kinne to the Massilians, friends to the Romans; They haue wonne to their party, lost, recouered, and lost againe, some pettie bordering Nations of the Spaniards, that are carried one while by perswasion, other whiles by force, and sometimes by their owne vnsettled passions; and now finally they haue wonne a Towne, whereof the Carthaginians held entire possession, who had rooted out the old Inhabitants. Wherefore we may easily beleeue, that when they tooke (if they tooke it not by surprise; which is to be suspected, since in this Action we finde no particulars remembred, as when the same place was ta∣ken by Hannibal ) they had gotten the better of their Enemies in some notable fight. In like sort also must we thinke, that all those battailes lately remembred, after eue∣ry one of which Asdrubal sate down before some place, that had rebelled, or seemed ready to rebell, were prosperous vnto the Carthaginians. For it is not the custome of Armies vanquished, to carry the warre from Towne to Towne, and beleaguer Cities of their Enemies; but to fortifie themselues within their owne places of strength, and therein to attend the leuie and arriuall of new supplies. And surely, if the Romans had beene absolute Masters of the field, when they wanne Saguntum, they would not haue consumed a whole yeere following, in practising only with the Celtiberians the next adjoyning people. Yet made they this, little lesse than two yeeres businesse. Of these Celtiberians we heare before, That they haue yeelded vp themselues vnto the Romans; for securitie of their faith, giuen Hostages to Scipio; and, at his appointment, made warre against the Carthaginians, with their proper forces. Wherefore it is strange, that they are now thus hardly wrought; and, not without expresse condition of a great summe, hired to serue in the Roman Campe. How this may hold together I cannot perceiue; vnlesse perhaps in those dayes it were the Roman custome, or rather the custome of some bad Author whom Liuie followes, to call euery Messenger, or straggler, that entred their campe, an Hostage of that people from whom he came. The Celtiberians at length, hired with great rewards, send an Armie of thirtie thousand to helpe the Romans: out of which, three hundred the fittest men are cho∣sen, and carried into Italie, there to deale with their Countrimen that follow Hanni∣bal in his warres. But if any of these three hundred returne back into Spaine, it is to be feared, that he brings with him such newes of the riches and welfare of Hannibals men, that all his fellowes at home are the lesse vnwilling to follow Asdrubal, when he shall next haue a desire to leade them into Italie. Hereof wee finde more than probability, when these Mercinarie Celtiberians meet the Carthaginian Army in the field. The two Scipio's, presuming on this accesse of strength, diuide their forces, and out the Enemies; who lie not farre off with three Armies. Asdrubal, the sonne of Amilcar, is neerest at hand; euen among the Celtiberians, at Anitorgis. With him Cn. Scipio doubts not to take good order: but the feare is, that this one part of the Carthaginian forces being destroied; Mago, and Asdrubal the sonne of Gisco, hearing the newes, will make vse of their distance, which is fiue daies march, and, by running into the furthest parts of the Countrie, saue themselues from being ouer-taken. Publius therefore must make the more hastie, and take with him the better Souldiers, that is, two parts of the old Roman Armie; leauing the third part, and all the Celtiberians, to his brother. Hee that hath the longer journie to make, comes somewhat the sooner to his liues end. Mago, and Asdrubal the sonne of Gisco, are not studying how to runne away: they finde no such necessitie. They joyne their forces together; meet with P. Scipio; and lay at him so hardly, that he is driuen to keepe himselfe close within his Trenches: wherin he thinkes himselfe not well assured. Especially he is vexed by Masanissa, Prince of the Massaesyli, Numi∣dians bordering vpon Mauritania, in the Region called now Tremizen: to whom the chiefe honor of this seruice is ascribed, for that he becomes afterward Confederate with the Romans. In this dangerous case P. Scipio gets intelligence, that Indibilis, a Spanish Prince, is comming with seuen thousand and fiue hundred of the , to joyne with his Enemies. Fearing therefore to be streight shut vp, and besieged, He issues forth by night, to meet with Indibilis vpon the way; leauing T. Fonteius his Lieutenant, with a small companie, to defend the campe. He meets with Indibilis; but is not able, according to his hope, to defeat him at the first encounter. The fight continues so long, that the Numidian horse appeare (whom he thought to haue bin ignorant of his departure) and fall vpon the Romans on all sides: neither are the Car∣thaginians farre behinde; but come so vpon him in Reare, that P. Scipio, vncer∣taine which way to turne, yet fighting, and animating his men, where neede most requireth, is struck through with a lance, and slaine: very few of his Armie escaping the same destinie, through benefit of the darke night. The like end hath Cn. Scipio within nine and twentie dayes after. At his meeting with Asdrubal, the Celtiberian Mercinaries all forsake him; pretending that they had warre in their owne Coun∣trie. If Anitorgis, where Asdrubal then lay, were, as Ortelius following Beuterus takes it; a Celtiberian Towne; this was no vaine pretence, but an apparent truth. But we may justly beleeue, that they were wonne by Asdrubal, and easily perswaded to take as much monie for not fighting, as they should haue had for hazarding their liues. Cn. Scipio therefore being vnable to stay them; and no lesse vnable, without their helpe, either to resist the Enemie, or to joyne with his Brother, makes a very violent retrait; herein only differing from plaine flight, that hee keepes his men to∣gether. Asdrubal presseth hard vpon him: and Mago, with Asdrubal the sonne of Gesco, hauing made an end of Publius, hasten to dispatch his brother after him. Scipio steales from them all, by night; but is ouer-taken the next day by their horse, and arrested, in an open place of hard stonie ground, where growes not so much as a shrub, vnfit for defence of his Legions against such enemies. Yet a little Hill hee findes, of easie ascent on euery side; which he takes for want of a more commodious place, and fortifies with pack-saddles, and other luggage, for default of a better Pal∣lisado. These weake defences the Carthaginians soone teare in sunder: and, breaking in on all hands, leaue very few of them aliue; that sauing themselues, I know not how, within some woods adjoyning, escape vnto T. Fonteius, whom Publius had left in his camp, as is before said. It is a terrible ouerthrow, they say, out of which no man escapes. Yet, how they that were thus hemmed in on euery side, in so bare a ground as affoorded not a shrub to couer them, could breake out, and shrowd them∣selues within woods adjoyning, I should much wonder; did not a greater miracle following call away mine attention. T. Fonteius is in P. Scipio's campe, on the North side of Iberus, fearefull (as may be supposed) of his owne life; since his Generall, with two parts of the Romane Armie, had little hope to remaine long safe within it. Thither comes L. Martius, a yong Roman Gentleman of a notable spirit: who ha∣uing gathered together the scattered Souldiers, & drawne some Companies out of their Garrisons, makes a pretie Armie. The Souldiers, being to choose a Generall by most voices, preferre this L. Martius before Fonteinus the Lieutenant; as well they may. For Asdrubal, the sonne of Gesco, comming vpon them; this L. Martius so encourageth his men, (fondly weeping when hee led them forth, vpon remem∣brance of their more honourable Generalls lately slaine) and admonisheth them of their present necessitie, that he beates the Carthaginians into their Trenches. A no∣table victorie perhaps he might haue gotten, but that he wisely sounds the retrait; reseruing the fury of his Souldiers to a greater occasion. The Carthaginians are at first amazed, and wonder whence this new boldnesse growes, in enemies lately van∣quished, and now againe little better than taken: but when they see, that the Roman dares not follow his aduantage, they returne to their former securitie; and vtterly despising him, set neither Corps dugard, nor Sentinell, but rest secure, as if no enemie were neere. Martius therefore animates his souldiers with liuely wordes; and tells them, That there is no aduenture more safe, than that which is furthest from suspi∣tion of being vnder-taken. They are soone perswaded to follow him, in any despe∣rate peece of seruice. So he leades them forth by night, and steales vpon the campe of Asdrubal: where finding no guard, but the enemies fast a sleepe, or very drowzie, He enters without resistance, fires their Cabbins, and a terrible alarme; so that all afrighted, the Carthaginians runne head-long one vpon another, they know not which way. All passages out of their campe Martius hath prepossessed, so that there is no way to escape, saue by leaping downe the Rampart: which as many doe, as can thinke vpon it, and runne away toward the campe of Asdrubal the sonne of Amilcar, that lay sixe miles off. But Martius hath way-laid them. In a Valley be∣tweene their two campes he hath bestowed a Roman cohort, and know not what number of Horse; so that into this Ambush they fall euery one, and are cut in pee∣ces. But lest perchance any should haue escaped, and giue the alarme before his comming; Martius hastens to be there as soone as they. By which diligent speede, He comes early in the morning vpon this further campe: which with no great diffi∣cultie he enters; and partly by force, partly by apprehension of danger which the Enemies conceiued, when they beheld the Roman shields, foule, and bloudied with their former execution, He driues head-long into flight, all that can saue themselues from the fury of the sword. Thirtie seuen thousand of the enemies in this nights worke; besides a thousand eight hundred and thirty, that are taken prisoners. Hereunto Valerius Antias addes, that the campe of Mago was also taken, and seuen thousand slaine: and that in another battaile with Asdrubal, there were slaine tenne thousand more; besides foure thousand three hundred and thirtie, taken prisoners. Such is the power of some Historians. Liuie therefore hath elsewhere well obser∣ued. That there is none so intemperate, as Valerius Antias, in multiplying the num∣bers that haue fallen in battailes. That, whilest Martius was making an Oration to his souldiers, a flame of fire shone about his head, Liuie reporteth as a common tale, not giuing thereto any credit: and temperately concludeth, That this Captaine Martius got a great name; which he might well doe, if with so small forces, and in such distresse, He could clearely get off from the Enemies, and giue them any par∣ting blow, though it were farre lesse than that which is here set downe. Of these occurrents L. Martius sent word to Rome, not forgetting his owne good seruice, whatsoeuer it was, but setting it out in such wise, as the Senate might judge him worthy to hold the place of their Vicegerent in Spaine: which the better to in∣timate vnto them, He stiled himselfe Propretor. The Fathers were no lesse moued with the tidings, than the case required: and therefore tooke such carefull order, for supplying their forces in Spaine, that although Hannibal came to the gates of Rome, ere the Companies, leuied to serue in that Prouince, could be sent away; yet would they not stay a tide for defence of the Citie it selfe, but shipped them in all haste for Spaine. As for that title of Propretor, which Martius had assumed, they thought it too great for him, and were offended at his presumption in vsurping it: foreseeing well, that it was a matter of ill consequence, to haue the souldiers abroad make choice, among themselues, of those that should command Armies and Prouinces. Therefore C. Claudius Nero was dispatched away, with all conuenient hasle, into Spaine: carrying with him about sixe thousand of the Roman foot, and as many of the Latines, with three hundred Roman Horse, and of the Latines eight hundred. It happened well, that about these times, the affaires of Rome beganne to prosper in Italie, and affoorded meanes of sending abroad such a strong supply: otherwise, the victories of Martius would ill haue serued, either to keepe footing in Spaine, or to stop the Carthaginian Armies from marching towards the Alpes. For when Claudius, landing with his new forces, tooke charge of that remainder of the Armie, which was vnder Martius & Fonteius; he found surer tokens of the ouerthrowes receiued, than of those miraculous victories, whereof Martius had made his vaunts vnto the Senate. The Roman partie was for saken by most of the Spanish friends: whom how to reclaime, it could not easily bee deuised. Yet Claudius aduanced boldly towards Asdrubal the brother of Hannibal: whom he found among the , neere e∣nough at hand, incamped in a place called Lapides atri; out of which there was no issue, but only through a streight, whereon the Roman seized at his first comming. What should haue tempted any man of vnderstanding to incampe in such a place, I doe not finde: and as little reason can I find in that which followed. For it is said, That Asdrubal, seeing himselfe thus lockt vp, made offer to depart forth-with out of all Spaine, and quit the Prouince to the Romans, vpon condition, that he and his Ar∣mie might be thence dismissed; That he spent many daies, in entertayning parlce with Claudius about this businesse, That night by night hee conueied his foot-men (a few at a time) through very difficult passages, out of the danger; and that finally taking aduantage of a mistie day, Hee stole away with all his Horse and Elephants, leauing his campe emptie. If we consider, that there were at the same time, besides this Asdrubal, two other Carthaginian Generalls in Spaine; wee shall finde no lesse cause to wonder at the simplicity of Claudius, who hoped to conclude a bargaine for so great a Countrie, with one of these three Chieftaines, than at the strange nature of those passages: through which the foot-men could hardly creepe out by night; the Horse and Elephants easily following them in a darke mistie day. Wherefore in giuing to such a tale, it is needfull that we suppose, both the danger wher∣in the were, and the conditions offered for their safe departure, to haue beene of farre lesse value. Howsoeuer it was; neither this, nor ought else that the Romans could doe, serued to purchase any new friends in Spaine, or to recouer the old which they had lost. Like enough it is, that the old Souldiers, which had chosen Martius their Propretor, tooke it not well, that the Senate, regardlesse of their good deserts, had repealed their Election, and sent a Propretor whom they fancied not so well. Some such occasion may haue moued them to desire a Procon∣sul, and (perhaps) yong Scipio by name: as if a title of greater dignitie, were need∣full to worke regard in the Barbarians; and the beloued memorie of Cn. and Publius, likely to doe good, were it reviued in one of the same Familie. Whether vpon these, or vpon other reasons; C. Claudius was recalled out of the Prouince; and Publius the sonne of P. Scipio sent Proconsul into Spaine. This is that P. Scipio, who afterward transferred the warre into Africk: where he happily ended it, to the great honour and benefit of his Countrie. He was a man of goodly presence, and singularly well conditioned: especially he excelled in Tempe∣rance, Continencie, Bountie, and other Vertues that purchase loue; of which qua∣lities what great vse he made, shall appeare in the tenour of his Actions following. As for those things that are reported of him, sauouring a little too much of the great Alexanders vanitie; How he vsed to walke alone in the Capitoll, as one that had some secret conference with Iupiter; How a Dragon (which must haue beene one of the gods; and, in likelihood, Iupiter himselfe) was thought to haue conuersed with his Mother, entring her chamber often, and vanishing away at the comming in of any man; and how of these matters he nourished the rumour, by doubtfull answeres; I hold them no better than meere fables, deuised by Historians, who sought there∣by to adde vnto the glory of Rome: that this noble Citie might seeme, not only to haue surpassed otheir Nations in vertue of the generalitie, but also in great worth of one single man. To this end nothing is left out, that might serue to adorne this Roman Champion. For it is confidently written, as a matter of vnquestionable truth, That when a Proconsul was to be chosen for Spaine, there durst not any Captaine of the principall Citizens offer himselfe as Petitioner, for that honourable, but dan∣gerous charge; That the People of Rome were much astonished thereat; That when the day of Election came, all the Princes of the Citie stood looking one ano∣ther in the face, not one of them hauing the heart, to aduenture himselfe in such a desperate seruice; and finally, that this P. Cornelius Scipio, being then about foure and twentie yeeres of age, getting vp on an high place where hee might be seene of all the Multitude, requested, and obtained, that the Office might be conferred vp∣on him. If this were true, then were all the victories of L. Martius no better than dreames: and either very vnreasonable was the feare of all the Roman Captaines, who durst not follow Claudius Nero, that not long before was gone into Spaine Pro∣pretor; or very bad intelligence they had out of the Prouince, which Asdrubal the Carthaginian, as we heard euen now, was ready to abandon. But vpon these inco∣herences, which I finde in the too partiall Roman Historians, I doe not willingly insist. P. Scipio was sent Proconsul into Spaine; and with him was joyned M. Iunius Syl∣lanus, as Propretor, and his Coadjutor. They carried with them ten thousaud foot, and a thousand horse, in thirtie Quinquereme Gallies. With these they landed at Em∣poriae; and marched from thence to Tarracon alongst the Sea-coast. At the of Scipios arriuall, it is said, that Embassages came to him apace from all quarters of the Proujace: which he entertained with such a majestie, as bred a wonderfull opinion of him. As for the Enemies, they were greatly afraid of him: and so much the grea∣ter was their feare, by how much the lesse they could giue any reason of it. If wee must beleeue this, then must wee needs beleeue, that their feare was euen as great as could be: for very little cause there was, to be terrified with the fame of so yong a man, which had as yet performed nothing. All the winter following (or, as some thinke, all the next yeere) hee did nothing: but spent the time perhaps, as his fore∣goers had done, in treating with the Spaniards. His first enterprise was against new Carthage: vpon which he came vnexpected, with fiue and twentie thousand foot, and two thousand fiue hundred horse; his Sea-forces coasting him, and moderating their course in such wise, that they arriued there together with him. Hee assailed the Towne by Land and Sea; and wanne it by assault the first day. The Carthaginians lost it, by their too much confidence vpon the strength of it: which caused them to man it more slenderly, than was requisite. Yet it might haue been well enough de∣fended if some Fisher-men of Tarracon had not discouered vnto Scipio, a secret pas∣sage vnto the walls; whereof the Townsmen themselues were either ignorant, or thought (at least) that their enemies could haue no notice. This Citie of new Car∣thage, resembled the old and great Carthage in situation; standing vpon a demi-Iland, betweene an Hauen and a great Lake. All the Westerne side of the walls, and some∣what of the North, was fenced with this Lake: which the Fisher-men of Tarracon had sounded; and finding in some part thereof a shelfe, whereon at low water men might passe knee-deepe, or (at most) wading vp to the Nauill, Scipio thrust thereinto some Companies of his men; who recouered the top of the wals without resistance: the place being left without guard, as able to defend it selfe by the naturall strength. These falling suddenly vpon the backs of the Carthaginians within the Citie; easily forced a gate, and gaue free entrance to the Roman Armie. What bootie was found within the Towne, Liuie himselfe cannot certainely affirme; but is faine to say, That some Roman Historians told lies without measure, in way of amplification. By that small proportion of riches, which was afterward carried by Scipio into the Ro∣man Treasurie, we may easily perceiue, how great a vanitie it was to say, That all the wealth of Africke and Spaine, was heaped vp in that one Towne. But therein were bestowed all the Spanish Hostages: (or at least of the adjoyning Prouinces) whom Scipio entreated with singular courtesie; restoring them vnto their kindred and friends, in such gracious manner, as doubled the thankes due to so great a bene∣fit. Hereupon a Prince of the Celtiberians, and two pettie Kings of the Ilergetes and Lacetani, neerest Neighbours to Tarracon, and dwelling on the side of Iberus, for sooke the Carthaginian partie; and joyned with the Romans. The speech of In∣dibilis, King of the Ilergetes, is much commended; for that he did not vant himselfe, as commonly fugitiues vse, of the pleasure which he did vnto the Romans, in reuol∣ting from their Enemies; but rather excused this his changing side, as being thereto compelled by injuries of the Carthaginians, and inuited by the honorable dealing of Scipio. This temperate estimation of his new professed friendship, was indeede no vnsure token, that it should be long-lasting. But if the Ilergetes had long ere this (as we haue heard before) forsaken the Carthaginian partie, and stoutly held themselues as friends to Cn. Scipio; then could nothing haue beene deuised more vaine, than this Oration of Indibilis their King; excusing, as new, his taking part with the same, when he should haue rather craued pardon for his breach of alliance, formerly con∣tracted with the Father and the Vncle. Most likely therefore it is, that howsoeuer the two elder Scipios had gotten some few places among these their Neighbours, and held them by strength; yet were the Romans neuer Masters of the Countrie, till this worthy Commander, by recouering their Hostages from the Carthaginians, and by great munificence in sending them home, wanne vnto himselfe the assured loue and of these Princes. The Carthaginian Generalls, when they heard of this losse, were very sorrie: yet neuerthelesse they set a good face on the ; saying, That a young man, hauing stolne a Towne by surprise, was too farre trans∣ported, and ouer-joyed, but that shortly they would meet with him, and put him in minde of his Father and Vncle; which would alter his moode, and bring him to a conuenient temper. Now if I should here interpose mine owne conjecture; I should bee bold to say, That the Carthaginians were at this time busie, in setting foorth towards Italie; and that Scipio, to diuert them, vnder-tooke new Carthage, as his Father and Vncle, vp∣on the like occasion, sate downe before Ibera. And in this respect I would suppose, that it had not been much amisse, if the passage ouer the Lake had beene vndisco∣uered, and the Towne held out some longer while. For howsoeuer that particular Action was the more fortunate, in comming to such good issue vpon the first day: yet in the generalitie of the businesse, betweene Rome and Carthage, it was more to be wished, that Asdrubal should bee staied from going into Italy, than that halfe of Spaine should be taken from him. Whereas therefore he had nothing left to do, that should hinder his journey; Mago, and Asdrubal, the sonne of Gisco, were thought suf∣ficient to hold Scipio worke, in that lingring warre of taking and retaking Townes, whilest the maine of the Carthaginian forces, vnder Asdrubal, the sonne of Amilcar, went to a greater enterprise: euen to fight in triall of the Empire. But the Roman Hi∣storians tell this after another fashion; and say, That Asdrubal was beaten into Ita∣ly: whither he ran for feare, as thinking himselfe ill assured of the Spaniards, as long as they might heare the name of Scipio. Scipio, say they, comming vpon Asdrubal; his Vantcourrers charged so lustily the Carthaginian horse, that they draue them into their Trenches: and made it apparent, euen by that small peece of ser∣uice, how full of spirit the Roman Armie was, and how dejected the Enemie. Asdru∣bal therefore by night retired out of that euen ground, and occupied an Hill, com∣passed on three sides with a Riuer, very steepe of ascent, and not easie of accesse on the foreside; by which himselfe got vp, and was to be followed by the Romans. On the top of it there was a Plaine, whereon he strongly incamped himselfe: and in the mid-way, between the top and root of the Hill, was also another Plaine, into which he descended, more vpon brauery, that he might not seeme to hide himselfe within his Trenches, than for that he durst aduenture his Armie to the hazard of a , for which this was no equall ground. But such aduantage of place could not saue him from the Romans. They climed vp the Hill to him; they recouered euen foo∣ting with him; droue him out of this lower Plaine, vp into his Campe on the Hill∣top: whither although the ascent were very difficult, and his Elephants bestowed in the smoothest places to hinder their approch; yet compassing about, and seeking passage where it was hardest to be found; but much more strongly breaking their way, where the Carthaginians had got vp before them, they draue both Men and E∣lephants head long, I know not whither: for it is said, that there was no way to flie. Out of such a battell, wherein he lost eight thousand men, Asdrubal is said to haue escaped; and gathering together his dispersed troups, to haue marched towards the Pyrenees, hauing sent away his Elephants ere the fight beganne. Neuertheles, Mago, and Asdrubal, the sonne of Gisco, are reported after this, to haue consulted with him about this warre; and finally to haue concluded, that goe he needs must, were it but to carrie all the Spaniards as farre as might be, from the name of Scipio. How likely this was to haue been true, it shall appeare at his comming into Italy; whence these incoherent relations of the Spanish affaires, haue too long detained vs. §. XII. The great troubles that HANNIBAL raised in all quarters, to the Cittie of Rome. POSTHVMIVS the Roman Generall, with his whole Armie, is slaine by the Gaules. PHILIP King of Macedon, enters into a League with HANNIBAL, against the Romans. The Romans ioyning with the Aetolians, make warre vpon PHILIP in Greece: and afterwards conclude a peace with him; the better to intend their businesse against the Carthaginians. WE left wintering at Capua: where hee and his new Consede∣rates (as may bee thought) not a little, to heare the good newes from Carthage of such mightie aide, as was decreed to be sent thence vnto him. In former times hee had found worke enough, to carrie the Romans corne into his own barnes, and to driue away their Cattell to Geryon: his victories him little other profit, then sustenance for his Armie; by making him of the open field. Hee might perhaps haue forc'd some walled Townes, in like sort as he did Geryon, and the Castle of Cannae: but had he spent much time, about the getting of any one place well defended; the hunger, that his Armie must haue endured the Winter and Spring following, vntill corne were , would haue grieuously punished him for such imploiment of the Summer. This may haue beene the reason, why hee forbore to aduenture vpon Rome after his victorie at Cannae. For had he failed (as it was a matter of no certain∣tie) to carrie the Citie at his first comming; want of victuals would haue compel∣led him to quit the enterprise. Yea, many of the people that opened so hastily their gates vnto him, vpon the fresh bruit of his glorious successe, would haue taken time of deliberation, and waited perhaps the euent of another battell: if being, either for of meanes to force the Citie, or of necessaries to continue a siege before it, (as might seeme) from the walls of Rome, hee had presented himselfe vnto them with a lessened reputation, somewhat later in the yeere; when time to force their obedience was wanting, vnlesse they would freely yeeld it. But this great part of the care and trauell was , when so many States of Italie were become his: the yeere following, the Samnites, and other old enemies of Rome, like to receiue a notable pleasure of their new alliance with Carthage, by helping to lay siege vnto that proud Citie, which so long had held them in subjection. Thus the Winter was passed ouer joyfully, sauing that there came not any tidings of the preparations, to second the welcom report of those mightie forces, that were decreed and expected. The Spring drew on: and of the promised supply there arriued no more, than only the Elephants. How late it was ere these came, I finde not: onely we find, that af∣ter this he had aboue thirtie of them; whereas all, saue one, that hee brought ouer the Alpes, had been lost in his iourney through the marishes of Hetruria. Very bad excuse of this exceeding negligence, they that brought the Elephants could make vnto Hannibal. If they were his friends, they told him truly, what mischiefes the perswasion of Hanno wrought among the too niggardly Carthaginians. Otherwise, they might perhaps informe him, that it was thought a safer, though a farther way about, to passe along through Spaine and Gaule, as hee himselfe had done; and in∣crease the Armie by hiring the Barbarians in the journey; than to commit the maine strength of Citie, to the hazard of the Seas: especially wanting a commodious Hauen, to receiue the fleete that should carrie such a number of Men, Horses, and Elephants, with all needfull prouisions. With these allegations Hannibal must rest content; and seeke, as well as he can, to satisfie his Italian Confederates. Therefore when time of the yeere serued Hee tooke the field: and hauing finished what rested to be done at Casilinum, sought to make himself Master of some good Hauen-towne thereabout; that might serue to entertaine the Carthaginian fleet; or take from his Enemies at home all excuse, which they might pretend by want thereof. To the same purpose, and to doe what else was needfull, He sent Himilco vnto the Locrians, and Hanno to the Lucans: not forgetting at once to assay al quarters of Italie, yea, the Iles of Sicil and Sardinia; since the siege of Rome must needes bee deferred vnto an∣other yeere. Hanno made an ill journey of it, being met, or ouer-taken, by T. Longus: who slue aboue two thousand of his men; with the losse of fewer, than three hundred Romans. But Himilco sped farre better. By helpe of the Brutians, his good friends, hee wanne Petcllia or Petilia by force; after it had held out some moneths. Hee wanne likewise Consentia; and Croton, that was forsaken by the In∣habitants. Also the Citie of Locri, which was of great importance, yeelded vnto him: as did all other places thereabout; except only the Towne of Rhegium, ouer∣against Sicil. The great faith of the Petilians is worthie to be recorded, as a notable testimonie of the good gouernement, vnder which the Roman subjects liued. As for the Sam∣nites, Campans, and others, whose earnestnesse in rebellion may seeme to proue the contrarie; we are to consider, That they had lately contended with Rome for Soue∣raignetie, and were now transported with ambition: which Reason can hardly moderate, or Benefits allay. The Petilians, in the very beginning of their danger, did send to Rome for helpe: where their Messengers receiued answere from the Se∣nate, That the publike misfortunes had not meanes, to relieue their Associates that were so farre distant. The Petilian Messengers (Embassadours they are termed; as were all others, publikely sent from Cities of the Roman subjection, that had a pri∣uate jurisdiction within themselues) fell downe to the ground, and humbly be∣sought the Fathers, not to giue them away: promising to doe and suffer whatsoeuer was possible, in defence of their Towne, against the Carthaginians. Hereupon the Senate fell to consultation againe: and hauing throughly considered all their forces remaining, plainely confessed, that it was not in their power to giue any reliefe. Wherefore these Embassadours were willed to returne home, and to bid their Ci∣tizens prouide hereafter for their owne , as hauing alreadie discharged their faith to the vtmost. All this notwithstanding, the Petilians (as was said) held out some moneths: and hauing striuen in vaine to defend themselues, when there was no apparant possibilitie, gaue to the Carthaginians a bloudie victorie them; be∣ing vanquished as much by famine, as by any violence of the Assailants. The Romans at this time were indeede in such ill case, that Hannibal, with a little helpe from Carthage, might haue reduced them into termes of great extremitie. For whereas, in a great brauerie, before their losse at Cannae; they had shewed their high mindes, by entertaining the care of things farre off, notwithstanding the great warre that lay vpon them so neere at hand: it now fell out miserably all at once, that their fortune abroad was no whit better then at home. L. Posthumius Albinus their Pretor they had sent, with an Armie of fiue and twentie thousand, into Gaule; to the Illyrian King Pineus they had sent for their Tribute due, whereof the pay-day was past, willing him, if hee desired forbearance, to deliuer hostages for his perfor∣mance of what was due; and to Philip King of they had sent, to require, that he should deliuer vp vnto them Demetrius Pharius, their Subject and Rebell, whom he had receiued. Butnow from all quarters they heare tidings, little sute∣able to their former glorious conceits. Posthumius with all his Armie was cut in peeces by the Gaules, in such sort, that scarce ten men escaped. The manner of his ouerthrow was very strange. There was a great Wood, called by the Gaules, Litana; through which he was to passe. Against his comming, the Enemies had sawed the Trees so farre, that a little force would serue to cast them downe. When there∣fore Posthumius, with his whole Armie, was entred into this dangerous passage, the Gaules, that lay about the Wood, beganne to cast downe the Trees: which fal∣ling one against another, bore all downe so fast, that the Romans were ouer-whel∣med, Men and Horses; in such wise, that no more escaped, than is said before. How this tedious worke, of sawing so many Trees, could take desired effect, and neither bee perceiued, nor made frustrate, either by some winde, that might haue blowne all downe before the Romans entred, or by some othet of those many acci∣dents, whereto the deuice was subject; I doe not well conceiue. Yet some such thing may haue beene done; and what failed in the stratagem, supplied with the Enemies sword. It is not perhaps worthie to be omitted, as a monument of the sa∣uage condition, wherewith Lombardie, a Countrie now so ciuill, was infected in el∣der times, That of Posthumius his skull, being cleansed, and trimmed vp with gold, a drinking cup was made, and consecrated in their principall Temple, as an holy vessell, for the vse of the Priest in their solemnities. Of this great ouerthrow, when word was brought to Rome; the amazement was no lesse than the calamitie. But sorrow could giue no remedie to the mischiefe: and anger was vaine, where there wanted forces to reuenge. Tribute from the Illyrians there came none: neither doe I finde, that any was a second time demanded; this we finde, That with Pleuratus, and Scerdiletus Illyrian Kings, as also with Gentius, who raigned within a few yeeres following, the Romans dealt vpon euen tearmes; entreating their assistance against Philip and Perseus; not commanding their dutie, as Vassalls. The Macedonian trou∣bled them yet a little further. For hauing assured his affaires in Greece, and enjoying leisure to looke into the doings abroad, Hee sent Embassadours to Hannibal: with whom he made a league, vpon these conditions; That the King in person should come into Italie, and with all his forces, by Land and Sea, assist the Carthaginians in the Roman warre, vntill it were finished; That Rome, and all Italie, together with all the spoile therein to bee gotten, should bee left entire vnto the State of Carthage; And that afterwards Hannibal with his Armie should passe into Greece, and there as∣sist Philip, vntill hee had subdued all his Enemies: (which were the Aetolians, Thra∣cians, King Antiochus, and others) leauing semblably vnto him the full possession of that Countrie, and the Iles adjoyning. But such predisposition of Kingdomes and Prouinces, is lightly comptrolled by the diuine Prouidence, which therein shewes It selfe not (as Herodotus falsly termes it, and like an Atheist ) enuious or malicious, but very just and majesticall; in vp-holding that vnspeakable greatnesse of Soue∣raignetie, by which It rules the whole World, and all that therein is. The first Embassadours that Philip sent, fell into the Romans hands, in their iour∣nie towards Hannibal: and being examined what they were, aduentured vpon a bold lie, saying, That they were sent from the King of Macedon to Rome, there to make a League with the Senate and People, and offer his helpe in this time of great necessi∣tie. These newes were so welcome, that the ioy thereof tooke away all care of ma∣king better inquirie. So they were louingly feasted; and friendly dismissed, with guides that should leade them the way, and shew them how to auoide the Carthagi∣nians. But they being thus instructed concerning their iournie, fell wilfully into the Campe of Hannibal: who entertained them after a better fashion; and concluded the , about which they came, vpon the points before remembred. In their returne homeward, they happened againe vnluckily to bee descried by the Roman fleete; which, mistrusting them to bee of the Carthaginian partie, gaue them chace. They did their best to haue escaped: but being ouer-taken, they suffered the Ro∣mans to come aboord; and trusting to the lie that once had serued them, said it a∣gaine, That hauing been sent from King Philip, to make a League with the People of Rome, they were not able, by reason of the Carthaginians lying betweene, to get any farther than to M. Valerius the Pretor, vnto whom they had signified the good affection of the King their Master. The tale was now lesse credible than before: and (which marred all) Gisco, Bostar, and Mago, with their followers, Carthaginians that were sent with them from Hannibal to ratifie the agreement, being presently detected, made the matter apparant. Wherefore a little inquisition serued to finde all out: so that at length Hannibals owne letters to King Philip were deliuered vp, and the whole businesse confessed. The Embassadours and their followers were sent close prisoners to Rome: where the chiefe of them were cast into prison; and the rest sold for bond-slaues. Yet one of their ships that escaped, carried word into Macedon of all that had happened. Whereupon a new Embassage was sent, that went and returned with better speede; concluding, as was agreed before; onely with some losse of time. The Romans were exceedingly perplexed: thinking with what heauie weight this Macedonian warre, in an houre, was likely to fall vpon them; when their shoul∣ders were ouer-burdened with the load of the Carthaginian. Yet they tooke a noble resolution; and suteable vnto that, whereby they kept off the storme, that else would haue beaten vpon them from Spaine. They judged it more easie, with small forces to detaine in Greece, than with all their strength to resist him in Italie. And herein they were in the right. For that the very reputation of a King of Mace∣don, ioining with Hannibal in such a time, would haue sufficed to shake the allegeance not onely of the Latines, and other their most faithfull Subiects, but euen of the Ro∣man Colonies that held all priuiledges of the Citie, it will appeare by the following successe of things. M Valerius the Pretor, with twentie Quinquereme Gallies, was appointed to attend vpon the Macedonian, and to set on foot some commotion in Greece; or to nourish the troubles alreadie therein begunne. Philip was busie about the Sea-townes, that looked towards Italie, setting vpon Apollonia; and thence fal∣ling vpon Oricum; which he wanne, and so returned to Apollonia againe. The Epi∣rots craued helpe of M. Valerius: or rather accepted his kinde offers; who had none other businesse to doe. The Garrison that Philip had left in Oricum, was strong e∣nough to hold the Townesmen in good order; but not to keepe out the Romans: of whose daring to attempt any thing against him, on that side the Sea, Philip as then had no suspition. Valerius therefore easily regained the Towne; and sent thence a thousand men, vnder Naeuius Crispus, an vnder-taking and expert Captaine; which got by night into Apollonia. These made a notable sallie; and brake into Philips Trenches with so great slaughter, that they forced him to forsake his camp, & raise the siege. The King purposed (as it is said) to haue departed thence by Sea: but Valerius, comming with his fleete from Oricum, stopped vp the mouth of the Riuer; so that hee was to burne his ships, (which belike were no better than long boates) and depart ill furnished of carriages, by Land. After this, Valerius dealth with the Aetolians, a Nation alwaies enemie to the Crowne of Macedon: and easily per∣swaded them (being so affected, as hath elsewhere beene shewed) to make strong warre on Philip; wherein he promised them great assistance from the Romans. That which most moued the troublesome spirits of the Aetolians, was the hope of getting Acarnania: after which they had gaped long; and whereof the Roman was as liberal in making promise, as if already it had beene his owne. So a league was made be∣tweene them: and afterward solemnely published at Olympia, by the Aetolians; and by the Romans, in their Capitoll. The conditions were, That from Aetolia to Corcyra, in which space Acarnania was contained, all the Countrie should bee subdued, and left vpon the Aetolians, the pillage only to be giuen to the Romans. And that if the Aetolians made peace with Philip, it shuld be with Prouision, to hold no longer, than whilest he abstained from doing iniurie to the Romans, or their Associates. This was indeede the only point, whereat Valerius aimed, who promised as much on the Ro∣mans behalfe, That they should not make peace with the Macedonian, vnlesse it were with like condition of including the Aetolians. Into this League was place reserued for the Lacedaemonians and Eleans, as to those that had made or fauoured the side of Cleomenes against the Macedonian, to enter at their pleasure. The like regard was had of Attalus, Pleuratus, and Scerdiletus: the first of which raigned at Pergamus, in Asia the lesse, a Prince hereafter much to bee spoken of; the other two held some part of Illyria, about which the Romans were so farre from contending with them, that gladly they sought to get their friendly acquaintance. But the names of these Associates, are thrust into the Treatie; rather to giue it countenance, than for any readinesse which they disclose to enter thereinto. The Aetolians alone, and chiefly Scopas their Pretor, with Dorymachus and others, are yet a while the onely men, of whom the Roman Generals must make much; as the late French King, Henrie the fourth, when he had only the title of Nauarre, was said to court the Majors of Rochel. Philip was not idle, when he heard wherevnto the Aetolians tended. He repaired his Armie; made a countenance of warre vpon the , and other his borderers, that were wont in times of danger to infest the Kingdome of Macedon; wasted the Countrie about Oricum and Apollonia; and ouer-running the Pelagonians, Dardanians, and others, whom he held suspected, came downe into Thessalie, whence hee made shew as if he would inuade Aetolia. By the fame of this Expedition, He thought to stirre vp all the Greekes adjoyning, against the Aetolians; whom they generally dete∣sted as a nest of Robbers, troublesome to all the Countrie. To which purpose, and to hinder the Aetolians from breaking into Greece, He left Perseus, his sonne & heire, with foure thousand men, vpon their borders: with the rest of his Armie, before greater businesse should ouer-take and entangle him. He made a long journie into Thrace, against a people called the Medes; that were wont to fall vpon Maceden, whensoeuer the King was absent. The Aetolians, hearing of his departure, armed as many as they could against the nanians; in hope to subdue those their daily ene∣mies, and winne their little Countrie, ere hee should bee able to returne. Hereto it much auailed, that the Romans had alreadie taken and Naxos, Acarnanian Townes, conueniently situated to let in an Armie; and consigned them vnto the Aetolians, according to the tenor of the contract lately made with them. But the stout resolution of the Acarnanians, to die (as we say) euery Mothers sonne of them, in defence of their Countrie; together with the great haste of the Macedonian (who laied aside all other businesse) to succour these his friends; caused the Aetolians to forsake their enterprise. When this Expedition was giuen ouer, the Romans and Aetolians fell vpon Anticyrae, which they tooke: the Romans assailing it by Sea, the Aetolians by Land. The Aetolians had the Towne, and the Romans the spoile. For these good seruices M. Valerius was chosen Consul at Rome; and P. Sulpicius sent in his stead, to keepe the warre on foot in Greece. But besides the Roman helpe, Attalus out of Asia came ouer to assist the Aetolians. He was chiefly moued, by his owne jealousie of Philips greatnesse: though somewhat also tickled with the vanity, of being chosen by the Aetolians their principall Magistrate; which honour, though no better than titularie, he tooke in very louing part. Against the forces which At∣talus and the Romans had sent, being joyned with the maine power of Aetolia, Philip tried the fortune of two battailes: and was victorious in each of them. Hereupon, these his troublesome Neighbours desired peace of him, and vsed their best meanes to get it. But when the day, appointed for the conclusion thereof, was come: their Embassadours, in stead of making submission, proposed vnto him such intolerable conditions, as ill beseemed vanquished men to offer: and might therefore well , that their mindes were altered. It was not any loue of peace, but feare of be∣ing besieged in their owne Townes, that had made them desirous of composition. This feare being taken away, by the encouragements of Attalus and the Romans, they were as fierce as euer: and thrust a Garrison of their owne, and some Roman friends, into Elis; which threatned Achaia, wherein Philip then lay. The Romans, making a cut ouer the streight from Naupactus, wasted the Countrie in a terrible brauerie: wherein Philip requited them; comming vpon them in haste from the Nemaean Games (which he was then celebrating) and sending them faster away, but nothing richer, than they came. In the heat of this contention, Prusias King of Bithynia, fearing the growth of At∣talus, no lesse than Attalus held suspected the power of Philip; sent a Nauie into Greece, to assist the Macedonian partie. The like did the Carthaginians: and vpon grea∣ter reason; as being more interessed in the successe of his affaires. Philip was too weake by Sea: and though he could man some two hundred ships; yet the Vessels were such, as could not hold out against the Roman Quinqueremes. Wherefore it be∣houed him, to vse the helpe of his good friends the Carthaginians. But their aide came somewhat too late: which might better at first haue kept those Enemies from fastning vpon any part of Greece; than afterwards it could serue to driue them out, when they had pierced into the bowels of that Countrie. Ere Philip could attempt any thing by Sea; it was needfull that he should correct the Eleans, bad Neighbours to the Achaians his principall Confederates. But in assailing their Towne, Hee was encountred by the Aetolian and Roman Garrison; which draue him back with some losse. In such cases, especially where God intends a great conuersion of Empire, Fame is very powerfull in working. The King had receiued no great detriment, in his retrait from Elis: rather he had giuen testimonie of his personall valour, in figh∣ting well on foot, when his horse was slaine vnder him. He had also soone after ta∣ken a great multitude of the Eleans, to the number of foure thousand; with some twentie thousand head of Cattaile, which they had brought together into a place of safetie, as they thought, when their Countrie was inuaded. But it had happened, that in his pursuit of the Roman forragers about Sicyon, his horse running hastily vn∣der a low tree, had torne off one of the hornes, which (after the fashion of those times) the King wore in his Crest. This was gathered vp by an Aetolian; who car∣ried it home, and shewed it as a token of Philips death. The horne was well known, and the tale beleeued. All Macedon therefore was in an vprore: and not onely the Borderers, to fall vpon the Countrie, but some Captaines of Philip, easily ; who thinking to make themselues a fortune in that change of things, ranne into such treason, as they might better hope to make good, than to excuse. Hereupon the King returned home; leauing not three thousand men, to assist his friends the Achaeans. He also tooke order, to haue Beacons erected; that might giue him notice of the Enemies doings; vpon whom hee meant shortly to returne. The affaires of Macedon, his presence quickly established. But in Greece all went ill-fauou∣redly: especially in the Ile of Euboea, where one Plator to Attalus, and the Romans, the Towne of , ere Philip could arriue to helpe it; where also the strong Citie of Chalcis was likely to haue beene lost, if hee had not come the sooner. He made such hastie marches, that he had almost taken Attalus in the Citie of Opus. This Citie, lying ouer against Euboea, had wonne, more through the cowar∣dize of the people, than any great force that he had vsed. Now because the Roman souldiers had defrauded him in the sack of Oreum, and taken all to themselues: it was agreed, that Attalus should make his best profit of the Opuntians; without admitting the Romans to be his sharers. But whilest he was busie, in drawing as much monie as he could out of the Citizens: the sudden of Philips arriuall, made him leaue all behinde him, and runne away to the Sea-side, where he got aboord his ships; fin∣ding the Romans gone before, vpon the like feare. Either the indignitie of this mis∣aduenture; or tidings of Prusias the Bithynian his inuasion vpon the Kingdome of Pergamus; made Attalus returne home, without staying to take leaue of his friends. So Philip recouered Opus; wonne Torone, Tritonos, Drymus, and many small townes in those parts; performing likewise some Actions, of more brauerie than impor∣tance, against the Aetolians. In the meane season, Machanidas, the Tyrant of Lace∣daemon, had beene busie in Peloponnesus; but hearing of Philips arriuall, was retur∣ned home. The Lacedaemonians, hearing certaine report of Cleomenes his death in Aegypt, went about to choose two new Kings; and to conforme themselues to their old manner of Gouernement. But their estate was so farre out of tune, that their hope of redressing things within the Citie, proued no lesse vnfortunate, than had beene their attempts of recouering a large Dominion abroad. Lycurgus a Tyrant rose vp among them: vnto whom succeeded this Machanidas; and shortly after came Nabis, that was worse than both of them. They held on the Aetolian and Roman side, for feare of the Achaeans; that were the chiefe Confederates of Philip, and hated ex∣tremely the name both of Tyrant, and of Lacedaemonian. But of these wee shall speake more hereafter. Philip entring into Achaia, and seeing his presence had brought the contentment of assurance to that Countrie; spake braue words to the Assembly of their States, saying, That he had to doe with an Enemie, that was very nimble, and made warre by running away. He told how he had followed them to Chalcis, to Oreum, to , and now into Achaia: but could no where finde them; such haste they made, for feare of being ouer-taken. But flight, He said, was not alwaies prosperous: He should one day light vpon them; as ere this hee sundrie times had done, and still to their losse. The Achaians were glad to heare these words; and much the more glad, in regard of his good deeds accompanying them. For hee restored vnto their Nation some Townes, that were in his hand, belonging to them of old. Likewise to the Me∣galopolitans their Confederates, He rendred Aliphera. The Dymaeans, that had beene taken by the Romans, and sold for slaues, He sought out, ransomed, and put in quiet possession of their owne Citie. Further, passing ouer the Corinthian Gulfe, Hee fell vpon the Aetolians: whom he draue into the mountaines and woods, or other their strongest holds; and wasted their Countrie. This done, Hee tooke leaue of the A∣chaeans: and returning home by Sea, visited the people that were his subjects, or de∣pendants: and animated them so well, that they rested fearelesse of any threatning danger. Then had he leisure to make warre vpon the Dardanians, ill Neighbours to Macedon: with whom he was not so farre occupied, but that he could goe in hand with preparing a fleet of an hundred Gallies, whereby to make himselfe Master of the Sea; the Romans (since the departure of Attalus ) hauing not dared to meet or pursue him, when he lately ranne along the coast of Greece, fast by them where they lay. This good successe added much reputation to the Macedonian; and emboldened him to make strong warre vpon the Aetolians, at their owne doores. As for the Ro∣mans; either some displeasure, conceiued against their Confederates; or some feare of danger at home, when Asdrubal was ready to fall vpon Italie; caused them to giue ouer the care of things in Greece, and leaue their friends there to their own fortunes. The Aetolians therfore, being driuen to great extremitie, were faine to sue for peace vnto Philip; and accept it, vpon what conditions it best pleased him. The agree∣ment was no sooner made, than P. Sempronius with ten thousand foot, a thousand horse, and thirtie fiue Gallies, came ouer in great haste (though somewhat too late) to trouble it. Hearing how things went in Aetolia, hee turned aside to Dyrrachium, and Apollonia; making a great noise, as if with these his owne forces he would work wonders. But it was not long, ere came to visit him; and found him tame e∣nough. The King presented him battaile: but he refused it: and suffering the Ma∣cedonians to waste the Country round about, before his eies, kept himself close with∣in the walls of Apollonia; making some Ouercures of peace: which caused Philip to returne home quietly. The Romans had not so great cause to be displeased with the Aetolians, as had Philip, to take in euill part the demeanor of the Carthaginians. For notwithstanding the Royall offer that he made them, to serue their turne in Italie, and assist them in getting their hearts desire, before he would expect any requitall: they had not sent any fleet, as in reason they ought, and as (considering his want of sufficient abilitie by Sea) it is likely they were bound, either to secure the transpor∣tation of his Armie, or to free his coast from the Roman and Pyracies. On∣ly once they came to his helpe, which was, at his last journie into . But they were gone againe before his arriuall: hauing done nothing, and pretending feare of being taken by the Romans, euen at such time as Philip, with his owne , boldly passe by Sea, and found none that durst oppose him. This rechlesse dealing of the , may therefore seeme to haue beene one of Hanno his tricks; whereof Hannibal so bitterly complained. For it could not but grieue this malicious man exceedingly; to heare, that so great a King made offer to serue in person vnder Hannibal, and required the assistance of the same Hannibal, as of a man likely to make Monarchs, and alter the affaires of the World at pleasure. Therefore he had rea∣son, such as Enuie could suggest, to perswade the Carthaginians vnto a safe and course: which was, not to admit into the fellowship of their Italian so mightie a Prince; whom change of affection might make dangerous to their Em∣pire; or his much affection vnto Hannibal, more dangerous to their libertie. Rather they should doe well to saue charges: and feede the Macedonian with hopes; by ma∣king many of sending a fleet, and some other succours. This would cost nothing: yet would it serue to terrifie the Romans, and compell them to send part of their forces from home; that might finde this Enemie worke abroad. So should the Roman Armies be lessened in Italie; and Philip, when once he was engaged in the warre, vnto the prosecution, by his owne necessitie: putting the Carthagi∣nians to little or no charges; yea scarce to the labour of giuing him thankes. Now if it might come to passe, as Hannibal euery day did promise, that Rome, and all Italie, should within a while bee at the deuotion of : better it were that the Citie should bee free, so as the troublesome Greekes might addresse their complaints vnto the Carthaginians, as competent Iudges betweene them and the Macedonian, than that Hannibal, with the power of , should wait vpon Philip, as his Executioner, to fulfill his will and pleasure, in doing such injuries, as would both make the name of a hatefull in Greece, and oblige Philip to be no impudent, in ful∣filling all requests of Hannibal. Whether the counsaile of Hanno and his fellowes, were such as this; or whether the Carthaginians, of their owne disposition without his aduice, too sparing, and carelesse, the matter (as farre as concerned Philip ) came to one reckoning. For they did him no manner of good: but rather dodged with him; euen in that little courtesie which they most pretended. And this per∣haps was part of the reason, why hee begunne the building of an hundred Gallies, as if hee would let them and others know, whereto his proper strength would haue reached, had he not vainely giuen credit to faithlesse promises. When therefore the Aetolians had submitted themselues alreadie: and when the Romans desired his friendship, as might be thought, for very feare of him; with reputation enough, and not as a forsaken Client of the Carthaginians, but a Prince able to haue succoured them in their necessitie, He might giue ouer the warre, and, without reprehension, leaue them to themselues. For hee had wilfully entred into trouble for their sakes: but they despised him, as if the quarrell were meerely his owne, and hee vnable to manage it. The vanitie of which their conceits would appeare vnto them: when they should see that with his proper strength he had finished the warre, and conclu∣ded it highly to his honour. So the yeere following it was agreed, by mediation of the Epirots, Acarnanians, and others, That the Romans should retaine three or foure Townes of Illyria, which they had recouered in this warre, being part of their old Illyrian Conquest: Places no way belonging to the Macedonian; and therefore per∣haps inserted into the couenants, that somewhat might seeme to haue been gotten. On the other side, the Atintanes were appointed to returne vnder the obedience of Philip: who, if they were (as Ortelius probably conjectures) the people of the Coun∣trie about Apollonia, then did the Romans aband on part of their gettings; whereby it appeares, that they did not giue peace, as they would seeme to haue done, but ac∣cepted it, vpon conditions somewhat to their losse. The Confederates and Dependants of the Macedonian, comprehended in this Peace, were Prusias King of Bithynia, the Achaeans, Boeotians, Thessalians, , and Epirots. On the Roman side were named, first, the People of Ilium, as an hono∣rable remembrance of the Romans descent from Troy; then, Attalus King of Per∣gamus; Pleuratus, an Illyrian Prince; and Nabis, the Tyrant of Lacedaemon; together with the Eleans, Messenians, and Athenians. The Aetolians were omitted, belike, as hauing agreed for themselues before. But the Eleans and Messenians, followers of the , (and by them, as is most likely, comprised in their League with Philip ) were also inserted by the Romans; that were neuer slow in offering their friendship to small and feeble Nations. As for the Athenians: they stood much vpon their old honour; and loued to beare a part, though they did nothing, in all great Actions. Yet the setting downe of their name in this Treatie, serued the Romans to good pur∣pose: forasmuch as they were a busie people; and ministred occasion to renew the Warre, when meanes did better to follow it. §. XIII. How the Romans beganne to recouer their strength by degrees. The noble affe∣ction of the Romans, in relecuing the publike necessities of their Common-weale. IT was a great fault in the Carthaginians, that embracing so many En∣terprises at once, they followed all by the halues: and wasted more men and monie to no purpose, than would haue serued (if good or∣der had beene taken) to finish the whole warre, in farre shorter space; and make themselues Lords of all that the Romans held. This errour had beene the lesse harmefull, if their care of Italie had beene such as it ought. But they suffered Hannibal, to wearie himselfe with expectation of their promised sup∣plies: which being still deferred from yeere to yeere, caused as great opportunities to be lost, as a conquerour could haue desired. The death of , and de∣struction of his whole Armie in Gaule; the begunne rebellion of the Sardinians; the death of Hiero their friend in Syracuse; with great alterations, much to their preju∣dice, in the whole of Sicil; as also that Warre, of which we last spake, threatned from Macedon; happening all at one time; and that so neerely after their terrible ouerthrow at Cannae, among so many reuolts of their Italian Confederates; would vtterly haue sunke the Roman State, had the Carthaginians, if not the first yeere, yet at least the second, sent ouer to Hannibal the forces that were decreed. It is not to be doubted, that euen this diuersitie of great hopes, appearing from all parts, admi∣nistred matter vnto Hanno, or such as Hanno was, whereupon to worke For though it were in the power of Carthage, to performe all that was decreed for Italie: yet could not that proportion hold, when so many new occurrences brought each a∣long with them their new care; and required their seuerall Armies. This had not been a very bad excuse, if any one of the many occasions offered had been through∣ly prosequuted: though it stood with best reason, that the foundation of all other hopes and comforts, which was the prosperitie of Hannibal in his Italian warre, should haue beene strengthened; whatsoeuer had become of the rest. But the slen∣der troupes, wherewith the Carthaginians fed the warre in Spaine; the lingring aide which they sent, to vp-hold the Sardinian rebellion, when it was alreadie wel-neere downe; their trifling with Philip; and (amongst all these their attempts) their hastie catching at Sicil: little deserued to be thought good reasons of neglecting the maine point, whereto all the rest had reference. Rather euery one of these Acti∣ons, considered apart by it selfe, was no otherwise to be allowed as discreetly vnder∣taken, or substantially followed; than by making supposition, That the care of Ita∣lie, made the Carthaginians more negligent in all things else. Yet if these allegations would not to content Hannibal; then must he patiently endure to know, that his owne Citizens were jealous of his Greatnesse, and durst not trust him with so much power, as should enable him to wrong the State at home. Whatsoeuer he heard or thought, Hannibal was glad to apply himselfe to Neces∣sitie; to feede his Italian friends with hopes; and to trifle away the time about , Naples, Cumae, and other places: being loth to spend his Armie in an hard siege, that was to bee reserued for a worke of more importance. Many offers hee made vpon ; but alwaies with bad successe. Once Marcellus fought a battaile with him there: yet vnder the very walls of the Towne; hauing the assistance of the Citizens, that were growne better affected to the Roman side, since the Heads, that inclined them to rebellion, were cut off. About a thousand men Hannibal in that fight lost: which was no great maruaile; his forces being then diuided, and imploi∣ed in parts of at once. Naples was, euen in those daies, a strong Citie; and required a yeeres worke to taken it by force. Wherefore the earnest desire of Hannibal to get it, was alwaies frustrate. Vpon the Towne of Cumae they of had their plot; and were in hope to take it by cunning. They sent to the chiefe Ma∣gistrates of the Cumans, desiring them (as being also Campans ) to be present at a so∣lemne sacrifice of the Nation, where they would consult about their generall good: promising to bring thither a sufficient guard, to assure the whole Assembly, from any danger that might come by the Romans. This motion the Cumans made shew to entertaine; but priuily sent word of all to T. Sempronius Gracchus the Roman Consul. Gracchus was a very good man of warre; and happily chosen Consul in so dange∣rous a time. His Colleague should haue beene Posthumius Albinus, that was lately slaine by the Gaules: after whose death Marcellus was chosen; as being judged the fittest man to encounter with Hannibal. But the Roman Augures either found some religious impediment, that nullified the election of Marcellus; or at least they fai∣ned so to haue done, because this was the first time, that euer two Plebeian Consuls were chosen together. Marcellus therefore gaue ouer the place: and Q. Fabius Maxi∣mus the late famous Dictator, was substituted in his roome. But Fabius was detai∣ned in the Citie, about matters of Religion, or Superstition: wherewith Rome was commonly, especially in times of danger, very much troubled. So Gracchus alone, with a Consular Armie, waited vpon Hannibal among the Campans: not able to meet the Enemie in field; yet intentiue to all occasions, that should be presented. The Volones, or Slaues, that lately had beene armed, were no small part of his fol∣lowers. These, and the rest of his men, Hee continually trained: and had not a greater care, to make his Armie skilfull in the exercises of warre; than to keepe it from quarrels, that might arise by vpbraiding one another with their base con∣dition. Whilest the Consul was thus busied at Linternum; the Senators of Cumae sent him word, of all that had passed betweene them and the Capuans. It was a good occasion to flesh his men, and make them confident against the Enemie; of whom hitherto they had bad experience. Gracchus therefore put himselfe into Cumae: whence he issued at such time, as the Magistrates of that Citie were expected by the Campans. The Sacrifice was to be performed by night, at a place called Hamae, three miles from Cumae. There lay Marius Alfius the chiefe Magistrate of Capua, with fourteene thousand men; not wholly intent either to the Sacrifice, or to any dan∣ger that might interrupt it; but rather deuising how to surprise others, than fearing himselfe to be assailed. The Consul therefore, suffering none to goe forth of Cumae, that might beare word of him to the Enemies, issued out of the Towne when it grew darke: his men being well refreshed with meat and sleepe, the day before, that they might hold out the better in this nights seruice. So he came vpon the Capuans vnawares: and slew more than two thousand of them, together with their Com∣mander; loosing not aboue an hundred of his owne men. Their campe hee tooke: but tarried not long to rifle it, for feare of Hannibal; who lay not farre off. By this his prouidence, He escaped a greater losse, than he had brought vpon the Enemies. For when Hannibal was enformed how things went at Hamae; forthwith he marched thither: hoping to finde those yong souldiers, and slaues, busied in making spoile, and loading themselues with the bootie. But they were all gotten safe within Cumae; which partly for anger, partly for desire of gaining it, & partly at the vrgent entrea∣tie of the Capuans, Hannibal assailed the next day. Much labour, and with ill successe, the Carthaginians and their fellowes spent, about this Towne. They raised a wood∣den Tower against it: which they brought close vnto the walls; thinking thereby to force an Entrie. But the Defendants, on the inside of the wall, raised against this an higher Tower: whence they made resistance; and found meanes at length, to consume with fire the worke Enemies. While the Carthaginians were busie in quenching the fire; the Romans, sallying out of the Towne at two gates, charged them valiantly, and draue them to their trenches, with the slaughter of about four∣teene hundred. The Consul wisely sounded the Retreat; ere his men were too farre engaged, and Hannibal in a readinesse to requite their seruice. Neither would He, in the pride of this good successe, aduenture forth against the Enemie; who presented him battell the day following, neere vnto the walls. Hannibal therefore, seeing no likelihood to preuaile in that which he had taken in hand, brake vp the siege; and returned to his old Campe at Tifata. About these times, and shortly after, when Fa∣bius the other Consul had taken the field; some small Townes were recouered by the Romans, and the people seuerely punished for their reuolt. The Carthaginian Armie was too small, to fill with Garrisons all places that had yeelded; and withall to abide (as it must doe) strong in the field. Wherefore Han∣nibal, attending the supply from home, that should enable him to strike at Rome it selfe, was driuen in the meane time to alter his course of warre: and, in stead of ma∣king (as formerly he had done) a general inuasion vpon the whole Country, to passe from place to place; and wait vpon occasions, that grew daily more commodious to the enemie, than to him. The Countrey of the Hirpines and Samnites was grieuous∣ly wasted by Marcellus, in the the absence of Hannibal: as also was Campania, by the Consul; when Hannibal hauing followed Marcellus to Nola, and receiued there the losse before mentioned, was gone to Winter in . These people shewed not the like spirit in defending their lands, and fighting for the Carthaginian Empire, as in former times they had done; when they with the Romans, in their owne behalfe, to get the Soueraigntie. They held it reason, that they should bee protected, by such as thought to haue dominion ouer them: whereby at once they ouerburdened their new Lords; and gaue vnto their old the more easie meanes, to take reuenge of their defection. The people of Rome were very intentiue, as necessitie constrained them, to the worke that they had in hand. They continued Fabius in his Consulship: and ioy∣ned with him M. Claudius Marcellus; whom they had appointed vnto that honour the yeere before. Of these two, Fabius was called the Shield: and Marcellus, the Ro∣man Sword. In Fabius it was highly, and vpon iust reason, commended, That being himselfe Consul, and holding the Election, he did not stand vpon nice points of for∣malitie, or regard what men might thinke of his ambition, but caused himselfe to be chosen with Marcellus; knowing in what need the Citie stood of able Comman∣ders. The great name of these Consuls, and the great preparations which the Ro∣mans made; serued to put the Campans in feare, that Capua it selfe should bee besie∣ged. To preuent this, Hannibal at their earnest came from Arpi: (where he lay, harkening after newes from Tarentum ) and, hauing with his presence comfor∣ted these his friends, fell on the sudden vpon Puteoli, a Sea-towne of Campania; about which he spent three daies in vaine, hoping to haue wonne it. The Garrison in Pu∣teoli was sixe thousand strong: and did their dutie so well, that the Carthaginian, finding no hope of good successe, could onely shew his anger vpon the fields there, and about Naples; which hauing done, and once more (with as ill successe as before) assaied , he bent his course to Tarentum: wherein he had very great intelligence. Whilest he was in his progresse thither; Hanno made a iournie against Beneuentum: and T. Gracchus the last yeeres Consul, hasting from Nuceria, met him there; and fought with him a battell. Hanno had with him about seuenteene thousand Foot, Brutians and Lucans for the most part: besides twelue hundred Horse; verie few of which were Italians, all the rest, and Moores. Hee held the Roman worke foure houres; ere it could bee perceiued, to which side the victorie would incline. But Gracchus his souldiers, which were all (in a manner) the late-armed slaues, had receiued from their Generall a peremptorie denunciation; That this day, or neuer, they must purchase their libertie, bringing euery man, for price thereof, an Enemies head. The sweet reward of liberty was so greatly desired, that none of them feared any danger in earning it: how beit that vaine labour, imposed by their Generall, of cutting off the Enemies heads, troubled them exceedingly; and hindered the seruice, by imployment of so many hands, in a worke so little concerning the victo∣rie. Gracchus therefore finding his owne errour, wisely corrected it: proclayming a∣loud, That they should cast away the heads, and spare the trouble of cutting off any more; for that all should haue libertie immediatly after the battell, if they wanne the day. This encouragement made them run headlong vpon the Enemie; whom their desperate furie had soone ouerthrowne, if the Roman Horse could haue made their part good against the Numidian. But though Hanno did what hee could, and pressed so hard vpon the Roman battell, that foure thousand of the slaues, (for feare either of him, or of the punishment which Gracchus had threatned before the bat∣tell, vnto those that should not valiantly behaue themselues) retired vnto a ground of strength: yet was he glad at length to saue himselfe by flight, when the Grosse of his Armie was broken; being vnable to remedie the losse. Leauing the field, hee was accompanied by no more than two thousand: most of which were Horse; all the rest were either slaine or taken. The Roman Generall gaue vnto all his souldiers that reward of libertie, which hee had promised: but vnto those foure thousand, which had recoiled vnto the Hill, he added this light punishment; That as long as they serued in the warres, they should neither eate nor drink otherwise than stand∣ing, vnlesse sicknesse forced them to breake his Order. So the victorious Armie re∣turned to Beneuentum: where the newly souldiers were feasted in pub∣like by the townsmen; some sitting, some standing, & all of them hauing their heads couered (as was the custome of slaues manumised) with Caps, or white wooll. The picture of this Feast (as a thing worthie of remembrance) was afterward hung vp in a Table by Gracchus, in the Temple of Libertie; which his father had built and de∣dicated. This was indeede the first Battell, worthie of great note, which the Carthaginians had lost since the comming of Hannibal into Italie: the victories of Marcellus at Nola, and of this Gracchus before at Hamae, being things of small im∣portance. Thus the Romans through industrie, by little and little, repaired that great Breach in their Estate, which Hannibal had made at Cannae. But all this while, and long after this, their Treasurie was so poore, that no industrie nor art could serue to helpe it. The fruits of their grounds did onely (and perhaps hardly) serue, to their Townes and Armies; without any surplusage, that might be exchanged for other needfull commodities. Few they were in Italie, that continued to pay them tribute: which also they could worse doe than before; as liuing vpon the same Trade, and subiect to the same inconueniences, which enfeebled Rome it selfe. Sicil and Sardi∣nia, that were wont to yeeld great profit, hardly now maintained the Roman armies, that lay in those Prouinces, to hold them safe, and in good order. As for the Citizens of Rome, euery one of them suffered his part of the detriment, which the Common∣wealth sustained and could now doe least for his Countrie, when most need was: as also the number of them was much decreased; so as if money should be raised vpon them by the poll, yet must it be farre lesse, than in former times. The Senate there∣fore, diligently considering the greatnes of the war within the bowels of Italie, that could not be thence expelled without the exceeding charge of many good Armies; the perill, wherein Sicil and Sardinia stood, both of the Carthaginians, and of many a∣mong the Naturals declining from the friendship or subiection of Rome; the threats of the Macedonian, readic to land in the Easterne parts of Italie, if they were not at the cost to finde him worke at home; the greater threats of Asdrubal, to follow his brother ouer the Alpes, as soone as he could rid himselfe of the Scipio's in Spaine; and the pouertie of the Common-wealth, which had not money for any one of these mortall dangers; were driuen almost euen to extreme want of counsell. But being vrged by the violence of swift necessitie, signified in the letters of the two Scipio's from Spaine; they resolued vpon the onely course, without which the Citie could not haue subsisted. They the people to Assembly: wherein Q. Fuluius the Pretor laide open the publique wants; and plainely said, That in this Exigent, there must be no taking of monie for victuall, weapons, apparrell, or the like things neede∣full to the Souldiers: but that such as had stuffe, or were artificers, must trust the Common-wealth with the Loane of their commodities, and labours, vntill the Warre were ended. Hereunto hee so effectually exhorted all men, especially the Publicans or Customers, and those which in former times had liued vpon their dea∣ling in the common Reuennues, that the charge was vnder-taken by priuate men; and the Armie in Spaine as well supplied, as if the Treasurie had beene full. Short∣ly after this, M Atilius Regulus, and P. Furius Philus the Roman Censors, taking in hand the redresse of disorders within the Citie, were chiefly intentiue to the cor∣rection of those, that had mis-behaued themselues in this present warre. They beganne with L. Caecilius Metellus: who, after the battell at Cannae, had held dis∣course with some of his companions, about flying beyond the Seas; as if Rome, and all Italie, had beene no better than lost. After him they tooke in hand those, that hauing brought to Rome the message of their fellowes made prisoners at Cannae, returned not backe to Hannibal, as they were bound by oath; but thought them∣selues thereof sufficiently discharged, in that they had stepped once backe into his campe; with pretence of taking better notice of the Captiues names. All these were now pronounced infamous by the Censors: as also were a great many more; euen whosoeuer had not serued in the warres, after the terme which the Lawes appointed: Neither was the note of the Censors at this time (as otherwise it had vsed to bee) hurtfull onely in reputation: but greater weight was added there∣vnto, by this Decree of the Senate following: That all such as were noted with in∣famie by these Censors, should bee transported into Sicill, there to serue vntill the end of the Warre, vnder the same hard conditions, that were imposed vpon the Remainder of the Armie beaten at Cannae. The Office of the Censors was; to take the List and accompt of the Citizens; to choose or displace the Senatours; and to set notes of disgrace (without further punishment) vpon those, whose vnhonest or vnseeme∣ly behauiour fell not within compasse of the Law. They tooke also an accompt of the Roman Gentlemen: among whom they distributed the publike Horses of seruice, vnto such as they thought meet; or tooke them away for their misbeha∣uiour. Generally, they had the ouer-sight of mens liues and manners: and their censure was much reuerenced and feared; though it extended no further, than to putting men out of ranke; or making them change their Tribe; or (which was the most that they could doe) causing them to pay some Duties to the Treasury, from which others were exempted. But besides the care of this generall Taxe, and matters of Moralitie, they had the charge of all publike Workes; as men∣ding of High-waies, Bridges, and Water-courses; the reparations of Temples, Porches, and such other buildings. If any man encroched vpon the streetes, High∣waies, or other places that ought to bee common; the Censors compelled him to make amends. They had also the letting out of Lands, Customes, and other pub∣like Reuennues, to farme: so that most of the Citizens of Rome were beholding vnto this Office, as maintaining themselues by some of the Trades thereto be∣longing. And this was no small helpe to conserue the dignitie of the Senate: the being obnoxious vnto the Censors; which were alwaies of that Order, and carefull to vp-hold the reputation thereof. But the Common-weale being now impouerished by warre, and hauing small store of Lands to let, or of Customes that were worth the farming; Regulus and troubled not them∣selues much with pervsing the Temples, or other decaied Places, that needed re∣parations: or if they tooke a view of what was requisite to be done in this kinde; yet forbore they to set any thing in hand, because they had not wherewith to pay. Herein againe appeared a notable generositie of the Romans. They that had beene accustomed, in more happie times, to vndertake such peeces of worke, of∣fered now themselues as willingly to the Censors, as if there had beene no such want: promising liberally their cost and trauell; without expectation of any pai∣ment, before the end of the warre. In like sort, the Masters of those slaues, that lately had beene enfranchised by Gracchus, were very well contented to forbeare the of them, vntill the Citie were in better-case to pay. In this generall incli∣nation of the Multitude, to relieue, as farre foorth as euery one was able, the com∣mon necessitie; all the goods of Orphans, and of Widdowes liuing vnder Patro∣nage, were brought into the Treasurie; and there the Quaestor kept a booke, of all that was laied out for the sustenance of these Widdowes and Orphans: whilest the whole was vsed by the Citie. This good example of those which remained in the Towne, preuailed with the Souldiers abroad: so that (the poorer sort excep∣ted) they refused to take pay; and called those Mercinaries, that did accept it, when their countrie was in so great want. The twelue hundred Talents, wrongfully extorted from the Carthaginians; nor any iniuries following, done by the Romans in the height of their pride; yeel∣ded halfe so much commoditie, as might bee laied in ballance against these mise∣ries, whereinto their Estate was now reduced. Neuerthelesse, if wee consider things aright; the calamities of this Warre did rather enable to deale with those Enemies, whom shee forth-with vnder-tooke, than abate or slacken the growth of that large Dominion, whereto shee attained, ere the youngest of those men was dead, whose names wee haue alreadie mentioned. For by this hammering, the Roman mettall grew more hard and solide: and by paring the branches of priuate fortunes, the Roote and Heart of the Common-wealth was corroborated. So grew the Cittie of Athens; when Xerxes had burnt the Towne to ashes, and taken from euery particular Citizen all hope of other felicitie, than that which rested in the common happinesse of the vniuersalitie. Certaine it is, (as Sir Francis Bacon hath iudiciously obserued) That a State, whose dimension or slemme is small, may aptly serue to be foundation of a great Monarchie: which chiefly comes to passe, where all regard of domesticall prosperitie is laid aside; and euery mans care addressed to the benefit of his countric. Hereof I might say, that our Age hath scene a great example, in the vnited Prouinces in the Netherlands; whose present riches and strength grew chiefly from that ill assurance, which each of their Townes, or almost of their Families, perceiued it selfe to hold, whilest the Generalitie was oppressed by the Duke of Alua; were it so, that the people had thereby growne as warlike, as by extreme industrie, and straining them∣selues to fill their publike Treasurie, they are all growne wealthie, strong at Sea, and able to wage great Armies for their seruices by Land. Wherefore if wee valew at such a rate as wee ought, the patient Resolution, conformitie to good Order, o∣bedience to Magistrates, with many other Vertues, and, aboue all other, the great loue of the Common-weale, which was found in Rome in these dangerous times: we may truly say. That the Cittie was neuer in greater likelihood to prosper. Nei∣ther can it be deemed otherwise, than that if the same affections of the people had lasted, when their Empire, being growne more large and beautifull, should in all reason haue been more deare vnto them, if the riches and delicacies of Asia had not infected them with sensualitie, and carried their appetites mainly to those pleasures, wherein they thought their well-being to consist; if all the Citizens, and Subiects of Rome could haue beleeued their owne interest to be as great, in those wars which these latter Emperours made for their defence, as in these which were managed by the Consuls: the Empire, founded vpon so great vertue, could not haue beene throwne downe by the hands of rude Barbarians, were they neuer so many. But vnto all Dominions God hath set their periods: Who, though hee hath giuen vnto Man the knowledge of those waies, by which Kingdomes rise and fall; yet hath left him subiect vnto the affections, which draw on these fatall changes, in their times appointed. §. XIIII. The Romans win some Townes back from HANNIBAL. HANNIBAL winnes Tarentum. The siege of Capua. Two victories of HANNIBAL. The tournie of HANNIBAL to the gates of Rome. Capua taken by the Romans. AS the People of Rome strained themselues to the vtmost, for maintai∣ning the warre: so their Generals abroad omitted no part of industrie, in seeking to recouer what had beene lost. The Towne of Casiline Fabius besieged. It was well defended by the Carthaginian Garrison; and likely to haue beene relieued by those of Capua, if Marcellus from Nola had not come to the assistance of his Colleague. Neuerthelesse the place held out so obstinately, that Fabius was purposed to giue it ouer: saying, that the enter∣prise was not great; yet as difficult, as a thing of more importance. But Marcellus was of a contrarie opinion. He said, That many such things, as were not at first to haue been vnder-taken by great Commanders, ought yet, when once they were ta∣ken in hand, to bee prosequuted vnto the best effect. So the siege held on: and the Towne was pressed so hard, that the Campans dwelling therein grew fearefull, and craued parlee; offering to giue it vp, so as all might haue leaue to depart in safetie, whither they pleased. Whilest they were thus treating of conditions: or whilest they were issuing foorth, according to the composition alreadie made; (for it is di∣uersly reported) Marcellus, seizing vpon a Gate, entred with his Armie, and put all to sword that came in their way. Fiftie of those that were first gotten out, ranne to Fabius the Consul: who saued them, and sent them to Capua in safety; all the rest were either slaine, or made prisoners. If Fabius deserued commendations, by hol∣ding his word good vnto these fiftie; I know not how the slaughter of the rest, or imprisonment afterward of such, as scaped the heat of execution, could bee excused by Marcellus. It may be that he helped himselfe, after the Roman fashion, with some aequiuocation, but he shall pay for it hereafter. In like sort was Mount Marsam in Gascoigne taken by the Marshall Monluc, when I was a young man in France. For whilest he entertained parlee about composition; the besieged ranne all from their seuerall guards, vpon hastie desire of being acquainted with the conditions propo∣sed. The Marshall therefore discouering a part of the walls vnguarded, entred by Scalado; and put all saue the Gouernour vnto the sword. Herein that Gouernour of Mount Marsam committed two grosse errours; the one, in that hee gaue no or∣der for the Captaines and Companies, to hold themselues in their places; the other, in that hee was content to parlee, without pledges for assurance giuen and receiued. Some such ouer-sight, the Gouernour of Casiline seemeth to haue committed; yet neither the aduantage taken by Marcellus, or by Monluc, was very honourable. When this Worke was ended, many small Townes of the Samnites, and some of the Lucans and Apulians, were recouered: wherein were taken, or slaine, about fiue and twentie thousand of the Enemies; and the Countrie grieuously wasted by Fabius, Marcellus lying sicke at Nola. Hannibal in the meane while was about Tarentum; waiting to heare from those, that had promised to giue vp the Towne. But M. Valerius, the Roman Propretor, had thrust so many men into it, that the Traitors durst not stirre. Wherefore the Carthaginian was to depart; hauing wearied himselfe in vaine with expectati∣on. Yet he wasted not the Countrie; but contented himselfe with hope, that they would please him better in time following. So he departed thence toward Salapia: which he chose for his wintring place; and beganne to victuall it, when Summer was but halfe past. It is said, that he was in loue with a yong Wench in that towne: in which regard if he beganne his Winter more timely, than otherwise neede requi∣red, He did not like the Romans; whom necessitie enforced, to make their Summer last as long, as they were able to trauell vp and downe the Countrie. About this time beganne great troubles in Sicil; whither Marcellus the Consull was sent, to take such order for the Prouince, as neede should require. Of the do∣ings there, which wore out more time than his Consulship, we will speake hereafter. The new Consuls, chosen at Rome, were Q. Fabius the sonne of the present Con∣sul, and T. Sempronius Gracchus the second time. The Romans found it needfull for the publike seruice, to imploy often-times their best able men: and therefore made it lawfull, during the war, to recontinue their Officers, and choose such, as had late∣ly held their places before; without regarding any distance of time, which was o∣therwise required. The old Fabius became Lieutenant vnto his sonne: which was perhaps the respect, that most commended his sonne vnto the place. It is noted, That when the old man came into the campe, and his sonne rode forth to meete him: eleuen of the twelue Lictors, which carried each an axe with a bundle of rods before the Consull, suffered him, in regard of due reuerence, to passe by them on horse-backe; which was against the custome. But the sonne perceiuing this, com∣manded the last of his Lictors to note it: who thereupon bade the old Fabius alight, and come to the Consul on his feete. The father chearefully did so; saying, It was my minde, sonne, to make triall, whether thou diddest vnderstand thy selfe to bee Consul. a wealthie Citizen of Arpi, who, after the battell at Cannae, had hol∣pen the Carthaginian into that Towne, seeing now the fortune of the Romans to a∣mend; came priuily to this Consul Fabius, and offered to render it back vnto him, if he might bee therefore well rewarded. The Consull purposed to follow old ex∣amples: and to make this Altinius a patterne to all Traitors; vsing him, as Camillus and Fabricius had done those, that offered their vnfaithful seruice against the , and King Pyrrhus. But Q. Fabius the father, was of another opinion: and said, it was a matter of dangerous consequence, That it should be thought more safe to reuolt from the Romans, than to turne vnto them. Wherefore it was concluded, that hee should be sent to the Towne of Cales, and there kept as prisoner; vntill they could better resolue, what to doe with him, or what vse to make of him. Hannibal, vnder∣standing that Altinius was gone, and among the Romans, tooke it not sorrowfully; but thought this a good occasion, to seize vpon all the mansriches, which were great. Yet, that he might seeme rather seuere, than couetous, He sent for the wife and children of Altinius into his campe: where hauing examined them by torment, partly concerning the departure and intentions of this fugitiue, partly, and more strictly, about his riches, what they were, and where they lay, He condemned them, as partakers of the Treason, to be burnt aliue; and tooke all their goods vnto him∣selfe. Fabius the Consul shortly after came to Arpi: which he wanne by Scalado, in a stormie and rainie night. Fiue thousand of Hannibals Souldiers lay in the Towne; and of the Arpines themselues, there were about three thousand. These were thrust formost by the Carthaginian Garrison; when it was vnderstood, that the Romans had gotten ouer the wall, and broken open a Gate. For the souldiers held the townsmen suspected; and therefore thought it no wisedome, to trust them at their backs. But after some little resistance, the Arpines gaue ouer fight, and entertained parlee with the Romans: protesting, that they had beene betraied by their Princes; and were be∣come subject to the Carthaginians, against their wills. In processe of this discourse, the Arpine Pretor went vnto the Roman Consul: and receiuing his faith for security of the Towne, presently made head against the Garrison. This notwithstanding; like it is, that Hannibals men continued to make good resistance. For when almost a thousand of them, that were Spaniards, offered to leaue companions, and serue on the Roman side; it was yet couenanted, That the Carthaginians should be suffered to passe forth quietly, and returne to Hannibal. This was performed: and so Arpi became Roman againe; with little other losse, than of him that had betraied it. A∣bout the same time, Cliternum was taken by Tuditanus, one of the Pre∣tors: and vnto Cneius Fuluius, another of the Pretors, an hundred and twelue Gen∣tlemen of Capua offered their seruice; vpon no other condition, than to haue their goods restored vnto them, when their Citie should bee recouered by the Romans. This was a thing of small importance: but considering the generall hatred of the Campans toward Rome, it serued to discouer the inclination of the Italians in those times; and how their affections recoiled from Hannibal, when there was no appea∣rance of those mighty succours, that had beene promised from Carthage. The Consentines also, and the Thurines, people of the Brutians, that had yeelded them∣selues to Hannibal; returned againe to their old allegeance. Others would haue fol∣lowed their example, but that one L. Pomponius, who of a Publican had made himself a Captaine, and gotten reputation by some pettie exploits in forraging the country, was slaine by Hanno, with a great multitude of those that followed him. Hannibal in the meane while had all his care bent vpon Tarentum; which if he could take, it seemed that it would stand him in good stead, for drawing ouer that helpe out of Macedon, which his Carthaginians failed to send. Long he waited, ere he could bring his desire to passe: and being loth to hazard his forces, where he hoped to preuaile by intelligence; He contented himselfe, with taking in some poore Townes of the Salentines. At length, his Agents within Tarentum found meanes to accomplish their purpose, and his wish. One Phileas, that was of their conspiracie, who lay at Rome as Embassador, practising with the Hostages of the Tarentines, & such as had the keeping of them, conueighed them by night out of the Citie. But hee and his companie were the next day so closely pursued, that all of them were taken, and brought back to Rome; where they suffered death, as Traitors. By reason of this crueltie, or seueritie, the people of Tarentum grew to hate the Romans, more general∣ly and earnestly than before. As for the Conspirators, they followed their businesse the more diligently; as knowing what reward they were to expect, if their intention should happen to be discouered. Wherefore they sent againe to Hannibal: and ac∣quainting him with the manner of their plot, made the same composition with him for the , which they of Capua had made before. Nico and Philomenes, two the chiefe among them, vsed much to goe forth of the Towne on hunting by night; as if they durst not take their pleasure by day, for feare of the Carthaginians. Seldome or neuer they missed of their game: for the Carthaginians prepared it readie for their hands, that they might not seeme to haue been abroad vpon other occasion. From the campe of Hannibal, it was about three daies journie to Tarentum, if hee should haue marched thither with his whole Armie. This caused his long abode in one place the lesse to be suspected: as also to make his Enemies the more secure, He cau∣sed it to be giuen out, that he was sick. But when the Romans within Tarentum, were growne carelesse of such his neighbourhood, and the Conspirators had set their bu∣sinesse in order; He tooke with him ten thousand the most expedite of his horse and foot; and long before breake of day, made all speede thitherward. Fourescore light horse of the Numidians ranne a great way before him, beating all the waies, and kil∣ling any that they met, for feare lest he, and his troupe following him, should be dis∣couered. It had beene often the manner of some few Numidian horse, to doe the like in former times. Wherefore the Roman Gouernour, when hee heard tell in the euening, that some Numidians were abroad in the fields, tooke it for a signe, that Hannibal was not as yet dislodged; and gaue order, that some companies should be sent out the next morning, to strip them of their bootie, and send them gone. But when it grew darke night; Hannibal, guided by Philomenes, came close to the towne: where, according to the tokens agreed vpon, making a light to shew his arriuall; Nico, that was within the Towne, answered him with another light, in signe that he was readie. Presently Nico beganne to set vpon one of the Gates, and to kill the watchmen. went toward another gate: and whistling (as was his man∣ner) called vp the ; bidding him make haste, for that hee had killed a great Bore, so heauie, that scarce two men could stand vnder it. So the Porter opened the wicket: and forthwith entred two yong men, loaden with the Bore; which Hanni∣bal had prepared large enough, to bee worthie the looking on. While the Porter stood wondring at the largenesse of the beast, Philomenes ran him through with his Bore-speare: and letting in some thirtie armed men, fell vpon all the watch; whom when he had slaine, he entred the great gate. So the Armie of Hannibal, entring at two gates, went toward the Market-place; where both parts met. Thence they were distributed by their Generall, and sent into all quarters of the Citie, with Tarentines to be their guides. They were commanded to kill all the Ro∣mans; and not to hurt the Citizens. For better performance hereof Hannibal wil∣led the Conspirators, that when any of their friends appeared in sight, they should bid him be quiet, and of good cheare. All the Towne was in an vprore: but few could tell what the matter meant. A Roman trumpet was vnskilfully sounded by a Greeke in the Theater: which helped the suspition, both of the Tarentines, that the Romans were about to spoile the Towne; and of the Romans, that the Citizens were in commotion. The Gouernour fled into the Port: and taking boat, got into the Citadell, that stood in the mouth of the Hauen; whence hee might easily perceiue the next morning, how all had passed. Hannibal, assembling the Tarentines, gaue them to vnderstand, what good affection hee bore them; inueighed bitterly against the Romans, as tyrannous oppressors; and spake what else he thought fit for the pre∣sent. This done: and hauing gotten such spoile as was to bee had of the Souldiers goods in the Towne, He addressed himselfe against the Citadell; hoping that if the Garrison would sallie out, he might giue them such a blow, as should make them vnable to defend the Peece. According to his expectation it partly fel out. For when hee beganne to make his approches, the Romans in a brauerie sallying forth, gaue charge vpon his men: who fell back of purpose according to direction, till they had drawne on as many as they could, and so farre from their strength, as they durst ad∣uenture. Then gaue Hannibal a signe to his Carthaginians, who lay prepared readie for the purpose: and fiercely setting vpon the Enemie, draue him back with great slaughter, as fast as he could runne; so that afterwards he durst not issue forth. The Citadell stood vpon a Demi-Iland, that was plaine ground; and fortified only with a ditch and wall against the Towne, whereunto it vvas joyned by a cawsey. This cawsey intended to fortifie in like sort against the Citadell; to the end that the Tarentines might bee able, without his helpe, to keepe themselues from all dan∣ger thence. His worke in few daies went so well forward, without impediment from the besieged, that he conceiued hope of winning the Peece it selfe, by taking a little more paines. Wherefore he made readie all sorts of engines, to force the place. But whilest he was busied in his works, there came by Sea a strong supply from Me∣tapontum: which tooke away all hope of preuailing; and made him returne to his former counsaile. Now for asmuch as the Tarentine fleet lay within the Hauen, and could not passe forth, vvhilest the Romans held the Citadell: it seemed likely, that the Towne would suffer want, being debarred of accustomed trade and prouisions by Sea; whilest the Roman Garrison, by helpe of their shipping, might easily be re∣lieued, and enabled to hold out. Against this inconuenience, it was rather wished by the Tarentines, than any way hoped, that their fleet could get out of the Hauen; to guard the mouth of it, and cut off al supply from the Enemy, Hannibal told them, that this might well be done: for that their Towne standing in plaine ground, and their streets being faire and broad, it would bee no hard matter to draw the Gallies ouer Land, and them into the Sea without. This he vndertooke and effected: whereby the Roman Garrison was reduced into great necessitie; though with much it held out, and found Hannibal often-times otherwise busied, than his af∣faires required. Thus with mutuall losse on both sides, the time passed: and the Roman forces, growing daily stronger, Q. Fulvius Flaccus, with Claudius, lately chosen Consuls, prepared to be siege the great Citie of Capua. Three and twenty Legions the Romans had now armed. This was a great and growth from that want of men, and of all necessaries, whereinto the had reduced them. But to fill vp these Legions, they were faine to take vp yong Boyes, that were vnder seuen∣teene yeeres of age: and to send Commissioners aboue fiftie miles round, for the see∣king out of such Lads as might appeare seruiceable, & pressing them to the warres; making yet a Law, That their yeares of seruice, whereinto they were bound by order of the Citie, should be reckoned, for their benefit, from this their beginning so yong, as if they had beene of lawfull age. Before the Roman Armie drew neere, the Campans felt great want of victuailes, as if they had alreadie beene besieged. This happened partly by sloth of the Nation, partly by the great waste and spoile, which the Romans had in foregoing made vpon their grounds. They sent therefore Embassadours to Hannibal; desiring him to succour them ere they were closed vp, as they seared to bee shortly. Hee gaue them comfortable words: and sent Hanno with an Armie to supply their wants. Hanno appointed them a day; a∣gainst which they should be readie with all manner of carriages, to store themselues with victuailes, that he would prouide. Neither did he promise more, than he per∣formed. For hee caused great quantitie of graine, that had beene laied vp in Cities round about, to be brought into his campe, three miles from Beneuentum. Thither at the time appointed came no more than fortie Carts or Wagons, with a few pack∣horses; as if this had beene enough to victuaile Capua. Such was the rechlesnesse of the Campans. Hanno was exceeding angrie hereat: and told them they were worse than very beasts; since hunger could not teach them to haue greater care. Where∣fore hee gaue them a longer day; against which hee made prouision to store them throughly. Of all these doings word was sent to the Roman Consuls, from the Ci∣tizens of . Therefore Q. the Consul, taking with him such strength as hee thought needfull for the seruice, came into Beneventum by night; where with diligence hee made inquirie into the behauiour of the Enemie. He lear∣ned, that Hanno with part of his Armie was gone abroad to make prouisions; that some two thousand Wagons, with a great rabble of Carters and other Varlets, lay among the Carthaginians in their campe; so that little good order was kept: all thought being set vpon a great Haruest. Hereupon the Consul bade his men pre∣pare themselues, to assaile the Enemies campe: and leauing all his impediments within Beneventum, He marched thitherward so early in the morning, that hee was there with the first breake of day. By comming so vnexpected, Hee had well-neere forced the campe on the sudden. But it was very strong, and very well defended: so that the longer the fight continued, the lesse desire had Fuluius to loose more of his men in the attempt; seeing many of them cast away, and yet little hope of doing good. Therefore he said, that it were better to goe more leisurely and substantially to worke; to send for his fellow-Consul with the rest of their Armie; and to lie be∣tweene Hanno and home; that neither the Campans should depart thence, nor the Carthaginian be able to relieue them. Being thus discoursing, and about to sound the retrait; hee saw, that some of his men had gotten ouer the Enemies Rampart. There was great bootie; or (which was all one to the souldier) an opinion of much that might be gotten in that campe. Wherefore some Ensigne-bearers threw their Ensignes ouer the Rampart, willing their men to fetch them out, vnlesse they would endure the shame and dishonour following such a losse. Feare of such ignominie, than which none could bee greater, made the Souldiers aduenture so desperately; that Fuluius, perceiuing the heat of his men, changed purpose, and encouraged those that were somewhat backward, to follow the example of them, that had alreadie gotten ouer the Trenches. Thus the campe was wonne: in which were slaine aboue sixe thousand; and taken, aboue seuen thousand, besides all the store of victuailes, and carriages, with abundance of bootie, that Hanno had lately gotten from the Ro∣man Confederates. This misaduenture, and the neerer approch of both the Con∣suls, made them of Capua send a pittifull Embassage to Hannibal: putting him in minde of all the loue, that he was wont to protest vnto their Citie; and how he had made shew, to affect it no lesse than . But now, they said, it would be lost, as Arpi was lately, if he gaue not strong and speedie succour. Hannibal answered with comfortable words: and sent away two thousand horse, to keepe their grounds from spoile; whilest hee himselfe was detained about Tarentum, partly by hope of winning the citadell, partly by the disposition, which he saw in many townes adjoy∣ning, to yeeld vnto him. Among the Hostages of the Tarentines, that lately had fled out of Rome, and being ouer-taken, suffered death for their attempt; were some of the , and other Cities of the Greekes, inhabiting that Easterne part of I∣talie, which was called of old Magna Graecia. These people tooke to heart the death of their Hostages; and thought the punishment greater, than the offence. Where∣fore the , as soone as the Roman Garrison was taken from them, to de∣fend the citadell of Tarentum, made no more adoe, but opened their gates to Hanni∣bal. The Thurines would haue done the like, vpon the like reason: had not some companies laine in their Towne; which they feared that they should not bee able to master. Neuerthelesse they helped themselues by cunning: inuiting to their gates Hanno and Mago, that were neere at hand: against whom whilest they proffered their seruice to , the Roman captaine, they drew him forth to fight; and re∣coyling from him, closed vp their gates. A little formalitie they vsed in pretending feare, lest the Enemie should breake in together with the Romans; in sauing Atinius himselfe, and sending him away by Sea; as also in consulting a small while (because perhaps many of their chiefe men were vnacquainted with the practice) whether they should yeeld to the Carthaginian, or no. But this disputation lasted not long: for they that had remoued the chiefe impediment, easily preuailed in the rest; and deliuered vp the Towne to and Mago. This good successe, and hope of the like, detained Hannibal in those quarters; whilest the Consuls, fortifying Beneven∣tum to secure their backs, addressed themselues vnto the siego of . Many disasters befell the Romans, in the beginning of this great enterprise. T. Sem∣pronius Gracchus, a very good man of warre, that had of late beene twice Consul, was slaine either by trecherie of some Lucans, that drew him into ambush; or by some Carthaginian stragglers, among whom he fell vnawares. His bodie, or his head, was very honourably interred, either by Hannibal himselfe, or (for the reports agree not) by the Romans; to whom Hannibal sent it. He was appointed to lie in Beneventum, there to secure the back of the Armie that should besiege Capua. But his death hap∣ned in an ill time; to the great hindrance of that businesse. The Volones, or Slaues late∣ly manumised, forsooke their Ensignes, and went euery one whither hee thought good, as if they had been discharged by the decease of their Leader; so that it asked some labour to seeke them out, and bring them back into their campe. Neuerthe∣lesse the Consuls went forward with their worke: and drawing neere to Capua, did all acts of hostilitie which they could. Mago the Carthaginian, and the Citizens of Capua, gaue them an hard welcome; wherein aboue fifteene hundred Romans were lost. Neither was it long, Hannibal came thither: who fought with the Consuls, and had the better; insomuch that hee caused them to dislodge. They remoued by night, and went seuerall waies: toward ; , into . followed after Claudius: who hauing led him a great walke, fetcht a compasse about, and returned to Capua. It so fell out, that one M. Centenius Penula a stout man, and one that with good commendations had discharged the place of a , lay with an Armie not farre from thence, where Hannibal rested, when hee was wearie of hunting after Claudius. This Penula had made great vants to the Roman Senate, of wonders which he would worke, if he might be trusted with the leading of fiue thousand men. The Fathers were vnwilling in such a time, to reject the vertue of any good Souldier; how meane so euer his condition were. Wherfore they gaue him the charge of eight thousand: and he himselfe, being a proper man, and talking brauely gathered vp so many voluntaries, as almost doubled his number. But mee∣ting thus with Hannibal, he gaue proofe of the difference, betweene a stout Centurion, and one able to command in chiefe. Hee and his fellowes were all (in a manner) slaine; scarce a thousand of them escaping. Soone after this Hannibal had word, that Cn. Fuluius, a Roman , with eighteene thousand men, was in Apulia, very care∣lesse, and a man insufficient for the charge which he held. Thither he therefore ha∣sted, to visit him: hoping to deale the better with the maine strength of Rome, which pointed at , when he should haue cut off those forces, that lay in the Prouinces , vnder men of small abilitie. Comming vpon Fuluius, He found him and his men so , that needs they would haue fought the first night. Wherefore it was not to be doubted, what would happen the day following. So hee bestowed Mago with three thousand of his lightest armed, in places thereabout most fit for ambush. Then offering battaile to , Hee soone had him in the trap: whence he made him glad to escape aliue; leauing all, saue two thousand of his followers, dead be∣hinde him. These two great blowes, receiued one presently after the other, much astonished the Romans. Neuerthelesse all care was taken, to gather vp the small reliques of the broken Armies: and that the Consuls should goe substantially forwards with the siege of Capua; which was of great consequence, both in matter of reputation, and in many other respects. The two Consuls sate downe before the towne: and C. Clau∣dius Nero, one of the Pretors, came with his Armie from Suessula to their assistance. They made Proclamation, That whosoeuer would issue forth of Capua before a cer∣taine day prefixed, should haue his pardon, and bee suffered to enjoy all that vnto him belonged: which day being past, there should be no grace expected. This offer was contumeliously rejected; the Capuans relying on their owne strength, and the succors attended from Hannibal. Before the Citie was closed vp, they sent to the Carthaginian; which found him at Brundusium. He had made a long jour∣nie, in hope of gaining the Tarentine citadell: of which expectation failing, he tur∣ned to Brundusium; vpon aduertisement that he should be let in. There the Capuans met him; told him of their danger with earnest words; and were with wordes as braue recomforted. He bade them consider, how a few daies since he had chased the Consuls out of their fields; and told them, that he would presently come thither a∣gaine and send the Romans going, as fast as before. With this good answere the Mes∣sengers returned: and hardly could get back into the citie; which the Romans had al∣most entrenched round. As for Hannibal himselfe; He was of opinion, that Capua, being very well manned, and heartily deuoted vnto his friendship, would hold out a long time: and thereby giue him leisure, to doe what he thought requisite among the Tarentines, and in those Easterne parts of Italie; whilst the Roman armie spent it selfe in a tedious siege. Thus he lingred: and thereby gaue the Consuls time, both to fortifie themselues at Capua, and to dispatch the election of new Magistrates in Rome; whilest he himselfe pursued hopes, that neuer found successe. Claudius and Fuluius, when their terme of Office was expired, were appointed to continue the siege at Capua; retaining the same Armies, as Proconsuls. The townes∣men often sallied out: rather in a brauerie, than likelihood to worke any matter of effect; the Enemie lying close within his Trenches, as intending, without other violence, to subdue them by famine. Yet against the Campan horse (for their foot was easily beaten) the Romans vsed to thrust out some troups, that should hold them skirmish. In these exercises the Campans vsually had the better, to the great of their proud Enemie; who scorned to take foile at the hands of such Rebels. It was therefore deuised, that some actiue and couragious yong men, should learne to ride behinde the Roman men at armes; leaping vp, and againe dismounting lightly, as occasion serued. These were furnished like the Velites, hauing each of them three or foure small darts: which, alighting in time of conflict, they discharged thick vpon the Enemies horse; whom vanquishing in this kinde of seruice, they much disheart∣ned in the maine. The time thus passing, and famine daily increasing within the Ci∣tie; Hannibal came at length, not expected by the Romans: and taking a Fort of theirs, called , fell vpon their campe. At the same time the Capuans issued with their whole power, in as terrible manner as they could deuise: setting all their multitude of vnseruiceable people on the walls; which, with a loud noise of Pannes and Ba∣sons, troubled those that were occupied in fight. Appius Claudius opposing himselfe to the Campans, easily defended his Trenches against them; and so well repressed them, that he draue them at length back into their Citie. Neuerthelesse, in pursu∣ing them to their gates. He receiued a wound, that accompanied him in short space after to his graue. Q. Fuluius was held harder to his taske, by Hannibal and the Armie. The Roman campe was euen at point to haue beene lost: and Hannibal his Elephants, of which he brought with him three and thirtie, were either gotten within the rampart, or else (for the report varies) being some of them slaine vpon it, fell into the ditch; and filled it vp in such sort, that their bodies serued as a bridge vnto the Assailants. It is said, that Hannibal in this tumult caused some fu∣gitiues, that could speake Latine well, to proclaime aloud, as it were in the Consuls name, That euery one of the Souldiers should shift for himselfe, and flie betimes vnto the next Hils, for asmuch as the campe was alreadie lost. But all would not serue. The fraud was detected: and the Armie, hauing sitten there so long, had at good leisure strongly entrenched it selfe; so as little hope there was to raise the siege by force. This did extremely perplexe the Carthaginian. The purchase of Capua had (as was thought) with-held him from taking Rome it selfe: and now his desire of win∣ning the Tarentine Citadell, had well-neere lost Capua; in respect of which, neither the Citadell, nor Citie of Tarentum, were to haue beene much regarded. Falling therefore into a desperate anger with himselfe and his hard fortune, that of so many great victories he had made no greater vse: on the sudden he entertained an haugh∣tie resolution, euen to set vpon Rome; and carrie to the walles of that proud Citie, the danger of warre that threatned Capua. This hee thought would bee a meane, to draw the Roman Generals, or one of them at least, vnto the defence of their owne home. If they rose from the siege with their whole Armie; then had he his desire: If they diuided their forces; then was it likely, that either he or the should well enough deale with them apart. Neither did hee despaire, that the terror of his comming might so astonish the multitude within Rome, as he might enter some part or other of the Citie. His onely feare was, left the Campans, being ignorant of his purpose, should thinke he had forsaken them; and thereupon forthwith yeeld them∣selues to the Enemie. To preuent this danger, He sent letters to Capua by a subtile : who running as a fugitiue into the Roman campe, conueighed himselfe thence ouer the innermost Trenches into the Citie. The journie to Rome, was to be performed with great celeritie: no small hope of good successe, resting in the suddennesse of his arriuall there. Wherefore hee caused his men, to haue in a readi∣nesse ten daies victuailes; and prepared as many boats, as might in one night trans∣port his Armie ouer the Riuer of Vulturnus. This could not be done so closely, but That the Roman Generalls by some fugitiues had notice of his purpose. With this danger therefore they acquainted the Senate which was there with affected, accor∣ding to the diuersitie of mens opinions, in a case of such importance. Some gaue counsaile to let alone Capua, yea and al places else, rather then to put the Towne of Rome into perill of being taken by the Enemie. Others were so farre from allow∣ing of this, as they wondered how any man could thinke, that Hannibal, being vn∣able to relieue Capua, should iudge himselfe strong enough to winne Rome; and therefore stoutly said, That, those Legions, which were kept at home for defence of the Citie, would serue the turne well enough, to keepe him out, and send him thence; if he were so vnwise, as to come thither. But it was finally concluded, that letters should be sent to and Claudius, acquainting them perfectly with the forces, that at the present were in Rome: who, since they knew best, what the strength was which Hannibal could bring along with him, were best able to iudge, what was needfull to oppose him. So it was referred vnto the discretion of these Generals at Capua, to doe as they thought behouesull: and if it might conueniently be, neither to raise their siege, nor yet to put the Citie of Rome into much aduen∣ture. According to this Decree of the Senate, Q. Fuluius tooke fifteene thousand foot, and a thousand horse, the choise of his whole Armie: with which he hasted toward Rome; leauing App Claudius, who could not trauel by reason of his wound, to continue the siege at Capua. Hannibal, hauing passed ouer Vulturnus, burnt vp all his boats; and left nothing that might serue to transport the Enemie, in case he should offer to pursue or coast him. Then hasted he away toward Rome; staying no longer in any one place, then he needes must. Yet found he the bridges ouer Liris broken downe, by the people of Fregellae: which as it stopped him a little on his way; so it made him the more grieuously to spoile their lands, whiles the bridges were in mending. The neerer that he drew to Rome, the greater waste he made: his Numidians running before him; driuing the Countrie, and killing or taking multitudes of all sorts and ages, that fled out of all parts round about. The messengers of these newes came a pace, one after another into the Citie; some few bringing true aduertisements; but the most of them reporting the conceits of their owne feare. All the streets, and Tem∣ples in Rome, were pestered with women, crying and praying, and rubbing the Al∣tars with their haire, because they could doe none other good. The Senators were all in the great Market, or place of Assembly; readie to giue their aduice, if it were asked, or to take directions giuen by the Magistrates. All places of most importance were stuffed with souldiers: it being vncertaine, vpon which part Hannibal would fall. In the middest of this trepidation, there came newes that Q. Fuluius, with part of the Armie from Capua, was hasting to defence of the Citie. The Office of a Pro∣consul did expire, at his returne home, and entrie into the Gates of Rome. Where∣fore, that might lose nothing by comming into the Citie in time of such need, an Act was passed, That he should haue equall power with the Consuls, du∣ring his abode there. Hee and Hannibal arriued at Rome, one soone after another: Fuluius hauing beene long held occupied in passing ; and Hannibal re∣ceiuing impediment in his iourney, as much as the Countrie was able to giue. The Consuls, and Fuluius, incamped without the Gates of Rome; attending the Cartha∣ginian. Thither they called the Senate: and as the danger grew neerer and greater; so tooke they more carefull and especiall order against all occurrences. Hannibal came to the Riuer Anio or Anien, three miles from the Towne; whence he aduan∣ced with two thousand Horse, and rode along a great way vnder the wals; viewing the site thereof, and considering how he might best approach it. But he either went, or (as the Roman Storie saith) was driuen away; without doing, or receiuing any hurt. Many tumults rose in this while among the people; but were supressed by and diligence of the Senators. Aboue the rest one accident was both , and not without perill. Of Numidians that had shifted side, and fallen (vpon some displeasures) from Hannibal to the Romans, there were some twelue hundred then in Rome; which were appointed by the Consuls, to passe through the Towne, from the Mount Auentine to the Gate Collina, where it was thought that their ser∣uice might be vsefull, among broken wayes, and Garden wals lying in the suburbes. The of these men, and their furniture, wherein they differed not from the fol∣lowers of ; bred such mistaking, as caused a great vproare among the peo∣ple: all crying out, that Auentine was taken, and the enemie gotten within the wals. The noise was such, that men could not be informed of the truth: and the streets were so full of cattaile, and husbandmen, which were fledde thither out of the Vil∣lages adioyning, that the passage was stopt vp: and the poore Numidians pittifully beaten from the house-toppes, with stones and other weapons that came next to hand, by the desperate multitude, that would haue run out at the gates, had it not beene certaine who lay vnder the walls. To remedie the like inconueniences, it was ordained, That all which had beene Dictators, Consuls, or Censors, should haue authoritie as Magistrates, till the Enemie departed. The day following, Hannibal passed ouer Anien, and presented battaile to the Romans, who did not wisely if they vndertooke it. It is said, that a terrible showre of raine, caused both Romans & Carthaginians to returne into their seuerall Camps: and that this happened two daies together, the weather breaking vp, and clearing, as soone as they were departed asunder. Certaine it is, that Hannibal, who had brought along with him no more then ten daies prouision, could not endure to stay there, vntill his victuals were all spent. In which regard, the Ro∣mans, if they suffered to waste his time and prouisions, knowing that hee could not abide there long, did as became well-aduised men: if they offered to fight with him, and either had the better, or were parted (as is said) by some accident of wea∣ther; the commendations must be giuen to their fortune. The terrour of Hannibals comming to the Citie, how great soeuer it was at the first, yet after some leisure, and better notice taken of his forces, which appeared lesse than the first apprehension had formed them, was much and soone abated. Hereunto it helped well, that at the same time, the supplie appointed for Spaine, after the death of the two Scipio's, was sent out of the towne, & went forth at one gate, whilest the Carthaginian lay before another. In al Panick terrors, as they are called, wherof there is either no cause known or no cause answerable to the greatnesse of the sudden consternation; it is a good remedie to doe somewhat quite contrarie to that which the danger would require, were it such, as men haue fashioned it in their amazed conceits. Thus did Alexander cause his souldiers to disarme themselues, when they were al on a sudden in a great feare of they knew not what. And thus did Clearchus pacifie a foolish vprore in his Army, by proclaiming a reward vnto him, that could tel who had sent the Asse into the Campe. But in this present example of the Romans, appeares withall a great magnanimitie: whereby they sustained their reputation, and augmented it no lesse, than by this bold attempt of Hannibal it might seeme to haue beene diminished. Neither could they more finely haue checked the glorious conceipts of their Ene∣mies, and taken away the disgrace of that feare, which clouded their valour at his first comming; than by making such demonstrations, when once they had recoue∣red spirit, how little they esteemed him. To this purpose therefore that verie piece of ground, on which the Carthaginian lay incamped, was sold in Rome: and sold it was nothing vnder the value, but at as good a rate, as if it had been in time of peace. This indignity comming to his eare, incensed Hannibal so much, that he made Port∣sale of the Siluer-smithes shops, which were neere about the Market or Common place in Rome; as if his owne title to the houses within the Towne, were no whit worse, then any Roman Citizens could be vnto that piece of ground, wheron he rai∣sed his Tent. But this counter-practice was nothing worth. The Romans did seek to manifest that assurance, which they iustly had conceiued; Hannibal, to make continuing in an hope, which was alreadie past. His victuals were almost and of those ends, that he had proposed vnto himselfe, this iourney had forth none other, than the fame of his much daring. Wherefore hee brake vp his campe: and doing what spoile could in the Roman , without sparing religious places, wherein wealth was to bee gotten, He passed like a Tempest ouer the Countrie; and ranne toward the Easterne Sea so fast, that hee had almost taken the Citie of Rhegium before his arriuall was feared or suspected. As for Capua, hee gaue it lost: and is likely to haue cursed the whole faction of Hanno, which thus dis∣abled him to relieue that faire Citie; since he had no other way to vent his griefe. Q. returning back to Capua, made Proclamation anew, that whoso would yeeld, before a certaine day, might safely doe it. This, and the very returne of Fuluius, without any more appearance of Hannibal, gaue the Capuans to vnderstand; that they were abandoned, and their case desperate. To trust the Roman pardon proclaimed, euery mans conscience of his owne euill deserts, told him, that it was a vanitie: and some faint hope was giuen, by Hanno and Bostar, Captaines of the Car∣thaginian Garrison within the Towne, that Hannibal should come againe; if meanes could onely be found, how to conuey such letters vnto him, as they would write. The carriage of the letters was vndertaken, by some : who running, as fugitiues, out of the Towne, into the Roman campe, waited fit opportunitie to make an escape thence with their packets. But it hapned, they could conueigh them∣selues away, that one of them was detected by an Harlot following him out of the Towne; and the letters of Bostar and Hanno were taken and opened; containing a entreatie vnto Hannibal, that he would not thus forsake the Capuans and them. For (said they) we came not hither to make warre against Rhegium and Ta∣rentum, but against the Romans: whose Legions wheresoeuer they lie, there also should the Carthaginian Armie bee readie to attend them; and by taking of such course, haue wee gotten those victories at Trebia, Thrasymene, and Cannae. In fine, they be sought him, that he would not dishonour himself, and betray them to their enemies, by turning another way; as if it were his onely care, that the Citie should not be taken in his full view: promising, to make a desperate sally, if he would once more aduenture to set vpon the Roman campe. Such were the hopes of Bostar and his fellow. But Hannibal had alreadie done his best: and now began to faint vnder the burden of that warre, wherein (as afterward he protested) he was vanquished by Hanno and his Partisans in the Carthaginian Senate, rather than by any force of Rome. Liu. l. 30. It may well be, as a thing incident in like cases, that some of those which were besie∣ged in Capua, had sent ouer by the Hannonians, to obserue the doings of Hanni∣bal, and to check his proceedings. If this were so; iustly might they curse their owne malice, which had cast them into this remedilesse necessitie. Howsoeuer it were, the letters directed vnto Hannibal, fell (as is shewed) into the Roman Procon∣suls hands; who cutting off the hands of all such counterfait fugitiues, as carried such messages, whipt them backe into the Towne. This spectacle brake the hearts of the : so that the Multitude crying out vpon the Senate, with menacing termes, caused them to assemble, and consult, about the yeelding vp of Capua vnto the Romans. The brauest of the Senators, and such as a few yeeres since had beene most forward in joyning with Hannibal, vnderstood well enough where∣vnto the matter rended. Wherefore one of them inuited the rest home to supper: telling them, that when they had made good cheare, he would drink to them such an health, as should set them free from that cruel reuenge, which the Enemie sought vpon their bodies. About seuen and twentie of the Senators there were, that liking well of this motion, ended their liues together, by drinking poyson. All the rest, ho∣ping for more mercie than they had deserued, yeelded simply to discretion. So one of the Towne-gates was set open: whereat a Roman Legion with some other companies, entring, disarmed the Citizens; apprehended the Garri∣son; and commanded all the Senators of Capua to goe forth into the Roman campe. At their comming thither, the Proconsuls laid yrons vpon them all: and comman∣ding them to tell what store of gold and siluer they had at home, sent them into safe custodie; some to Cales; others to Theanum. Touching the generall Multitude; they were reserued vnto the discretion of the Senate: yet so hardly vsed by Fuluius in the meane while, that they had little cause of hope or comfort in this aduersitie. Ap. Claudius was brought euen to the point of death, by the wound which he had lately receiued: yet was he not inexorable to the Campans; as hauing loued them well in former times, and hauing giuen his daughter in marriage to that Pacuvius, of whom we spake before. But this facilitie of his Colleague, made Fuluius the more hastie in taking vengeance: for feare, lest vpon the like respects, the Roman Senare might proue more gentle, than he thought behouefull to the common safetie, and honour of their state. Wherefore he tooke the paines, to ride by night vnto Thea∣num, and from thence to Cales: where he caused all the Campan prisoners to suffer death; binding them to stakes, and scourging them first a good while with rods; after which he struck off their heads. This terrible example of vengeance, which the Carthaginians could not hinder, made al Townes of Italie the lesse apt to follow the vaine hope of the Campans: and bred a generall inclination, to returne vpon good conditions to the Roman side. The Atellans, Calatines, and Sabatines, people of the Campans, that in the former change had followed the fortune of Capua, made also now the like submissiō, for very feare, and want of abilitie to resist. They were therefore vsed with the like rigour, by Ful∣uius: who dealt so extremely with them all, that he brought them into desperation. Wherefore some of their yong Gentlemen, burning with fire of reuenge, got into Rome: where they found meanes by night-time, to set on fire so many houses, that a great part of the Citie was like to haue been consumed. The beginning of the fire in diuers places at once, argued that it was no casualitie. Wherfore libertie was pro∣claimed vnto any slaue, and other sufficient reward vnto any free man, that should discouer who those Incendiaries were. Thus all came out: and the Campans, being detected by a slaue of their owne (to whom, aboue his libertie promised, was giuen about the summe of an hundred markes) had the punishment answerable to their deserts. Fuluius hereby being more and more incensed against this wretched peo∣ple, held them in a manner as prisoners within their walls: and this extreme seueri∣tie caused them at length to become Suppliants vnto the Roman Senate; that some period might be set vnto their miseries. That whereupon the Senators resolued in the end, was worse than all that which they had suffered before. Onely two poore women in (of which one had beene an Harlot) were found not guiltie of the late rebellion. The rest were, some of them, with their wiues and children sold for slaues, and their goods confiscated; others laid in prison, and reserued to further de∣liberation: but the generalitie of them, commanded to depart out of Campania by a certaine day; and confined vnto seuerall places as best liked the angrie Victors. As for the Towne of Capua, it was suffered to stand, in regard of the beautie and com∣modious site: but no corporation or forme of politie, was allowed to bee therein; only a Roman Prouost was euery yeere sent to gouerneouer those that should inha∣bit it, and to iustice. This was the greatest act, and most important, hitherto done by the people of Rome, after many great losses in the present warre. After this, the glorie of Hannibal beganne to shine with a more dimme light, than before: his oile being farre spent; and that, which should haue reuiued his flame, being vnfor∣tunately shed; as shall be told in place conuenient. § XV. How the Carthaginians, making a partie in Sardinia and Sicil, held against the Romans in those Ilands; and were ouer- . WHilest things passed thus in ; the commotions raised in Sardinia and Sicil by the Carthaginians & their friends, were brought to a quiet and happie end, by the industrious valour of the Romans. The Sardi∣nian rebellion was great and sudden: aboue thirtie thousand being in armes, ere the Roman forces could arriue there to suppresse . One Harsicor as with his sonne Hiostus, men in that Iland, were the Ring-leaders; being incited by Hanno a Carthaginian, that promised the assistance of his Countrie. Neither were the Carthaginians in this enterprise so carelesse, as in the rest of their maine vndertakings, about the same time. Yet it had beene better, if their care had beene directed vnto the prosecution of that maine businesse in Italie; whereon this and all other hopes depended. For it would haue sufficed, if they could haue hin∣dred the Romans from sending an Armie into Sardinia. Harsicoras with his followers might well enough haue serued to driue out Q. Mutius the Praetor; who lay sicke in the Prouince; and not more weake in his owne bodie, than in his traine. But whilest they sought reuenge of that particular iniurie, whereof the sense was most grieuous: they neglected the opportunitie of requiting those that had done them wrong, and of the securing themselues from all iniuries in the future. Their for∣tune also in this enterprise was such; as may seeme to haue discouraged them from being at the like charge, in cases of more importance. For whereas they sent ouer Asdrubal, surnamed the bald, with a competent fleet and armie; assisted in this Expe∣dition by Hanno the Author of the rebellion, & by Margo a Gentleman of the Bar∣chine house, and neere kinsman to Hannibal: it so fell out, that the whole fleet by ex∣tremitic of foule weather, was cast vpon the Baleares; so beaten and in such euill plight, that the Sardinians had euen spent their hearts, and were in a manner quite vanquished, ere these their friends could arriue to succour them. Titus Manlius was sent from Rome with two and twentie thousand foot, and twelue hundred horse, to settle the estate of that Iland, which he had taken in, and annexed vnto the Roman Dominion, long before this, in his Consulship. It was a laudable custome of the Romans, to preserue and vp-hold in their seueral Prouinces, the greatnesse and reputation of those men, and their families, by whom each Pro∣uince had beene first subdued vnto their Empire. If any iniurie were done vnto the Prouincialls; if any grace were to be obtained from the Senate; or whatsoeuer ac∣cident required the assistance of a Patron: the first Conquerour, and his race him, were the most readie and best approued meanes, to procure the benefit of the people subdued. Hereby the Romans held very sure intelligence, in euery Prouince, and had alwaies in readinesse fit men to reclaime their Subiects, if they fel into any such disorder, as would otherwise haue required a greater charge and trouble. The comming of Manlius, retayned in obedience all that were not already broken too farre out. Yet was Harsicoras so strong in field, that Manlius was compelled to arme his Mariners: without whom he could not haue made vp that number of two and twentie thousand, whereof we haue spoken before: He landed at Calaris or Carallis, where mooring his ships, he passed vp into the Countrie, and sought out the Ene∣mie. Hyostus, the sonne of Harsicoras, had then the command of the Sardinian Ar∣mie left vnto him by his father, who was gone abroad into the Countrie, to draw in more friends to their side. This yong Gentleman would needes aduenture to get honor, by giuing battaile to the Romans at his owne discretion. So hee rashly ad∣uentured to fight with an old Souldier: by whom he receiued a terrible ouerthrow; and lost in one day aboue thirtie thousand of his followers. Hyostus himselfe, with the vest of his broken troupes, got into Cornus, the chiefe Towne of the Island: whither Manlius pursued them. Very soone after this defeature came with his Carthaginians: too late to winne all Sardinia in such haste as he might haue done, if the tempest had not hindred his voiage; yet soone enough, and strong enough to saue the Towne of Cornus, and to put a new spirit into the Rebells. Manlius here∣vpon with-drew himselfe back to Calaris: where he had not stayed long, the Sar∣dinians (such of them as adhered to the Roman partie) craued his assistance; their Countrie being wasted by the Carthaginians, and the Rebells, with whom they had refused to ioyne. This drew Manlius forth of Calaris: where if he had staied a little longer, Asdrubal would haue sought him out with some blemish to his reputation. But the of Asdrubal and his companie, appeares to haue been greater than was their strength. For after some triall made of them in a few skirmishes; Manlius ad∣uentured all to the hazard of a battaile: wherein he slew twelue thousand of the e∣nemies; and took of the Sardinians and Carthaginians three thousand. Foure houres the battaile lasted: and victorie at length fell to the Romans, by the flight of the Islanders; whose courages had beene broken in their vnprosperous fight, not ma∣ny daies before. The death of yong Hyostus, and of his father Harsicoras, that slew himselfe for griefe, together with the captiuity of Asdrubal himselfe, with Mago and Hanno the Carthaginians; made the victorie the more famous. The vanquished Armie fled into Cornus: whither Manlius followed them; and in short space wanne the Towne. All other Cities of the Isle that had rebelled, followed the example of Cornus, and yeelded vnto the Roman: who imposing vpon them such increase of tribute, or other punishment, as best sorted with the nature of their seueral offences, or their ability to pay, returned backe to Calaris with a great bootie, and from thence to Rome; leauing Sardinia in quiet. The warre in Sicil was of greater length, and euery way more burdensome to Rome: as also the victorie brought more honour and profit; for that the Romans be∣came thereby not only sauers of their owne, as in Sardinia; but Lords of the whole Countrie; by annexing the Citie and Dominion of Syracuse, to that which they en∣ioyed before. Soone after the battaile of , the old King of Syracuse died: who had continued long a sted fast friend vnto the Romans; and greatly relieued them in this present warre. He his Kingdome to Hieronymus his grand-child, that was about fifteene yeeres of age; Gelo his sonne, that should haue beene his heire, being dead before. To this yong King his successor, Hiero appointed fifteene tutors: of which the principal were Andronodorus, Zoilus, and Themistius; who had married his daughters, or the daughters of Gelo. The rest were such, as he iudged most likely to preserue the Kingdome, by the same arte, whereby himselfe had gotten and so long kept it. But within a little while; Andronodorus, waxing wearie of so many Coad∣iutors, beganne to commend the sufficiencie of the yong Prince, as extraordinary in one of his yeeres; and said, that he was able to rule the Kingdome without helpe of any Protector. Thus by giuing ouer his owne charge, hee caused others to doe the like: hoping thereby to get the King wholly into his hands; which came to passe in a sort as hee desired. For Hieronymus, laying aside all care of gouernement, gaue himselfe wholly ouer to his pleasures: or if he had any regard of his Royall dignitie, it was onely in matter of exterior shew, as wearing a Diademe with ornaments of purple, and being attended by an armed guard. Hereby he offended the eyes of his people; that had neuer seene the like in Hiero, or in Gelo his sonne. But much more he offended them, when by his insolent behauiour, sutable to his outward pompe, he gaue proofe, that, in course of life, hee would reuiue the memorie of Tyrants dead long fince, from whom he tooke the patterne of his habit. Hee grew proud, lustful, cruel, and dangerous to all that were about him: so that such of his late Tu∣tors as could escape him by flight, were glad to liue in banishment: the rest, being most of them put to death by the Tyrant; many of them dying by their owne hands, to auoid the danger of his displeasure, that seemed worse than death it selfe. Only Andronodorus, Zoilus, and one Thraso continued in grace with him, and were his Counsailers, but not of his Cabinet. These, howsoeuer they agreed in other points, were at some dessension about that maine point, of adhering, either to the Romans, or to the Carthaginians. The two former of them, were wholly for the Kings pleasures, which was on change: but Thraso, hauing more regard of his honour and profit, was very earnest to continue the amitie with Rome. Whilest as yet it remained somewhat doubtfull, which way the King would incline: a conspi∣racie against his Person, was detected by a of his; to whom, one Theodorus had broken the matter. Theodorus hereupon was apprehended, and tormented; thereby to wring out of him the whole practice, and the names of the vndertakers. Long it was ere he would speake any thing: but yeelding (as it seemed) in the end, vnto the extremitie of the torture; he confessed, that he had beene set on by Thraso; whom he appeached of the treason, together with many more, that were neere in loue or place vnto Hieronymus. All these therefore were put to death, being inno∣cent of the crime where with they were charged. But they that were indeede the Conspirators, walked boldly in the streets, and neuer shrunke for the matter: assu∣ring themselues, that the resolution of Theodorus would yeelde to no extremitie. Thus they all escaped, and soone after found meanes to execute their purpose. The King himselfe, when Thraso was taken out of the way, quickly resolued vpon siding with the Carthaginians; whereto he was very inclinable before. Yong men, when first they grow Masters of themselues, loue to seeme wiser than their fathers, by ta∣king different courses. And the liberalitie of Hiero to the Romans, in their great ne∣cessitie, had of late beene such, as might haue beene termed excessiue; were it not in regard of his prouidence; wherein hee tooke order for his owne estate, that de∣pended vpon theirs. But the yong Nephew, taking little heede of dangers farre off; regarded only the things present; the weakenesse of Rome; the preualent fortunes of Carthage; and the much monie that his grand-father had laied out in vaine, to shoulder vp a falling house. Wherefore he dealt with Hannibal: who readily entred into good correspondence with him; that was maintained by Hippocrates & Epicides, Carthaginians borne, but grand-children of a banished Syracusan. These grew into such fauour with Hieronymus, that they drew him whither they listed. So that when Appius Claudius the Roman Pretor, hearing what was towards, made a motion of re∣newing the Confederacie, betweene the People of Rome and the King of Syracuse; his Messengers were dismissed with an open scoffe. For Hieronymus would needes haue them tell him the order of the fight at Cannae; that hee might thereby learne how to accommodate himselfe: saying, That he could hardly the Cartha∣ginians; so wonderfull was the victorie as they reported it. Hauing thus dismissed the Romans, be sent Embassadors to Carthage, where hee concluded a league: with condition, at first, that a great part of the Island should be annexed to his Domini∣on; but afterward, that he should raigne ouer all Sicil; and the Carthaginians rest satisfied, with what they could get in Italie. At these doings Ap. Claudius did not greatly stirre: partly for the indignities that were offered; partly for that it behoued not the Romans, to entertaine more quarrells, then were enforced vpon them by ne∣cessitie; and partly (as may seeme) for that the reputation, both of himselfe, and of his Citie, had receiued such blemish, by that which hapned vnto him in his journie, as much discountenanced him when he came into Sicil, & forbad him to looke big. The money that Hiero had bestowed vpon the Romans, wherewith to relieue them in their necessitie, this Appius was to carrie backe vnto him: it being refused by the Roman Senate, with greater brauerie than their present fortune would allow. But in stead of returning the monie with thankes, as he had beene directed, and as it had beene noised abroad that hee should doe: the warre against Philip King of Macedon (whereof we haue spoken before) compelled the Romans to lay aside their vaine glory, and send word after him, that he should consigne that monie ouer to Marcus Valerius; of whose voyage into Greece, the Citie had not otherwise wherewith to beare the charge. This was done accordingly: and hereby Claudius (which name in the whole continuance of that Familie, is taxed with pride) his errand was chan∣ged, from a glorious ostentation of the Roman magnanimitie; into such a tune of thanksgiuing, as must needes haue bred sorrow and commiseration, in so true a friend as Hiero; or, if it were after his death, matter of pastime and scorne, in Hieronymus the new King. But whilest Hieronymus was more desirous of warre, than well resolued how to beginne it: his owne death changed the forme of things, and bred a great innouati∣on in the state of Syracuse; which thereby might haue prospered more than euer, had it beene wisely gouerned. Hippocrates and Epicides, of whom we spake before, were sent about the Country with two thousand men; to sollicite the Townes, and perswade them to shake off their obedience to the Romans. The King himselfe with an Armie of fifteene thousand horse and foot, went to Leontium, a Citie of his owne Dominion: hoping that the fame of his preparation, would make the whole Island fall to him in all haste, and accept him for Soueraigne. There the Conspirators tooke him on the sudden, as hee was passing through a narrow street; and rushing betweene him and his guard, strooke him dead. Forthwith liberty was proclaimed: and the sound of that word so joyfully answered by the Leontines, that the guard of Hieronymus, had little courage to reuenger their Masters death. Yet for feare of the worst, a great largesse was promised vnto the Souldiers, with rewards vnto their Captaines; which wrought so effectually; that when many wicked acts of the mur∣dered King were reckoned vp; the Armie, as in of his bad life, suffered his carkasse to lie vnburied. These newes ranne quickly to Syracuse: whither some of the Conspirators, taking the Kings horses, away; to all that had passed; to stirre vp the people to libertie; and preuent Andronodorus, if he, or his fellowes would make offer to vsurpe a Tyrannie. Syracusians hereupon present∣ly tooke Armes; and made themselues masters of their owne Citie. Andronodorus on the other side fortified the Palace, and the Island: being yet vncertaine what to doe; betweene desire of making himselfe a soueraigne Lord, and feare of suffering punishment, as a Tyrant, if his enterprise miscarried. His wife Demarata, that was the daughter of Hiero, cherished him in his hopes: putting him in minde of that well knowne Prouerbe, which Dionysius had vsed; That a Tyrant should keepe his place, till he haled out of it by the heeles, and not ride away from it on horse-backe. But feare, and better counsaile preuailed so farre; that Andronodorus, hauing slept vpon the mat∣ter; dissembled his affections, and deferred his hope, vnto better opportunitie. The next day he came forth, and made a speech vnto the People: telling them; That hee was glad to see, how prudently they behaued themselues in so great a change; that he had stood in feare, lest they would not haue contained themselues within bounds of discretion; but rather haue sought to murder all without diffe∣rence, that any way belonged to the Tyrant; and that since he beheld their order∣ly proceeding, and their care, not to rauish their liberty perforce, but to wed it vnto them for euer; he was willingly come to them forth of his strength, & surrendred vp the charge, committed vnto him, by one that had beene an Master, both to him and them. Hereupon great joy was made; and Pretors chosen (as in former times) to gouerne the Citie; of which Andronodorus was one, and the chiefe. But such was his desire of Soueraignetie: and so vehement were the instigations of his wife; that shortly he beganne to practise with Hippocrates, Epicides, and other Cap∣taines of the Mercinaries: hoping to make himselfe strong, by their helpe, that were least pleased with the change. Hippocrates and Epicides had beene with the Pretors, and told them, that, being sent from Hannibal to Hieronymus, they according to instructions of their Captaine, had done him, whilest he liued, what seruice they could; and that now they were desirous to returne home. They requested there∣fore that they might be friendly dismissed: and with a conuoy; that might keepe them from falling into the hands of the Romans, and set them safe at Locri. This was easily granted: both for that the Syracusian Magistrates were well cotended to earne thankes of Hannibal, with such a little curtesie; and for that they thought it expe∣dient; to rid their Towne quickly of this troublesome couple; which were good souldiers, and gracious with the Armie, but otherwise men. It was not the desire of these two , to be gone so hastily as they made shew: they were more mindfull of the businesse, for which Hannibal had sent them. Wherefore they insi∣nuated themselues into the bosoms of such as were most likely to fill the army with tumult: especially of the Roman fugitiues, and those that had cause to mistrust what should become of themselues, when the Romans & Syracusians were come to agree∣ment. Such instruments as these, Andronodorus had great neede of: as also of ma∣ny other, to helpe him in his dangerous attempt. Hee found Themistius, that had married Harmonia the sister of Hieronymus, ready to take his part; as being carried with the like passions of his owne, and of his wife. But in seeking to increase the number of his adherents; he reuealed the matter to one, that reuealed all to the rest of the Pretors. Hereupon it followed, that he, and Themistius, into the Se∣nate, were slaine out of hand: and afterward accused to the People, of all the euill which they had done, whilest Hieronymus liued, as by his authoritie; and now since attempted, in seeking to vsurpe the tyrannie themselues. It was also declared, that the daughters of Hiero and Gelo were accessarie to this dangerous treason: and that the vnquiet spirits of these women would neuer cease to worke, vntill they had re∣couered those Royall ornaments, and Soueraigne power, whereof their familie was now dispossessed. These daughters therefore of Hiero and Gelo were also condem∣ned to die: & executioners presently sent by the enraged people, to take away their liues. Demarata, and Harmonia had perhaps deserued this heauie sentence: but He∣raclea, the daughter of Hiero, and wife of Sosippus, being altogether innocent; was murdered together with her two yong daughters, in the hasty execution of this rash judgement. Her husband Sosippus was a louer of the Common-wealth; and in that respect so hated by Hieronymus, that being sent Embassador to King Ptolemie, &c. he durst not returne home; but staied in Aegypt as a banished man. This considera∣tion, when it was too late, together with some other pittifull accidents accompany∣ing the slaughter, so affected the multitude; that (pardoning themselues) all cryed out vpon the authors of so foule a butcherie. Being thus incensed against the Se∣nate; and knowing not otherwise how to satisfie their anger; they called for an ele∣ction of new Pretors, in the roome of Andronodorus and Themistius, that were lately slaine: meaning to substitute such in their places, as the Senators should haue little cause to like. At the election were present a great rowt, not only of the poorer Ci∣tizens, but of souldiers that pressed into the throng. One of these, named Epicides Pretor; another named Hippocrates: and the lesse that the old Pretors and Senators approued this nomination, the more eager was the multitude; and by a generall crie forced them to be accepted. These being made Pretors, did what they could to hinder the agreement that was in hand, between the Syracusians and the Romans. But hauing in vaine, and seeing that the People stood in feare of Ap. , and of Marcellus, that was lately come into Sicil; they gaue way vnto the time, and suffered the old league of Hiero to be reconfirmed; which afterward they purposed to dissolue by practice. The Leontines had some neede of a Garrison: and to them was sent Hippocrates the Pretor; attended, by such fugitiues, and mercinary souldiers, as were most burdensome to Syracuse. Thither when he came, hee beganne to doe many acts of hostilitie against the Romans: first in secret, afterward more openly and boldly. Marcellus, rightly vnderstanding the purpose of these two brethren, sent word vnto the Syracusians, that they had already broken the league; and that the peace would neuer be kept sincerely, vntill this turbulent paire of brethren were ex∣pelled the Island. Epicides, fearing to sustaine the blame of his brothers proceedings, and more desirous to set forward the warre, than to excuse any breach of peace; went himselfe vnto the Leontines, whom he perswaded to rebell against the . For he said, that since they had all of late serued one ; there was little reason why the Leontines should not be enfranchised by his death, as well as the Sy∣racusians; yea or much rather, all things considered; since in their the Ty∣rant was slaine, and libertie first proclaimed. Wherefore, since they of Syracuse were not contented, to enjoy the freedome purchased among the Leontines; but thought it good reason, that they should beare Dominion ouer those that had bro∣ken the chaine, wherwith both the one, and the other were bound: his was, that such their arrogancie should be checked betimes, ere it could get any colour of right by prescription. Hereunto occasion was giuen by one article of the league, made of by the Romans and Syracusians. For it was agreed, That all which had been subiect to HIERO and HIERONYMVS, should hence forth vnto the state of Syracuse. Against this article, if the Leontines would take exception, and thereby challenge their owne due; Epicides told them, that in this noueltie of change, they had fit opportunity to recouer the freedome, which their fathers had lost not many ages before. Neither was it vnreasonable, which this crasty Carthaginian propoun∣ded; if the Leontines had beene subdued by the same hand, which tooke libertie from the Syracusians. But seeing they had long since yeelded vnto Syracuse, and been subject vnto that Citie, by whatforme soeuer it was gouerned; this claime of li∣bertie was rather seasonable than just. Neuerthelesse the motion of was highly approued: in so much that when messengers came soone after from Syracuse, to rebuke the Leontines, for that which they had done against the Romans; and to de∣nounce vnto Hippocrates & Epicides, that they should get them gone, either to Locri, or whither else they listed, so that they staied not in Sicil: word was returned, That they of Leontium had not requested the Syracusians, to make any bargaines for them with the Romans, nor thought themselues bound to obserue the couenants, which others without had made in their names. This peremptorie answere was forth-with vnto by the Syracusians: who offered him their assi∣stance in doing the Leontines their Rebells; with condition that when the Towne was taken, it might be theirs againe. Marcellus required no better sa∣tisfaction: but forth-with tooke the businesse in hand; which he dispatched in one day. At the first assault, was taken: all saue the Castle, whereinto Hippo∣crates and Epicides fled; and stealing thence away by night, conueied themselues in∣to the Towne of Herbesus. The first thing that Marcellus did, when hee had wonne the Towne, was the same, which other Roman Captaines vsed after victorie; to seeke out the fugitiue Roman slaues and renegados, whom hee caused all to die: the both of the Townsmen and Souldiers, hee tooke to mercy; forbearing also to strip or spoile them. But the fame of his doings was bruted after a contrary sort. It was said, that he had , Man, Woman, and Child, and put the Towne to sacke. These newes met the Syracusian Army vpon the way, as it was going to joyne with Marcellus, who had ended his businesse before. About eight thousand Mercinaries there were, that had beene sent forth of Syracuse, vnder Sosis and Dinomenes two of the Pretors, to serue against the Leontines and other Rebells. These Captaines were honest men, and well affected to their Countrie: but the souldiers that followed them, had those diseases, with which all mercinaries are commonly infected. They tooke the matter deeply to heart, that their fellow-souldiers (as now they termed those against whom they went) had beene so cruelly butchered: and hereupon they fell to mutinie; though what to demand, or with whom to bee angrie, they could not tell. The Pretors therefore thought it best, to turne their vnquiet thoughts another way, and set them a worke in some place else: for as much as at there was no neede of their seruice. So toward Herbesus they marched: where lay Hippocrates and Epicides, the architects of all this mischiefe, deuising what further harme they might doe; but now so weakely accompanied, that they seemed vnable to escape the punishments belonging to their past. Hereof the two bre∣theren were no lesse well aware: and therfore aduentured vpon a remedy little lesse desperate than their present case. They issued forth of Herbesus vnarmed, with O∣liue branches in their hands, in manner of suppliants; and so presented themselues to the Armie. Sixe hundred men of Creete were in the vantguard; that had bin well vsed by Hieronymus; and some of them greatly bound vnto ; who had ta∣ken them prisoners in the warre, and dismissed them. These Cre∣tans therefore welcomed the two brethren, and bade them be of good cheare; say∣ing, that no man should doe them harme, as long as they could vse their weapons. Herewithall the Armie was at a stand; and the rumor of this accident, ranne swiftly from man to man, with generall approbation. The Pretors thought to helpe the matter by seueritie; which would not serue. For when they commanded these two Traitors to be laid in yrons: the exclamation was so violent against them, that faine they were to let all alone, and returne, what course to take, vnto Megara; where they were lodged the night before. when they came, Hip∣pocrates deuised a tricke; whereby to helpe himselfe, and better the vncertaine case wherein he stood. He caused letters of his owne penning, to be by some of his most trustie Cretans; directed (as they made shew) from the Syracusian Pre∣tors, to Marcellus. The contents hereof were, That Marcellus had well done, in committing all to the sword among the Leontines: but that it farther behoued him, to make the like dispatch of all the Mercinaries belonging to Syracuse; which were offensiue, all of them in generall, to the libertie of the Citie, and the peace with Rome. When this counterfeit Epistle was openly rehearsed: the vprore was such, that Sosis and his fellow Pretor, were glad to forsake the campe, and flic for their liues. All the Syracusians remaining behinde, had been cut in by the enraged souldiers, if the two artificers of the sedition had not saued their liues; rather to keepe them as pledges, and by them, to winne their friends within the Towne, than for any good will. They perswaded also a mischieuous knaue that had serued a∣mong the Leontines, to justifie the bruit of Marcellus his crueltie; and to carrie home the newes to Syracuse, as an eye-witnesse. This not only the multitude, but some of the Senate; and filled the whole Towne with causelesse indignation. In good time (said some) was the auarice and crueltie of the Romans detected: who, had they in like fort gotten into Syracuse, would haue dealt much worse; where their greedy appetites might haue beene tempted with a farre greater bootie. Whilest they were thus discoursing, and how to keepe out the wicked Romans, Hip∣pocrates with his Armie came to the gates; exhorting the Citizens to let him in, vn∣lesse for want of helpe, they would be betraied to their enemies. The Pretors with the best and wisest of the Senate, would faine haue kept him out: but the violence of the souldiers to force a gate, was no whit greater, than the head-strong furie of those within the Towne; that laboured to breake it open. So he entred, and imme∣diately fell vpon the Pretors; whom (being forsaken by all men) hee put to the sword, and made slaughter of them and their followers vntill night. The next day he went openly to worke: and after the common example of Tyrants, gaue liberty to all slaues and prisoners; and being fortified with adherents of the worst and ba∣sest sort, made himselfe and his Pretors, in Title, but in effect, Lords of Syracuse. When Marcellus was aduertised of this great alteration, hee thought it no time for him to sit still, and attend the further issue. He sent Embassadours to Syracuse; that were not admitted into the Hauen, but chased out as enemies. Then drew he neere with his Armie: and lodging within a mile and a halfe of the Towne, sent be∣fore him, some to require a parlee. These were entertained without the walls by the two new Pretors: to whom they declared, That the Romans were come thither, not with purpose to doe hurt, but in fauour of the Syracusians, which were oppressed by Tyrants; and to punish those, that had murdered and banished so many of the principall Citizens. Wherefore they required, that those worthy men, their Con∣federates, which were chased out of the Towne, might be suffered to returne and enjoy their owne; as also that the Authors of the great slaughter lately committed, might be deliuered vp. Hereto Epicides briefly answered, That if their errand had beene to him, he could haue told what to say to them: but since it was directed vn∣to others, they should doe well to returne, when those to whom they were sent, had the gouernement in their hands. As for the warre which they threatned; hee told them, they should finde by experience, that to besiege Syracuse, was an other manner of worke, than to take Leontium. Thus hee sent them gone; and returned back into the Citie. Immediately beganne the siege, which endured longer than the Romans had expected. The quicke and easie winning of Leontium did put Marcellus in hope, that so long a circuit of walls, as compassed Syracuse, being manned with no better kinde of Souldiers, than those with whom he had lately dealt, would in some part or other, be taken at the first assault. Wherefore he omitted no violence or terrour in the very beginning; but did his best, both by Land and Sea. Neuer∣thelesse all his labour was disappointed; and his hope of preuailing by open force, taken from him by the ill successe of two or three of the first assaults. Yet was it not the vertue of the Defendants, or any strength of the Citie, that bred such de∣spaire of hastie victorie. But there liued at that time in Syracuse, Archimedes the no∣ble Mathematician: who at the request of Hiero the late King, that was his kinsman, had framed such engines of warre, as being in this extremitie put in vse, did more mischiefe to the Romans than could haue beene wrought by the Canon, or any in∣struments of Gunne-powder; had they in that age beene knowne. This Archimedes discoursing once with Hiero, maintained, That it were possible to remoue the whole earth out of the place wherein it is, if there were some other earth, or place of sure footing, whereon a man might stand. For proofe of this bold assertion, he per∣formed some strange workes; which made the King entreat him to conuert his stu∣die vnto things of vse; that might preserue the Citie from danger of enemies. To such Mechanicall workes, Archimedes, and the Philosophers of those times, had lit∣tle affection. They held it an done vnto the liberall sciences, to submit lear∣ned Propositions, vnto the workemanship, and gaine, of base handicrafts men. And of this opinion Plato was an author: who greatly blamed some Geometricians; that feemed vnto him to profane their science, by making it vulgar. Neither must wee rashly taske a man so wise as Plato, with the imputation of supercilious austeritie, or affected singularitie in his reprehension. For it hath beene the vnhappy fate of great inuentions, to be vilified, as idle fancies, or dreames, before they were published: and being once made knowne, to be vnder-valued; as falling within compasse of the meanest wit; and things, that euery one, could well haue performed. Hereof (to omit that memorable example of Columbus his discouerie, with the much different sorts of neglect, which hee vnder-went before and after it) in a familiar and most homely example, we may see most apparent proofe. He that lookes vpon our En∣lish Brewers, and their Seruants, that are daily exercised in the Trade; will thinke it ridiculous to heare one say, that the making of Malt, was an inuention, proceeding from some of an extraordinary knowledge in naturall Philosophie. Yet is not the skill of the inuentors any whit the lesse, for that the labor of workmanship growes to be the Trade of ignorant men. The like may be said of many handicrafts: and particularly in the Printing of Bookes; which being deuised, and bettered, by great Scholers and wise men, grew afterward corrupted by those, to whom the practice fell; that is, by such, as could slubber things easily ouer, and feede their workemen at the cheapest rate. In this respect therefore, the Alchymists, and all others, that haue, or would seeme to haue any secret skill, whereof the publication might doe good vnto mankinde; are not without excuse of their close concealing. For it is a kinde of injustice, that the long trauels of an vnderstanding braine, beside the losse of time, and other expence, should be cast away vpon men of no worth; or yeeld lesse benefit vnto the Author of a great worke, than to meere strangers; and per∣haps his enemies. And , if the passion of Enuie, haue in it any thing allowable and naturall, as hauing Anger, Feare, and other like Affections: it is in some such case as this; and serueth against those, which would vsurpe the knowledge, where∣with God hath denied to endue them. Neuerthelesse, if we haue regard vnto com∣mon charitie, and the great affection, that euery one ought to beare vnto the gene∣ralitie of mankinde, after the example of him that suffereth his Sunne to shine vpon the iust and : it will appeare more commendable in wise men, to enlarge them∣selues, and to publish vnto the world, those good things that lie buried in their own bosomes. This ought specially to be done, when a profitable knowledge hath not annexed to it some dangerous cunning; that may bee by men to a mischieuous vse. For if the secret of any rare Antidot, contained in it the skill of gi∣uing some deadly and irrecouerable poyson: better it were, that such a iewell re∣maine close in the hands of a wise and honest man; than being made common, binde all men to vse the remedie, by teaching the worst men how to doe mischiefe. But the workes which Archimedes published, were such as tended to very commendable ends. They were engins, seruing vnto the defence of Syracuse; not fit for the Syra∣cusians to carry abroad, to the hurt and oppression of others. Neither did he altoge∣ther publish the knowledge, how to vse them, but reserued so much to his owne di∣rection; that after his death more of the same kinde were not made, nor those of his owne making were employed by the Romans. It sufficed vnto this worthy man, that he had , euen vnto the vulgar, the dignitie of his Science; and done espe∣ciall benefit vnto his Countrey. For to enrich a Mechanicall trade, or teach the art of murdering men, it was besides his purpose. Marcellus had caused certaine of his Quinquereme Gallies to be fastened together, and Towers erected on them, to beat the defendants from the wall. Against these, Archimedes had sundrie deuices; of which any one sort might haue repelled the as∣saylants: but all of them together shewed the multiplicitie of his great wit. He shot heauie stones and long peeces of timber, like vnto the yards of ships; which brake some of the Gallies by their force and weight. These afflicted such as lay farre off. They that were come neerer the walls, lay open to a continuall voly of shot, which they could not endure. Some with an yron graple were taken by the prow and hoi∣sted vp, shaking out all the men, and afterward falling downe into the water. Some by strange engins were lifted vp into the ayre; where turning round a while, they were broken against the walls, or cast vpon the rockes: and all of them were so bea∣ten, that they durst neuer come to any second assault. In like sort was the Land-ar∣mie handled. Stones and timber, falling vpon it like Haile; did not onely ouer∣whelme the men, but brake downe the Roman engins of battery; and forced Mar∣cellus to giue ouer the assault. For remedie hereof it was conceiued, that if the Ro∣mans could earely before day get neere vnto the walls: they should be (as it were) vnder the point blanck, and receiue no hurt by these terrible Instruments; which were woond vp hard to shoote a great compasse. But this vaine hope cost many of the assaylants liues. For the shot came downe right vpon them: and beating them from all parts of the wall, made a great slaughter of them, all the way as they fled, (for they were vnable to stay by it) euen till they were gotten very off. This did so terrifie the Romans; that if they perceiued any peece of timber, or a ropes end, vpon the walls, they ranne away, crying out, that Archimedes his engins were readie to discharge. Neither knew Marcellus how to ouercome these difficulties, or to take away from his men, that feare; against the cause whereof he knew no re∣medie. If the engins had stood vpon the walls, subiect to firing, or any such annoy∣ance from without; he might haue holpen it by some deuice, to make them vnser∣uiceable. But all, or the most of them were out of sight; being erected in the streetes behinde the walls; where Archimedes gaue directions how to vse them. Where∣fore the Roman had none other way left, than to cut off from the Towne all prouisi∣on of victualls, both by Land and by Sea. This was a desperate peece of worke. For the enemies hauing so goodly an Hauen; the Sea in a manner free; and the Carthaginians that were strong by Sea, willing to supply them: were not likely, so soone to bee consumed with famine, as the besiegers to bee wearied out, by ly∣ing in Leaguer before so strong a Citie, hauing no probabilitie to carrie it. Yet, for want of better counsell to follow, this was thought the best, and most honourable course. In the meane while, Himilco, Admirall of a Carthaginian Fleete, that had waited long about Sicil, being by Hippocrates aduertised of these passages, went home to Carthage, and there so dealt with the Senate, that fiue and twentie thousand Foote, three thousand Horse, and twelue Elephants, were committed vnto his charge, wherewith to make warre vpon the Romans in Sicil by Land. Hee tooke many Townes; and many, that had anciently belonged vnto the Carthaginians, did yeeld vnto him. To remedie this mischiefe, and to stay the inclination of men, which following the current of Fortune, beganne to turne vnto the Carthaginians; Mar∣cellus with a great part of his Armie, rose from Syracuse, and went from place to place about the Island. Hee tooke Pelorus and Herbesus, which yeelded vnto him. He tooke also Megara by force and sackt it: either to terrifie others that were ob∣stinate, especially the Syracusians, or else because Rome was at this time poore, and his Armie must haue somewhat to keepe it in heart. His especiall desire was to haue saued Agrigentum: whither hee came too late; for Himilco had gotten it before. Therefore he returned back toward Syracuse; carefully, and in as good order as hee could, for feare of the Carthaginian that was too strong for him. The circumspe∣ction that he vsed, in regard of Himilco; stood him in good stead, against a danger that he had not mistrusted. For Hippocrates, leauing the charge of Syracuse vnto his brother, had lately issued out of the Citie, with ten thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse, intending to ioyne his forces with Himilco. Marcellus fell vpon him, ere ei∣ther was aware of the other: and the Romans, being in good order, got an easie vi∣ctorie, against the dispersed and halfe vnarmed Syracusians. The reputation heereof helped a little to keepe the Sicilians from rebellion. Yet it was not long, ere Himilco, ioyning with Hippocrates, ranne ouer al the Island at his pleasure, and presented bat∣taile to Marcellus, euen at his Trenches; but the Roman wisely refused it. Bomilcar also a Carthaginian, entred with a great fleet into the Hauen of Syracuse, and victual∣led the Citie. After this, the disposition of the Islanders changed so againe, that al∣though another Legion was come from Rome, which escaped from Himilco, and safely arriued at Marcellus his campe: yet many places reuolted vnto the Carthagini∣ans, and slue or betraied the Roman Garrisons. In the midst of these troubles, Winter enforced both parts to take breath awhile: and Marcellus leauing some of his Armie before Syracuse, that he might not seeme to haue giuen ouer the siege, went vnto Leontium, where he lay intentiue to all oc∣casions. In the beginning of the Spring he stood in doubt, whether it were better to continue the laborious worke of besieging Syracuse, or to turne all his forces to A∣grigentum, against Himilco and Hippocrates. But it would greatly haue impaired his reputation, if he had gone from Syracuse, as vnable to preuaile: and he himselfe was of an eager disposition, euer vnwilling to giue ground, or to quit, as not faisible, an enterprise, that he had once taken in hand. Hee came therefore to Syracuse: where though he found all the difficulties remaining as before; and no likelihood to take the Citie by force or famine; yet was hee not without hope, that continuance of time would bring forth somewhat, which might fulfill his desire. Especially hee as∣saied to preuaile by treason; against which no place can hold out. And to this end he dealt with the Gentlemen that were in his campe; exhorting them to practise with their friends that remained in the Citie. This was not easie for them to doe, because the towne would harken to no parlee. At length a slaue vnto one of these banished men, making shew to runne away from his Master, got into Syracuse; where he talked in priuate with some few, as he had beene instructed. Thus began Marcellus to haue intelligence within the Citie: whence the vsed to send him aduertisement of their proceedings; by a fisher-boat that passed forth in the night: but when they were growne to the number of fourescore, and thought themselues able to effect somewhat of importance: all was discouered; and they, like Traitors, put to death. In the meane while, one Damasippus a Lacedaemonian, that had beene sent out of the Towne as an Embassador to Philip King of Macedon, was fallen into the hands of Marcellus. Epicides was very desirous to ransome him: and many meetings were appointed for that purpose, not farre from the walls. There, one of the Romans, looking vpon the wall, and wanting the more compen∣dious arte of Geometrie, fell to numbring the stones: and, making an estimate of the height, iudged it lesse than it had beene formerly deemed. Herewith hee ac∣quainted Marcellus: who causing better notice to be taken of the place, and finding, that ladders of no extraordinarie length would reach it; made all things ready, and waited a conuenient time. It was the weakest part of the Towne, and therfore the most strongly garded: neither was there hope to preuaile by force against Archime∣des, if they failed to take it by surprise. But a fugitiue out of the Towne brought word, that a great feast was to bee held vnto Diana, which was to last three dayes: and that, because other good cheare was not so plentifull within the Citie, as in for∣mer times, Epicides, to gratifie the People, had made the more large distribution of Wine. A better opportunitie could not be wished. Wherefore Marcellus, in the dead of the Festiuall night, came vnto the walls, which hee tooke by Scalado. was diuided into foure parts (or fiue, if Epipolae were reckoned as one) each of which were fortified as distinct Cities. When therefore Marcellus had gotten some peeces, he had the commoditie of a better and safe lodging, with good store of bootie; and better opportunitie than before, to deale with the rest. For there were now a great many, as well of those in Acradinia and the Island, inner parts of the Towne, as of those that were alreadie in the hands of Marcellus, that beganne to harken vnto composition, as being much terrified by the losse of those parts, which the Romans had taken and sackt. As for the weapons of Archimedes, little harme, or none they did, vnto those, that were sheltred vnder strong houses: although it may seeme, that the inner walls were not altogether vnfurnished of his helpe; since they held out a good while, and were not taken by force. The Roman fugitiues, and Renegados; were more carefull than euer to defend the rest of the Citie: being sure to be rewar∣ded with a cruell death, if Marcellus could preuaile. Hippocrates and Himilco, were daily expected; and Bomilcar was sent away to Carthage, to bring helpe from thence: It was not long ere Hippocrates and Himilco came: who fell vpon the old camp of the Romans, whilest Epicides sallied out of Acradinia vpon Marcellus. But the Romans made such defence in each part, that the Assailants were repelled. Neuerthelesse, they continued to beset Marcellus: whom they held in a manner as streightly besie∣ged, as he himselfe did besiege the T owne. But the pestilence at length consumed; together with the two Captaines, a great part of the Armie, and caused the rest to dislodge. The Romans were (though somewhat lesse) afflicted with the same pesti∣lence, in so much that Bomilcar did put the Citie of Carthage in hope, that he might be taken where he lay, if any great forces were sent thither. This Bomilcar wanted no desire to doe his Countrie seruice: but his courage was not answerable to his good will. He arriued at Pachynus with a strong fleet: where he staied; being loth to double the Cape; for that the windes did better serue the enemie than him. Thither sailed Epicides out of : to acquaint him with the necessities of the Citie; and to draw him on. With much intreatie, at length hee came forward: but meeting with the Roman fleet, that was readie for him, he stood off into the deepe; and sailed away to Tarentum, bidding Sicil farewell. Then durst not Epicides returne into Syracuse, but went to Agrigentum: where he expected the issue; with a very faint hope of hearing any good newes. The Sicilian souldiers, that remained aliue of Hippocrates his Armie, lay as as they could safely, vnto Marcellus; and some of them, in a strong Towne three miles off. These had done what good they could to Syracuse, by doing what hurt they could vnto the Romans. But they were informed, that the state of Sicil was giuen as desperate by the Carthaginians: they sent Embassadours to treat of peace; and made offer to compound, both for themselues, and for the Towne. Marcellus willingly gaue : for he had staied there long enough; and had cause to , that a little while, the Carthaginians might come strong againe. He , both with the Citizens, and with the Souldiers that lay abroad; That they should be Masters of their owne, enioying their and proper ; yet suffering the Romans to , whatsoeuer had belonged vnto the Kings. Hereupon they, to whom Epicides had left his charge, were put to death; new Pretors chosen; and the gates readie to be opened vnto Marcellus: when suddenly the Roman fugitiues disturbed all. These their owne condition to be desperate, perswaded the other Mercinarie souldiers, That the Ci∣tizens had bargained onely for themselues, and betraied the Armie to the Romans. Wherefore they presently tooke armes, and fell vpon the new-chosen Pretors: whom they slue; and made election of sixe Captaines that should command ouer all. But shortly it was found our, that there was no danger at all to the souldiers; excepting only the Fugitiues. The treatie therfore was set on foot, and wan∣ted little of conclusion: which yet was delaied; either by some feare of the Citizens, that had seene (as they thought) proofe of the Roman auarice in the sack of Epipolae, Tyche, and Neapolis, the parts taken; or by some desire of Marcellus to the Towne by force, that he might vse the libertie of a Conqueror, and make it wholly subiect vnto Rome. Mericus a Spaniard was one of the sixe Captaines, that had beene chosen in the late commotion: a man of such faith, as vsually is found in ; holding his own particular benefit aboue all other respects. With this Captaine, Marcellus dealt secretly: hauing a fit instrument, of the same Nation, one Belligenes; that went in company with the Roman Embassadors, daily passing to and . This Agent perswaded Mericus, That the Romans had got∣ten all Spaine: and that if he purposed to make his owne fortune good, either at home in Spaine, or any where else; it was now the onely time to doe it; by confor∣ming himselfe to the will of the Roman Generall. By such hopes the Spanish Cap∣taine was easily , and forth his owne brother among the Syracusian Em∣bassadours to the couenant with Marcellus. This vnder-hand of Marcellus against the Syracusians, cannot well be com∣mended as honest: neither was it afterwards throughly approued at his comming to Rome. For the benefits of Hiero to the Romans had beene such, as deserued not to be requited with the ruine of his Countrie: much lesse, that miseries of his peo∣ple, (though partly through their owne follie) by an Armie of Mercina∣ries, should minister vnto the of Rome, aduantage against them. The Citizens could not make good their parts against the hired souldiers; and therefore were to yeeld vnto the time, and those Ministers of Hannibal, that ruled the Armie. But as long as they were free after the death of Hieronymus; and now of late, when they had gathered courage by the flight of Epicides: it had beene their chiefe care to maintaine with the of Rome. They had lately slaine many the principall of Epicides his followers; and many of themselues had also bin slaine, both lately and in former times, because of this their desire vnto the peace. What though it were true, that the Rascalitie, and some ill aduised Persons with the souldiers in hatred of the Romans, by occasion of the slaughter which they to be done at Leontium, and afterward beheld in those parts of their owne Citie which was taken? Ought therefore the Roman Generall, in a treatie of peace held with the Syracusians, to make a bargaine vnder-hand against them, with a Cap∣taine ofthe Mercinaries? These things were obiected against Marcellus, at his re∣turne home. But the Senators thought it a great deale better, to comfort the Syra∣cusians with words, and promises of good vsage in time to come, the bootie, and the Dominion of a Citie, so great, , , and many waies important. Neuerthelesse if we consider the many and great mischiefes, Syracuse was obnoxious; both by cuill neighbors, and by that very of politie, after which it was : wee may truly af∣firme, That it no small , by becomming vnto Rome. For it was not only assured against all forraine enemies, , and such Tyrants as of old had raigned therein: but freed from the necessitie of ba∣nishing, or murdering, the most worthie Citizens; as also all factions, intestine seditions, and a thousand like miseries, that wont to grow out of the , wherein they held their in vaine. that Citie, from her first foundation, any such long time of happinesse, as that it flourished, when it rested secure vnder the protection of Rome; and was no more molested, by the disease of ambition; whereof by his victorie it was throughly . But such , arising from wrongs , not to make the more excusable: we should the of that , who being found to haue stollen a cup from a sicke man, said, drinking. By the treason of Mericus, the Roman Army was let into possession of all : , the booty that it found, was said to haue been no , than could haue beene hoped for, if they had taken Carthage it selfe; that warre by Land and Sea against them. All the goodly works and , wherewith Syracuse was maruellously adorned, were away to Rome; and nothing vntouched; saue only the houses of banished men, that had from Hippocrates and Epicides, into the Roman campe. Among other pittifull ; the death of Ar∣chimedes was greatly lamented, euen by Marcellus himselfe. He was so about his Geometrie, in drawing figures, that he harkened not to the noise, and vprore in the Citie; no, nor greatly attended the rude Souldier that was about to kill him. Marcellus took heauily the death of him; and caused his body to bee honourably buried. Vpon his Tombe (as he had ordained in his life time) was placed a Cylin∣der and a Sphere, with an inscription of the proportion betweene them; which hee first found out. An Inuention of so little vse, as this may , pleased that great Artist better, than the deuising of all those engines, that made him so famous. Such difference is betweene the iudgement of men, and of the vulgar sort. For many an one would thinke the monie lost, that had been spent vpon a sonne, whose , in the Vniuersitie had brought forth such fruit, as the proportion a Sphere and a Cylinder. After the taking of Syracuse, all the Townes in Sicil yeelded vnto the Romans; except Agrigentum and a few places . At Agrigentum lay Epicides with one Hanno a Canthaginian, and Mutines an Asrican, that was lately sent from Hannibal. This Mutines, by many good peeces of seruice, had added some to the bea∣ten Carthaginian side; and withall made his owne name great. By his perswasions, and Epicides aduentured to Marcellus without the Towne, and not themselues as men expecting to be . Neither was more valiant in counsell, than in execution. Once and againe he set vpon the Romans, where they lay encamped; and droue into their Trenches. This in Epicides and Hanno: in Hanno, that hauing beene lately sent from Carthage, with commission and authoritie from the State, thought himselfe wronged greatly by Hannibal; in that he had sent vnto him this , to be his Companion, and to take vpon him, like as good a man as himselfe. The indignitie the , when Mutines being to step aside vnto Heraclea, for the pacifying of some troubles among the Numidians; aduised (as directing Hanno and Epicides ) not to med∣dle with the enemie, vntill his returne, So much therefore the rather would Hanno fight: and offered battell vnto Marcellus, before he sought it. It is like, that a great part of the Roman Armie was left behinde in Syracuse, as required: which made the Carthaginians the better able to deale with those that came against them. But whatsoeuer disproportion was betweene the two Armies; farre greater were the oddes betweene the Captaines. For howsoeuer the people of Carthage would giue by fauour; yet could they not giue worth, and abilitie, in matter of warre. The Numidians, hauing before conceiued some displeasure against their Cap∣taines: and being therefore some of them gone away to Heraclea; were much more offended, when they saw that the vaine-glorious of Hanno carried him vnto the fight, vpon a desire to get victorie, without the helpe of Mutines their Countriman. they sent vnto the Roman Generall, and him be con∣fident: for that it was not purpose to shew themselues his enemies that day; but onely looke on, and see the proud Carthaginians well beaten, by whom they had beene misused. made good their promise; and had their desire. For Mar∣cellus, finding likelihood of truth in their message, did so lustily set vpon the enemies, that he brake them at the first charge; and with the slaughter of many thousands, droue them backe into Agrigentum. If Hanno could haue beene contented, to follow the directions of one, that was a better man of warre than himselfe, and not haue hazarded a battell without neede; the Romans would shortly haue been reduced into termes of great difficulty in their Sicilian warre. For Marcellus was shortly to leaue the Prouince; and soone vpon his departure, landed in the Iland a supply of eight thousand foote, and three thousand Numidian horse, that were sent from Carthage. The fame of this Armie drew many of the Sicilians into rebellion. The Roman Armie, consisting (for the most part) of the Legions of Cannae, tooke it very hainously, that no good seruice done, could bring them into the fauour of the Senate; but that, as banished men, they were sent from home, and not suffered to returne back to Rome with their Generall. Mutines had pacified his Countrimen the Numidians; and, like an honest man, did the that he could for those whom he serued, without conten∣ding against the foolish pride of Hanno; finding that there was a great alteration; and a greater might beene, ifthe Armie lately ouerthrowne had beene entire. M. Cornelius, the Roman Pretor, vsed all diligence, both to pacifie his owne men, and to hinder the Carthaginians. He recouered those inland Townes that had rebel∣led: and though he could not hinder Mutines from ouer-running all the Countrie; yet hee hindred the Countrie from reuolting vnto Mutines. Aboue threescore Townes, great and small, the Carthaginians held in Sicil: of which, Agrigentum was the principall, and farre bigger than any of the rest. Thence issued Mutines as of∣ten as he pleased, in despight ofthe Romans: not only to the of his owne ad∣herents, but to the great waste of those that followed the contrarie part. But , in stead of being pleased with all these good seruices, was filled more and more with enuie, against man that performed them. He had (belike) receiued instru∣ction from old Hanno at Carthage, not to suffer Hannibal, or any Hannibalian, to haue share in the honor of these Sicilian warres: which were therefore perhaps the more diligently supplied; whilest Italie was neglected, that should haue regarded more then all the rest. Wherefore, to shew his authoritie, and that it was not in the power of Hannibal, to appoint vnto him an Assistant, or Director: Hee tooke away from Mutines his charge, and gaue it to his owne sonne; thinking thereby to dis∣countenance the man, and make him little esteemed, as one out of Office, among his . But it fell out quite contrary: and this spightfull dealing, occasioned the losse of the Carthaginians held in Sicil. For the Numidians were so incensed by the indignitie offered vnto their Countriman, being such a braue Com∣mander, that they offered him their seruice to requite the wrong; and were thence∣forth absolutely at his owne disposition. M. Valerius Laeuinus, the Roman Consul, was newly come into the Prouince, when this fell out: and with him did Mutines enter into intelligence. For he could no longer brooke these : but being, neither a Carthaginian, nor fauoured by those that bore all the sway in Carthage; He thought it the wisest way, to play the best of his owne game, and forsake that Citie, which was likely to perish by the euill counsell that gouerned it. He did not therefore, as his Countrimen had lately done, content himselfe to see his Aduersa∣ries reape the bitter fruits of their owne malicious ouer-weening: and to that harme, in doing whereof hee would not beare a part; but conspired against them to deliuer vp Agrigentum, and to helpe to expell them vtterly out of Sicil. The Consul was glad ofhis friendship: and carefully followed his aduertisements. Nei∣ther was there much cunning needfull, to the performance of that which had vnder-taken. For hee with his Numidians did forcibly scize vpon a gate; where∣at they let in some Roman Companies that lay neere in a readinesse for the purpose. Hanno, when first hee heard the noise, thought it had beene no worse matter, than some such tumult of the Numidians, as hee had beene well acquainted with of late. But when, making haste to pacifie the trouble, he saw and heard, the Romans inter∣mixed, among those discontented followers of Mutines, forthwith he betooke him∣selfe to flight: and sauing himselfe, with Epicides, in a small Barke, set saile for Africk; leauing all his Armie and Adherents in Sicil, to the mercie of the Romans, that hence∣forward continued masters of the whole Iland. Laeuinus the Consul hauing taken Agrigentum, did sharpe execution of justice vpon all the Citizens. The principall of them hee scourged with rods, and after∣wards beheaded, as was the manner of the Romans: all the rest of them he sold for slaues, and confiscated their goods; sending home to Rome the monie that was rai∣sed of the bootie. This was indeede a time, wherein Rome stood in no lesse necessi∣tie of gold, than of steele: which may haue beene the reason, why Laeuinus dealt so cruelly with the Agrigentines. Neuerthelesse the fame of such seueritie bred a ter∣rour among all the Dependants of the Carthaginians; so that in great haste they sought to make their peace. About fortie Townes yeelded themselues quickly vn∣to the Romans; twentie were deliuered vp by Treason; and sixe onely staied to bee wonne by force. These things done, Laeuinus returned home to Rome: carrying with him about foure thousand men from Agatirna; that were a companie of out∣lawes, bankrouts, and banished men, accustomed to liue by spoile of others, in these troublesome times. He bestowed them about Rhegium in Italie, where they might exercise their occupation against the Brutians; a theeuish kinde of people, that enemies vnto those of Rhegium, and to the Romans. As for Mutines, he was well re∣warded, and made Citizen of Rome: where he liued in good accompt; accompany∣ing the two Scipio's in their journie against Antiochus, and therein doing (as it is said) very especiall seruice. So by this enterprise of Sicil, the wasted much of their forces, that with greater profit might haue beene emploied in Italie: lea∣uing yet vnto the Romans, in the end of this warre, the entire possession ofthis Iland; which they wanted when it beganne. §. XVI. How the warre passed betweene the Romans and HANNIBAL in Italie, from the taking of Capua to the great victorie at Metaur us. SHortly after the winning of Capua, Marcellus came to Rome: where for his good seruices done in the Iland of Sicil, he had granted vnto him the honour of the lesser Triumph, which vvas called Ovation. The greater Triumph was denied him: because hee had not finished the warre, but vvas faine to leaue his Armie behinde him in the Pro∣uince. Hee staied not long in Rome, before hee vvas againe chosen Consul together with M. Valerius Laeuinus, who succeeded him in the gouernement of Sicil, and was, at the time of his election, making warre against King Philip in Greece. Great com∣plaint was made against the Consul Marcellus, by the Syracusians, for that which he had done vnto them: they alledging their great friendship to the people of Rome, in the time of their late King Hiero; and affirming, that their Citie did neuer wil∣lingly break the alliance, excepting when it was oppressed by such Tyrants, as were not greater enemies to Rome, than to all good men that liued in Syracuse. The Con∣sul, on the other side, reckoned vp the labours and dangers whereunto they had put him: willing them to bemoane themselues to the Carthaginians that had holpen them in their necessitie; and not vnto the Romans whom they had kept out. Thus each part hauing some good matter to alledge, the Senate made such an end of the controuersie, as best agreed with the benefit of their owne Common-wealth: bla∣ming the too much rigour of Marcellus; yet not restoring the bootie that hee had ta∣ken, nor making the Syracusians free from their subjection, but comforting them, with gentle words, and hopefull promises, as hath been shewed before. The two new Consuls, Marcellus and Laeuinus, were appointed to make warre, as their lots should fall out; the one in Italie; the other in Sicil. The Isle of Sicil fell vnto Marcel∣lus: which Prouince he willingly changed with his Colleague; to the end that the Syracusians (whose cause had not as yet beene heard in the Senate) might not seeme hindred by feare, from vttering their grieuances freely. Afterwards, when his bu∣sinesse with them was dispatcht, hee gently vndertooke the patronage of them: which remained long in his Familie; to the great benefit of their Country in times following. So Valerius, the other Consul, was sent into Sicil, whose doings there haue beene alreadie rehearsed: but Marcellus was emploied against Hannibal. Before the Consuls departed out of Rome, they were much troubled with pres∣sing of Souldiers to the warre; and most of all, with getting Mariners for their Na∣uie. They were all of the poorer sort, that vsed to be emploied in Sea-seruices; espe∣cially in rowing. These could not liue without present wages: neither was there monie enough in the Treasurie to giue them pay. Wherefore it was ordained, that they should be set out at the expence of priuate men; who, in this necessitie of the state, were driuen to sustaine all publike charges. Hereat the People murmured: and were readie to fall into sedition; had not the Consuls deferred the matter vnto further consideration. The Senate could ill tell, what to determine or doe, in a case of such extremitie. For manifest it was that the multitude had alreadie endured so much, as well it could vnder-goe; and somewhat more, than could with honestie haue been imposed vpon it. Neuerthelesse it was impossible to maintaine the warre against the , or to keepe the Macedonian out of Italie, without a strong fleet. Wherefore, somewere of opinion; That, since the common Treasure was so emptie, the people must be forced, by right or wrong, to take the burden vpon them. At last the Consuls beganne to say, That no perswasions would be so effectu∣all with the people, as good examples: and that if the Senators would follow the Consuls, like it was, that the People also would follow the Senate. Wherefore they propounded, and it was immediately concluded, That euery one of them should bring forth, and put into the Treasurie, all the monie that hee had; and that no Se∣nator should keepe any vessell of gold, or plate whatsoeuer; excepting one salt-sel∣ler, and a boule wherewith to make their offerings vnto the gods; as also a Ring for himselfe, with such other tokens of ingenuitie for his wife and children, as euery one did vse, and those of as small value as might be. This aduice of the Consuls was not more thankfully accepted by the Senate, than the ready performance thereof by the Senate was highly applauded; and hastily followed by the Gentlemen of Rome. Neither did the Commonaltie refuse to doe that, which their betters had o∣penly done before them. For since the publike necessity could no otherwise be hol∣pen; euery one was contented, that his priuate estate should runne the same fortune with the Common-wealth; which if it suffered wrack, in vaine could any particular man hope to enjoy the benefit of his proper substance. This deser∣ued well that greatnesse of Empire, whereof it was the foundation. Conuenient order being thus taken for an Armie and : went forth of the Citie against Hannibal; and Laeuinus toward Sicil. The armie of Hannibal was greatly diminished, by long and hard seruice: neither did his Carthaginians seeme to remember him, and thinke vpon sending the promised supply, or any such propor∣tion as he needed. His credit also among his Italian friends, was much , by the losse of Capua: which gaue them cause to looke vnto themselues; as if in his helpe there were little trust to be reposed, when they should stand in need. This he well perceiued; yet could not tell how to remedy. Either he must thrust Garrisons into all Townes that he suspected, and therby so diminish his armie, that he should not bee able to keepe the field: or else hee must leaue them to their owne fidelitie; which now beganne to wauer. At length his jealousie grew so outragious, that he sacked, and wasted, those places that he was vnable to : thinking that the best way to enrich himselfe; and make vnprofitable, to his enemies, the purchase from which he could not hinder them. But by this example, many were quite alienated from him; and some of those, whom before he had least cause to doubt. The towne of Salapia yeelded vnto Marcellus: and betraied vnto him a Regiment of Nu∣midian horse, the best of all that serued vnder Hannibal; which was a greater losse, then the Towne it selfe. Blasius the author of this rebellion, could not bring his de∣sire to effect; without getting the consent of one Dasius, that was his bitter enemie. Wherefore he brake the matter to this Dasius in priuate; and was by him accused vnto Hannibal. But when he was conuented, and charged of Treason, he so stoutly denied it, and by way of recrimination, so vehemently his accuser with the same fault: that Hannibal thought it a matter deuised out of meere malice; knowing well what enemies they were; and seeing, that neither of them could bring any proofe of what he affirmed. This notwithstanding, Blasius did not cease to presse his aduersarie anew, and vrge him from time to time, with such liuely reasons; that he who could not be belieued by Hannibal, was contented at length to winne the fauor of Marcellus. Presently after this, the Consul tooke by force, Maronea and Meles, Townes of the Samnites: wherein hee slew about three thousand of Hannibal his men. Hannibal could not looke to all at once: but was faine to catch aduantages, where he might get them; the Romans now being growne stronger in the field than . The best was, that his Carthaginians, hauing wearied themselues with ill speede in many pettie enterprises, and laide aside all this while the care of Italie, to follow bu∣sines of farre lesse importance; had now at length resolued, to send presently the great supply, that had beene so long promised and expected. This if they had done in better season; Rome it selfe might haue beene strucken downe, the next yeere af∣ter that great blow receiued at Cannae. But since that which is past cannot be amen∣ded: must force himselfe to make a good countenance; and tell his follow∣ers, that this mighty succour would come time enough. For Masanissa was at Car∣thage with fiue thousand Numidians, ready to set saile for : whither when hee came, it was appointed, that Asdrubal should forthwith take his journie into Italie; of which there had beene so long talke. These newes did not more Han∣nibal and his followers, than terrifie the Romans. Wherefore each did their best: the Romans to preuent the threatning mischiefe, and winne as much as they could vpon Hannibal, before the comming of his brother; Hannibal, on the contrarie, to hold his owne, and weaken the Romans as much as he was able. He had intelligence, that Cn. Fuluius, a Roman Pretor, lay neere vnto Herdonea to get the Towne by pra∣ctice. It was not long, since, neere vnto the same place, another Cn. Fuluius had lost his armie. Therefore Hannibal made great marches thitherward; and came to Her∣donea ere Fuluius heard newes of his approch. As soone as he came, he offered bat∣taile to the Roman Pretor: who accepted it with more haste than good speede. The Roman Legions made good resistance a while, till they were compassed round with the Carthaginian horse. Then fell they to rowt; and great slaughter was made of them. himselfe, vvith twelue Tribunes or Coronels, vvere lost: of the common souldiers that were slaine, the number is vncertaine; some reporting seuen, others thirteene thousand. The Towne of Herdonea, because it was at point to haue yeel∣ded vnto Fuluius, Hannibal did set on fire: and putting those to death that had pra∣ctised with the Enemie, carried away the multitude; whom hee bestowed among the Thurians and Metapontines. The Consul Marcellus hearing of this, wrote vnto the Senate: and exhorted them to be of a good cheare; for that he would shortly abate the enemies pride. Hee followed the apace; and ouer-taking him at Numistro in the countrie of the Lucans, fought with him a battaile: which beginning at nine of the clock in the morning, lasted vntill night; and ended, by reason of the darknesse, with vncertaine victorie. Afterward Hannibal departed thence into A∣pulia, whither Marcellus followed him. At Venusia they met, and had many skir∣mishes; but none of importance. Hannibal remoued often; and sought to bring the enemie within danger of some ambush. But Marcellus, though he was very ea∣ger of battaile, would yet aduenture nothing, but by open day-light and vpon faire ground. Thus passed the time away, vntill Q. Fabius Maximus, and Q. Fuluius, he that late∣ly had taken Capua, were chosen Consuls. Fabius, considering how much the Roman affaires were bettered by the taking of Capua, purposed that yeere to besiege Taren∣tum: which if he could winne; like it was, that scarce one good Citie would after∣wards remaine true to Hannibal. Wherfore he vehemently exhorted his Colleague, and Marcellus, (to whom was continued the command of those Legions that serued vnder him the yeere before) to presse the Carthaginian so hard, as he might haue no leisure to helpe Tarentum. Marcellus was very glad of this charge: for hee thought no Roman fitter than himselfe, to deale with Hannibal in open field. Hee followed him therefore to , and thence from place to place: desiring euer to come to battaile, but vpon equall termes. The Carthaginian had not minde to hazard much in fight: but thought it enough to entertaine his enemie with skirmish; as being desirous to keep his Army strong vntill the comming of Asdrubal. Yet could he not auoide the importunitie of Marcellus; nor brooke the indignitie of being dai∣ly braued. He therefore bade his men to be lustie, and to beat soundly this hot-spi∣rited Roman Captaine, that would neuer suffer them to bee at quiet; vntill they once had cooled well his courage, by letting him bloud. Hereupon followed a battaile: wherein Hannibal had the victorie; tooke sixe Ensignes; and slue of the Romans almost three thousand, among which were some of marke. Marcellus was so impa∣tient of this dishonour, that hee rated his men, as Pesants, and base cowards: telling them, that they were the first of the Roman Legions, which had beene beaten by Hannibal, by plaine force and manhood; without being circumuented by any stra∣tageme. With these, and many other the like words, which they were ashamed to heare, hee did so vexe them; that thinking themselues better able to endure any violence of the enemie, than such displeasure of their Generall; they besought him to pardon them, and leade them forth once againe to fight. He did so: and placing those Companies formost, that had lost their Ensignes the day before, bade them be carefull to winne a victorie; whereof the newes might bee at Rome, before the re∣port of their shamefull ouerthrow. Hannibal was angrie, to see that nothing could make this Enemie quiet: and therefore vvas readie to fight againe; since all other motiues continued the same, and his men had beene heartned by the late victorie. But the Romans were stirred vp with desire of reuenge, and of repairing their honor lost, which affections gaue a sharpe edge vnto their valour: whereas the Carthagini∣ans were growne dull, and wearie by seeing themselues disappointed of their hope; and the enemie, notwithstanding their late victorie, as readie to molest them as be∣fore. In this second battaile Marcellus got the victorie: which hee purchased at so deare a rate; that neither hee, nor Hannibal, had great cause to vaunt, the second night. For if eight thousand of the Carthaginians were slaine, and three thousand of the Roman side, in this next battaile, the difference was no greater, than euen to re∣compence the late receiued ouerthrow: especially since the number of the Romans that were wounded, was so great, as disabled Marcellus from pursuing Hannibal; who dislodged by night. Neuerthelesse it sufficed, that Fabius the Consul hereby got leisure, to follow his businesse at Tarentum without any disturbance. Q. Fuluius the other Consul, about the same time, tooke in many of the Hirpines, Lucans, and Volscentes, that willingly yeelded themselues, and betraied the Garrisons of Hanni∣bal that lay in their Townes: whom Fuluius entertained in louing sort; gently re∣buking them for their errours past, without punishing those that had been authors, or busie doers in the rebellion. That rabble of Sicilian theeues, which had lately brought from Agaterna, was then also set on work to besiege Caulonia, a towne of the Brutians: and nothing was omitted, that might serue to diuert Hannibal, from the succour of Tarentum. Q. Fabius the Consul, hauing taken Manduria a Towne of the Salentines, sate downe before Tarentum: making all preparation that seemed needfull to carrie it, ei∣ther by assault or long siege. Of the Garrisons in the Towne a good part were Bru∣tians, placed there by Hannibal, vnder a Captaine of their owne Nation. This Cap∣taine fell in loue with a Tarentine wench; whose brother serued vnder Fabius. Here∣of, shee gaue notice by letters to her brother, as thinking belike to draw him from the Roman side; by telling him how rich, and of what great accompt her louer was. But her brother made the Consul acquainted with these newes: and said, that if the Brutian were farre in loue, hee might perhaps be wonne, by intreatie of his Mistris, to doe what shee would haue him. The Consul hearing this: and finding likeli∣hood in the matter, willed his souldier to conuey himselfe into the Towne as a fu∣gitiue; and trie what good might be done. It fell out, according to his desire. The Souldier grew acquainted with this Brutian Captaine: and partly by his owne per∣swasions, partly by the flattering entreatie of his sister; wanne him to betray the Towne to the Romans. When they had agreed vpon the businesse, and resolued how to order it; the same souldier got out of the Towne by night, and acquainted the Consul with his proceedings: telling him, in which part that Brutian kept watch, and what might conueniently be done. So in the night time, Fabius gaue an alarme to the Citie; especially about those parts of the wall, which were from the place where he meant to enter. The Captaines in the Towne, prepared to make re∣sistance in those places, where the noise did threaten them with likelihood of danger. But Fabius himselfe, with the choice of his men, came in great silence to the of the Brutians: who being wrought by their Captaine, helped the Ro∣mans to get vp, and breake open the next gate; whereat the Armie was let in. The Tarentines, and Carthaginian soldiers, made head against Fabius in the Market-place: but (as hapneth in like cases, where the maine confidence is already taken away) not very obstinately. Nico, Democrates, and Philomenes, with those that before had let in Hannibal, vsed now the last of their courage in dying against the Romans. Carthalo, who commanded the Garrison within the Towne, offered himselfe prisoner: ho∣ping to be well vsed, because of hospitality that had passed betweene his Father and the Consul. But he was slaine by the way, ere he could come at Fabius. The Romans did put all indifferently to the sword: in such sort, that they spared few of the Bru∣tians. This slaughter of the Brutians, was thought to haue beene made by appoint∣ment of the Consul, to the end that hee might seeme to haue wonne the Towne by force and not by treason: though he thereby failed of his purpose; and neither had the glorie which he expected, nor preserued his reputation of faithfull dealing, and keeping his word. The bootie found in was very great: whereofthe Ro∣man Treasurie, whither it was carried, had great neede. As for the Imageries, and other curiosities, that were in the Citie, Fabius was contented to let them alone: and being told of Idols, that seemed worthie to be carried away, being very good∣ly pieces, in such habit and posture as if they were fighting: he said, Let vs leaue vn∣to the their angrie gods. Hannibal being gotten cleare from Marcellus, fell vpon those that besieged Cau∣lonia. They fled at his comming: but hee was so neere, that they were faine to be∣take them to a Hill, which serued to no other purpose, than to beare off the first brunt. There they defended themselues a little while, and then they yeelded. When this businesse was done, hee hasted away to Tarentum. But when hee came within fiue miles of the Citie, he had newes that it was lost. This grieued him: yet hee said no more than this, The Romans haue also their HANNIBAL; we haue lost Tarentum in such sort as we got it. That he might not seeme to turne back amazed, or in any feare of the victorious Consul; he incamped a few daies together, so neere as hee was vnto Tarentum: and thence departing to Metapontum, bethought him∣selfe how to take Fabius in a trap. He caused the chiefe of the Metapontines to write vnto , and offer to betray into his hands, the Carthaginian Garrison; with condition, that he should in that respect, forgiue them all offences past. These let∣ters were sent by two yong men of the same Citie: who did their errand so well; that the Consul wrote back by them vnto the Metapontins, and appointed the day, when they should expect him. Hereof Hannibal was exceeding glad: and at good leisure, made readie his ambushes for the warie Fabius. But whether some secret no∣tice of the plot were giuen; or whether (as it is related) some tokens in sa∣crificing, terrified the superstitious Roman; the journie to Metapontum was deferred. Hereupon the same two Messengers were emploied againe: but being apprehen∣ded, and threatned with torture, they discouered all. This yeere was happie to the Romans, in all their warres: for they got euery where; saue onely at Caulonia; where they lost a companie of such lewd fellowes, that it may seeme good fortune, to haue so been rid of them. But their common po∣uertie, and disabilitie to maintaine their charge, continued, and grew greater than it was before. Thirtie Roman Colonies were then in Italie: of which, twelue refu∣sed to contribute any longer to the warres. For it was considered; that the Le∣gions of Cannae, and those vnhappie Companies, that had beene beaten vnder the one and the other Cn. Fuluius; were transported into ; where they liued, in a sort, as banished men. This grieued their friends at home, and made them reckon vp the more diligently those other miseries which they daily felt. Ten yeeres toge∣ther they had beene exhausted with leuies of men, and impositions of monie: in euery of which yeeres they had receiued some notable ouerthrow. In this case the least that they could feare; or rather the best which they could hope; was, to fall into the hands of the enemie to bee made prisoners. For Hannibal did gently send home their people that vvas taken by him: whereas the Romans did banish from their homes, those that had escaped. It was therefore likely to come to passe with∣in a while, that they should be all consumed: since new Souldiers were daily pressed forth of their Townes; and the old ones neuer did returne. Such talke was fre∣quent among those of the Colonies: especially where they that were transported into Sicil, had most compassionate friends. Wherefore it was concluded by the people of Ardea, , Alba, and other good Townes, to the number of twelue, That they should boldly denie vnto the Romans, their fathers helpe. This was thought the likeliest way to obtaine peace: whereof otherwise they saw little hope, as long as Hannibal liued. When the Consuls heard the Embassadors of these townes make such declaration, and protest their disabilitie of giuing any farther help; they were much amazed. They willed the Embassadours to returne home, and bring a better answere, forasmuch as this was none other than treason: they bade them to consider, that the people were not Campans, or Tarentines, but the off-spring of the Romans; and no lesse partakers of the Empire, than they that inhabited the Mo∣ther-Citie. But all would not serue: the Embassadours continuing to protest, that they had already done what they could; and that they had remayning, neither men, nor money. It was well for the Romans, that the other eighteene Colonies did not imitate these twelue; but shewed themselues willing to vndergoe whatsoeuer should be layed vpon them, without shrinking vnder the burden. This their was so highly pleasing to the Consuls; that the Embassadors of those faithfull Colonies, were brought vnto the Senate, and produced into the Assembly of the people: where, with commemoration of all their former good seruices, this their present loue vnto the State was magnified, & thankes accordingly bestowed vpon them; with promise, that it should not be forgotten. As for the Embassadors of those twelue Colonies, that refused to contribute; it was thought best, neither to retaine them in the Citie, nor yet to dismisse them nor take any notice of them at all; but leaue them to their owne consideration of their ill deseruing. It may greatly be doubted, what the example of these twelue people would haue wrought, in those that were so willing to helpe the State, if had been then comming into Italie. For then must the Romans haue betaken themselues wholly to their owne defence; whereas now, to the great comfort of their subiects, they em∣ployed their forces in the conquest of Italie, with hopefull and fortunate successe. Neuerthelesse, they were faine to open their most priuie treasurie; and thence take out the golde, that had beene layed vp to serue them in cases of greatest extremitie. Of the mony thus extracted, one quarter was to Fabius the Consul, to set him well out against the Tarentines; all the rest was sent into Spaine to Scipio, for the maintenance of his Armie; and to prouide, that Asdrubal might not passe from thence into Italie. It is likely that Fabius did not spend all his money; finding such easie successe at Tarentum, as was shewed before. But to stop the iourney of Asdru∣bal; neither the money sent into Spaine, nor any victories wonne by Scipio could suf∣fice. Neuerthelesse it fell out happily for the People of Rome, that this yeare, and the next, were spent, before his comming; and they better prepared, than at lesse war∣ning they could haue beene, to him. Here it were not amisse to note, That since the Romans, being in so great necessity of money, were driuen to furnish the Armie in Spaine, with the greatest part of all their stocke that was left: it must needes bee, that either the bootie taken in new Canthage, was farre lesse then same had reported it; or else that Scipio had not as yet wonne it: howsoeuer Liuie rather inclines to those, who say that he got it soone after his arriuall. M. Marcellus, and T. Quintus Crispinus, were chosen Consuls after Fabius and Fuluius. In their yeere it was, that Asdrubal tooke his iourney out of Spaine, though he came not into Italie vntill the yeere following. After the great battaile at Cannae, Hannibal had lost much time about Cumae and Naeples, in seeking to make himselfe Master of a good hauen, for the landing of those succours that were promi∣sed from Carthage. The hope that he reposed in Philip, caused him to turne his prin∣cipall care to the Easterne parts of Italie; where he made readie a faire entrance for the Macedonian, if hee had beene readie to come. But since his hope was vanished, and the long promised succour of Asdrubal was (though farre later then had beene expedient) readie to arriue: he began to deale with the people of Hetruria, through whose Countries his brother was to passe, that therein hee might make a partie a∣gainst the Romans. The losse of Capua, Tarentum, and many other Townes, might haue terrified all other of the Italian Townes, from harkening to any sollicitation of the Carthaginians. Yet the pouerty of the Roman, and the wearines of their adhe∣rents, together with the fame of a greater Armie comming, then that which Hanni∣bal brought into Italie; did many of the , especially the Aretines, to take such counsel as they thought most expedient for themselues, without re∣gard of their fidelitie to Rome. The Roman , hearing the rumour of their con∣spiracie, sent Marcellus the new chosen Consul into Hetruria: whose comming did so terrifie them, that they rested quiet for a while. All the yere following they were deuising how to breake out: as contrariwise the Roman Propretors; partly by terror of seuere iudgements and inquisitions; and partly by the force of two or three Le∣gions, with which they visited all suspected places, kept them honest against their wills; and tooke many Hostages for better assurance. The two Consuls had an earnest desire, to make strong warre vpon Hannibal without more temporising: perswading themselues, that in battaile they should be too strong for him. Crispi∣nus had further his particular desire, to make his Consulship notable by the win∣ning of some good Towne: as Fuluius and Fabius had gotten honour by Capua and Tarentum. Therefore he went about the siege of Locri; one of the best Cities which the Carthaginian then held in Italie: and brought thither all sorts of engines; sen∣ding for a fleet out of Sicil to helpe him. But Hannibal was not slow to relieue the Citie: the fame of whose approch, made Crispinus desist from his enterprise and retire vnto his Colleague, that lay at Venusia. Thither followed Hannibal; to whom the Consuls daily offered battaile. This great man of warre had no neede to stand vpon his reputation: which was alreadie so confirmed, that his refusing to fight, was not likely to be ascribed vnto feare; but rather deemed as part of his wisdome. He entertained the Consuls with many light skirmishes, and sought to take them at some aduantage; reseruing his owne numbers as full as he could, vnto a time of greater employment. In this lingring manner of Warre, tooke no plea∣sure: but sought to compell the Enemie to battaile, whether he would or no. The Admiral of the Roman fleet about Sicil, L. , was commanded againe to assaile the Towne of Locri: which might well enough be forced, if Hannibal continued as he beganne to trifle away the time at Venusia. To the same purpose a part of the Garrison that lay in Tarentum, was appointed to goe by Land to the assistance of Cincius. But Hannibal had an eye behinde him. He laid an ambush in the way, be∣tweene and Locri, whereinto the Romans fell: and hauing lost aboue three thousand of their companie, were well glad, the rest of them, to quit their enter∣prise, and saue their owne liues within Tarentum. As for the Consuls, it was the de∣sire of Hannibal, to waste their Armie by little and little: which to doe, hee negle∣cted no aduantage. There lay betweene him and them an Hillock, ouer-growne with wood, that seemed fit to couer a number of men: who lying there vndiscer∣ned, might fall vpon such, as should straggle from the Roman campe; and cut them off. Therefore he sent thither by night some companies of Numidians: whom hee willed to keepe themselues close, and attend their best aduantage. To this piece of ground, the Consuls thought it fit to remoue their Campe: Marcellus thinking that he neuer lay neere enough vnto Hannibal. Thither therefore both of them rode to view the place, accompanied with the sonne of Marcellus, a few Colonells, and other principall men; and not many more than two hundred horse, most of them . The Numidian Centinell gaue warning of their approach to his fellowes; who discouered not themselues, vntill they had surrounded the Consuls and their traine. The Consuls, as necessitie compelled them, defended themselues: hoping to be quickly relieued from their campe that was neere at hand. But the Hetrurians ranne away from them, at the first: and left them in that great danger, to the weake assistance of no more than fortie horse-men, that were of the Colo∣nie of Fregellae. These Fregellans abode by the Consulls; and did what they could to haue brought them safe off. But when Marcellus was stricken thorow with a Lance, and fell downe dead; then beganne euerie one to shift for himselfe, and escape as they might. Crispinus the other Consull, had his deaths wound, being stricken with two Darts; and yong Marcellus was likewise wounded; yet these two recouered their campe: The rest of the Colonells and Officers; together with the Lictors that carried the bundles of Rods and Axes before the Consuls, were all slaine or taken. To the dead bodie of the Consull Marcellus, Hannibal gaue honourable Funerall, according to the custome of those times: and bestowing his ashes in a siluer pot, couered it with a crowne of gold; and so sent them to yong Marcellus, to be by him interred, where he thought good. Presently after this, Crispinus bethought himselfe, how that the signet Ring of Marcellus was fallen into the custodie of Hannibal; who might vse it, to his owne purposes, ere that which had hapned were well knowne abroad. Wherefore hee sent word vnto all the Townes about; that his Colleague was slaine, and that Hannibal had gotten his Ring: wishing them in that regard, to giue no credit vnto any letters therewithall signed. This prouidence of Crispinus was not more than requisite. For his Messenger was but a little before come to Salapia, when another Messenger arriued there sent from Hannibal, bringing letters in the name of Marcel∣lus, and sealed with the captiue Ring; whereof the contents were: That it was his purpose to come the same night vnto Salapia; where he willed, that the Souldiers of the Garrison should be in a readinesse, for such employment as he should thinke needfull. The deuice was plaine: and no lesse plaine was the reuengefull minde, which he bare against that Citie; because of his braue Numidian companies, that had therein beene betraied. The Salapians hereupon bethought themselues, how to take their Enemie in his owne snare. They sent back the Messenger which was a Roman fugitiue; without letting him perceiue any signe of distrust in them. This done, they prepared all things in a , for the entertainement of such a friend. Late in the night he came thither; with a troupe of Roman fugitiues ar∣med Roman- like, leading the way. These all talking Latine together, called vnto the Watch, and bade open the gate; for the Consul was there. The gate was opened, faire and leisurely, and the Port-cullis drawne vp no higher than needes it must bee, to let them enter. But when sixe hundred of them were gotten in, downe fell the Port-cullis againe: and they that thought to haue taken others, were taken them∣selues; being laied at on all hands by the Salapians, that quickly made an ende with them. Hannibal being thus ouer-reached with this stratageme, hasted away to Locri; whereunto Cincius the Admirall of the Roman fleet about Sicil, did lay hard siege. The first appearance of the Numidians, Hannibal his Vantcurrors, made the Romans in all confused haste, runne to their ships: leauing all their engines, and whatsoeuer was in their campe, to the enemies disposition. The Roman Senate hearing of these accidents, sent vnto Crispinus the suruiuing Consul, and requested him to name a Dictator, that might take charge of the Com∣monwealth, and dispatch the election of new Magistrates, with other businesse; whereunto himselfe was disabled by his hurts. Hee did so: and soone after died. Then was it thought needfull, that newe Consuls should be chosen out of hand: forasmuch as two Roman Armies lay so neere vnto the Enemie, without any Gene∣rall. Especially it was desired, that Election should be made of such , as were not onely valiant, but well aduised: since the best, and most fortunate of their great Darers, M. Marcellus, by loosing himselfe so strangely, had giuen them a faire war∣ning, not to commit their Armie vnto rash heads. Among those that stood for the Consulship, C. Claudius Nero, was the most eminent. Hee was of great Nobilitie, a good Souldier, and one, whose many seruices in this present warre, did forcibly commend vnto the place. Yet he seemed a little too violent; and one, whose tem∣per needed the allay of a more stayed wit. The fathers therefore to ioyne vnto him in the Consulship M. Liuius: one that had borne the same Office, long before. This M. Liuius had been Consul with L. Aemylius Paulus, in the yeere foregoing the beginning of this warre. After their Consulship, wherein they did good seruice, they had both of them bin called into iudgement by the People: and this Liuius cōdemned; Aemylius hardly escaping. Though it hath bin once already noted; yet I cannot forbeare to remember it againe: how it pleased God, to vpbraid the vnthankefull Romans, with the malicious iudgement, giuen by their multitude vpon honorable men. For in the battaile of Cannae, it was apparant, what lamentable effects, the memorie of their iniustice wrought: when L. Aemilius rather chose to yeeld to the froward ignorance of his Colleague; and afterward to die in the grea∣test ouerthrow, that euer fell vpon the State of Rome, than by resisting the perni∣cious courses of Terentius Varro, to cast himselfe anew vpon the danger of the popu∣lar furie. As for M. Liuius, he is euen now readie, and will so continue, to tell the People of their faults in a diuers manner. Eight yeeres together after his condem∣nation had hee beene absent out of the Citie, and liued in his Countrie Grange; vexing himselfe with the indignitie of his condemnation. Marcellus and Laeuinus, being Consuls two or three yeeres agoe, had brought him into Rome: where he li∣ued priuate in discontented sort as might appeare, both by his carelesnesse in ap∣parell, and by the wearing of his long haire and beard; which in that time were the badges of men afflicted. Verie lately he was compelled by the Censors, to poll his haire, and come into the Senate: where hee vsed to sit silent, and signifie his assent or dislike to what was proposed; either in short formall words, or in passing from side to side, when the house was diuided. At length it hapned, that in some busines weightily concerning one that was his kinsman, he stood vp, and made a set speech: whereby he drew all the Fathers to attention; and bade them enquire of him, and take better notice, what he was, and what he had beene. The Senate was much al∣tered since he had left it; many braue men were lost; new ones were chosen; such as rather serued to fill vp the number, than to answere to the dignitie of the place: and they that were left of ancient standing, had euen spent their Vertues to no great effect. Wherefore, all began to say; that it was great pittie, so worthy and able a man, as this Liuius, had beene all this while forgotten; one, of whom the Com∣mon-wealth stood in great neede, yet had not vsed in this dangerous warre. Now seeing that the Consuls ought, one of them, to be chosen a Patrician, the other, of necessitie a Plebeian: and since, neither Fabius, nor Valerius Laeuinus, being both of them Patricians, could be ioyned with Claudius Nero: euery one was of opinion, that there could not be chosen and coupled together, two fitter men than C. Claudius, and this Marcus Liuius. But Liuie would not endure to heare of this. He said it was vnreasonable, that one condemned as a dishonest man, should afterwards be chosen Ruler of the Citie. If they had done ill to trust him with one Consulship, what meant they then to offer him another? With these, and the like phrases he resisted their desires: till by perswasions, and examples rehearsed, of such as had patiently digested iniuries done by the People, and repaied good for euill; he was contented to accept the honour. Here we may behold a true figure of that Embleme, with which Themistocles checked the ingratitude of the Athenians: resembling himselfe to a Plane-tree, the branches and boughes whereof men breake in faire weather; but runne vnder it for shelter in a storme. Such vnthankefulnesse, to well-deseruing men, is not rarely found in the outragious multitude. Neither was the late example hereto much vn∣like, of Philip the second King of Spaine his dealing with the Duke of Alua. For al∣though he had committed the Duke to prison, vpon some small offence conceiued, without all regard of his former deserts: yet when his intended of Por∣tugal, required the seruice of a man, more then ordinarily sufficient; hee stood no longer vpon the scanning of late displeasures; but employed the same Duke, whom he had newly disgraced. Thus is wisdome often taught by necessitie. It was a dangerous yeere , when C. Claudius Nero, and M. Liuius were cho∣sen Consuls. Asdrubal was alreadie come into France, and waited only, to haue the waies of the Alpes thawed by warme weather, for his passage into Italy. The Romans vsed at this time the seruice of three and twentie Legions: and wanted not employ∣ment, for many more, if they had knowne how to leuie and maintaine them. Of these which they had, foure serued in Spaine, two in Sicil and two in Sardinia: the rest were so disposed, in seuerall parts of Italie, where need seemed to require, that only two Legions were left to each of the Consuls. But the Consuls were men of execution: and would not be tied to the punctuall obseruance of what the thought fit. M. Liutus would not stirre out of Rome, against so mightie a power as followed Asdrubal; vntill he had first obtained, that hee might carry with him as many as could well be spared from other imploiments; and those, or the most of them, chosen Companies. It was true, that two Legions, appointed to serue vnder Lucius Porcius a Pretor of that yere, among the Sisalpine Gaules, might be as an additament to the forces of Liuius; to whom the warre against Asdrubal was alotted. So might also two other Legions, that were among the Salentines, neere vnto Tarentū, vnder another of the Pretors, be accounted a part of Claudius his Ar∣mie; that was sent against Hannibal. Neuerthelesse the Consuls, by the especiall in∣stance of Liuie, did obtaine, that all might be left to their owne discretion. For newes came, that Asdrubal was alreadie passing the Alpes; the Ligurians, who dwelt in the Countrie about Genua, with their Neighbour people, were in readinesse to ioyne with him; and L. Porcius sent word, that he would aduenture no further, then hee safely might. When all was ordered, as themselues best, the two Consuls went forth of the Citie; each, his seuerall way. The People of Rome were now quite otherwise affected, than they had beene, when L. Aemylius and C. Te∣rentius Varro, were sent against Hannibal. They did no longer take vpon them, to di∣rect their Generals; or bid them dispatch, and winne the victorie betimes: but ra∣ther they stood in feare; lest all diligence, wisdome and valour should proue too little. For since few yeeres had passed, wherein some one of their Generals had not beeneslaine; and since it was manifest, that if either of these present Consuls were defeated, or put to the worst; the two Carthaginians would forthwith ioyne, and make short worke with the other: it seemed a greater happinesse than could be ex∣pected, that each of them should returne home Victor; and come off with honour, from such mightie opposition, as he was like to finde. With extreme difficultie had Rome held vp her head, euer since the battaile of Cannae: though it were so, that Han∣nibal alone, with little helpe from Carthage, had continued the warre in Italie. But there was now arriued another sonne of Amilcar; and one, that in his present Expe∣dition, had seemed, a man of more sufficiencie than Hannibal himselfe. For, where∣as in that long and dangerous march, through barbarous Nations, ouer great Ri∣uers, and Mountaines, that were thought vnpassable, Hannibal had lost a great part of his Armie: this Asdrubal, in the same places, had multiplied his numbers; and, gathering the people that he found in the way, descended from the Alpes like a row∣ling Snow-bal, farre greater than he came ouer the Pyrenees at his first setting out of Spaine. These considerations and the like, of which feare presented many vnto them; caused the People of Rome, to wait vpon their Consuls out of the Towne; like a pensiue traine of Mourners: thinking vpon Marcellus & Crispinus, vpon whom in the like sort they had giuen attendance the last yere; but saw neither of them re∣turne aliue, from a lesse dangerous warre. Particularly, old Q. Fabius gaue his accu∣stomed aduice to M. Liuius, that he should abstaine from giuing, or taking battaile, vntill he well vnderstood the Enemies condition. But the Consul made him a fro∣ward answere, and said, That he would fight the very first day: for that he thought it long, till he should either recouer his honour by victorie; or by seeing the ouer∣throw of his owne vniust Citizens, satisfie himselfe with the ioy of a great, not an honest, reuenge. But his meaning was better than his words. Of the ouerthrow that Asdrubal receiued in Spaine, by Scipio, a little before hee tooke his iournie into Italie; such mention hath alreadie been made, as agreed with the report of that noble Historian Liuie. Yet I thinke it not amisse to adde in this place, what may be gathered out of the remaining fragments of Polybius his historie . . concerning that accident. Asdrubal had wrestled with many difficulties in Spaine; . . l. 10. & . by reason of those Captaines that were sent from the citie of Carthage, to ioine with him in the administration of that Prouince: they being, as it may seeme, of the Han∣nonian faction; which is to say, thus farre forth Traitors, that they preferred the ad∣uantage of their own side, before the good of their Common-wealth. In what par∣ticulars they wronged this worthie sonne of Amilcar, and how they hindred his courses , it cannot bee knowne: since of those bookes, wherein Polybius hath exactly handled these matters, there are to vs remaining onely a few broken pieces. But by the dealing of Hanno in Sicil with Mutines, a better man of warre than himselfe, whom Hannibal had sent into the Iland: we may conceiue, that against the brother of Hannibal it was thought needfull, by these mischieuous Partisans of Hanno, to vse the violent opposition of more malice. Neuerthe∣lesse was a good Patriot: and therefore endured patiently such indignities, as Mutines could not long digest. His iournie into Italie being resolued vpon: he lay with part of the Armie at , not farre from the mines of siluer; whence he was to furnish his Expedition. Thither came Scipio: and draue him out of his Campe, though he were strongly lodged, before the other Carthaginian Captaines could, or would, come to his assistance. The ouerthrow seemes not to haue beene so great, as it must haue been supposed, if no way lay open to those that fled. Rather it ap∣peares, that Asdrubal dealt like a prouident man, and seeing that his Campe was likely to be forced, sent away all his , with his Elephants before him: but staied behinde himselfe to sustaine the Romans awhile, vntill his carriages might bee out of danger. Herein he had his desire. Afterwards, he gathered his broken troups together: and retired in such sort, that Scipio thought it not good to pursue him, and so passed ouer Tagus. Then taking vnto him the forces assigned for his Expedition, he marched away toward the Pyrenees: leauing the care Spaine vnto his brother Mago, and to Asdrubal the sonne of Gesco; that thought himselfe the fittest man for the administration thereof. Faine would Scipio haue him on his iournie, by sending to defend against him the ordinarie way of the Mountaines. But whether Asdrubal tooke another way, or whether he forced the guards that Scipio had set to keepe the (as the defence of hard passages commonly sorts to no good ef∣fect) he was not letted in his voiage by any such impediment. Comming into Gaule, and following the steps of his brother Hannibal: he found the Nations that lay in his way, so well affected, either to him or to his monie, that no passages were defen∣ded against him, nor any sort of resistance made; but he, and his Armie, well enter∣tained, and their numbers much increased, by accesse of such as were desirous to take pay. Of these he had the better choice: for that he was driuen to Winter in their Countrie; whilest that the passages of the Alpes were closed vp with Ice and Snow. The Mountaines likewise, that had so greatly molested Hannibal in his iour∣nie ouer the Alpes; were easily won to take part with Asdrubal, when he trauailed through their Countrie. For these poore men, at the first comming of Hannibal, were verily perswaded, that it was his purpose to robbe them of their cattaile; and to make spoile of that little wealth, which they had out of the desolate rocks. But now in processe of time, they were better informed. Therefore vnderstanding, that there were two mightie Cities, farre disioyned asun∣der, which made warre vpon each other, by Land, and Sea; and that the Alpes did only lie in their way: they gladly condescended, to take their part in the fortune of the Inuaders. The like affection, vpon greater cause, was afterward found in the Gaules. The Ligurians also ioyned with Asdrubal: and so would the haue done; if he had arriued in their Countrie. There was no other Roman Armie neere, then L. with his two Legions; of whom there was no great feare. Therefore did Asdrubal set vpon Placentia a Roman Colonie: in hope to make his comming the more terrible, by the destruction of that Towne. But there hee lost a great deale of time, and finally was driuen to quit the enterprise: by vnderta∣king which, he gaue the Roman Consuls leisure to make readie for him; and caused his brother Hannibal (who vpon the first bruit of Asdrubal his so timely, and easily passing the , was about to leaue his wintring camps, and go forth to meet with him) to sit still awhile, as well aware, that Placentia would not be taken in haste. C. Claudius Nero the Roman Consul, made what speede hee could, to meet with Hannibal, and stop him from ioyning with his brother. He had about fortie thou∣sand foot, and fiue hundred horse: with which he daily offered battaile to the Car∣thaginian; and had of him the better in many skirmishes. was once driuen to make a tedious march from the borders of the Salentines and , into the Countrie of the Brutians, there to encrease his forces; which were otherwise too weake for the iournie intended. Afterward comming to Grumentum, a Towne of the Lucans; he there fought vnprosperously with Nero the Consul. Neuerthelesse he got off, and marched away to Venusia. But Nero followed him; and had there againe the better of him. Wherefore he was driuen to returne to Metapontum: where ioyning with Hanno, that had made ready a good Armie; hee assaied againe to make way by force to his brother. So he passed onward, and came againe to Ve∣nusia, hauing Nero still at his heeles. Thence went he ouer the Riuer to Ca∣nusium, where he sate downe, not farre from the place, in which he had obtained his most memorable victorie. There also did Nero sit downe by him: and both of them rested, without making offer to fight. It seemed perhaps vnto Hannibal, who knew the Countrie very well; that his brother might, with little impediment, ouer-come the way to Canusium: where if he could once againe deale with both the Consuls, and all the Roman forces together, he had reason to hope for such another victorie, as once he had gotten in the same open Countrie. If this had so fallen out; Rome would haue beene vndone for euer. But the should not haue needed to wish any second victorie, in the naked Champans about Cannae; if such an armie, as this which Asdrubal now brings, had come to second Hannibal, when hee was in his full strength; and the Romans not able to keepe the field. Wherefore this wor∣thy Generall had good reason afterward to say, that Hanno was the man, who by delaying the supply, did beat him out of Italie; which else no power of the Romans could haue done. Whilest Nero waited vpon the Carthaginians, and thought it enough to hinder them from meeting with the Armie that was comming to their succour: he was ad∣uertised of Asdrubal his approch; by Letters and Messengers intercepted, as they were going to Hannibal. These gaue notice, that Asdrubal had left the siege of Pla∣centia, and drew onwards apace: being already come within two hundred miles of his brother; notwithstanding all opposition that could bee made by Liuie the Con∣sul. Of these newes Claudius Nero was nothing ioyfull. For if Hannibal could once be ioyned as head, vnto that great body of an Armie, which Asdrubal brought with him: it was most apparant, that howsoeuer the fortune of Rome should auoid, for the present, any great calamitie; yet the very continuance of so strong a warre at home, would enforce the Latines, and other faithfull Associates, to faint vnder the burden; as twelue of the thirtie Roman Colonies had already done. resolued, that it were better to make any desperate aduenture, than to suffer the con∣iunction of two such malevolent Planets: whose pestilent influence, if not on the suddaine, yet within few yeres, was like to worke most lamentable effect. It seemed apparant, that his Colleague was vnable to stay the progresse of Asdrubal: neither were there any good Legions in a readines, that could doe seruice in such a needfull case; excepting those, that were already employed vnder the two Consuls. Here∣vpon hee concluded, that it was not expedient for him to himselfe to his owne charge, which was the warre against Hannibal: but rather that it behoued him, to helpe where more necessitie required; and to carry part of his forces vnto his Col∣league. This not be without much danger. Yet since the meeting of the two Carthaginian bretheren, was farre more dangerous to the Roman Common-wealth; it seemed the best way to put Fortune in trust, with that which was of the lesse im∣portance. Sixe thousand foot, and a thousand horse he therefore tooke, that were the very choice of his Armie: and making shew, as if he would only step aside, to doe some small piece of seruice neere at hand; away he posted as fast as hee could, to assist his fellow Consul. His Messengers ranne before him, to giue warning to all Townes by which he was to passe, that they should be ready to meet him, with vi∣ctualls, and all other necessaries for his Armie. Liuius the other Consul, at that time, lay incamped, neere vnto Sena Gallica, and Asdrubal within halfe a mile of him. In sixe daies Nero had finished his journie thither; and when he drew neere, sent Mes∣sengers before him, to giue notice of his comming. Liuie thought it fittest that he should stay in some place of couert vntill darke night, and then enter secretly into the campe: lest the Enemie, perceiuing this of strength, should accordingly frame his counsailes. This was done: and a token giuen, that the Colonells, Cap∣taines, and all Souldiers, aswell horse as foot, that Nero had brought with him; should bee lodged and entertained by men of their owne sort. Their Companie was som what increased by Voluntaries that joyned with them on the way. Neuer∣thelesse, it was not needfull, that the Quarter which receiued them, should bee en∣larged; since they had brought with them nothing but their armes. The next day they held a of warre: wherein some were of opinion, that it was best for these new-arriued Companies, to refresh themselues a few daies after their wearie iournie, before they should be drawne forth to battaile. But against this, Nero was very earnest: and besought his Colleague, to make vse of him out of hand; that he might betimes returne to his owne Campe, ere Hannibal should haue notice of his absence. The souldiers also of Nero, were full of spirit; perceiuing that the honour of the victorie was like to be theirs: forasmuch as the battaile would not haue beene vndertaken, without this their comming to helpe. Finally, it was agreed when the Counsaile brake vp, that the signe of battaile should be hung out; which was com∣monly a purple coate ouer the Generalls pauilion. Asdrubal was no lesse willing than the Romans to come to battaile, hauing long desired it, and hitherto not found occasion before. But when he had put his men in order, and was riding before the head of his Armie, to behold the Enemies counte∣nance: it seemed to him, that they were more than they had beene; and some of their armes and horses looked as though they had wanted dressing, after a long iournie. Hereupon he beganne to with-draw his Armie backe into the Campe: and gaue order, that if no prisoners could bee taken, by whom he might bee certified of the truth; yet should there good obseruation be made, whether the enemies campe were enlarged, or no; or what other alteration could be noted, that might shew their forces to be increased. The campe, as hath beene said, was not extended: but the trumpet, that sounded only once in the quarter of L. Porcius the Pretor, did now, contrary to former custome, sound twice in the quarter of Liuius the Consul. Here∣at Asdrubal greatly mused: and being well acquainted with the Roman orders; held this for a sure token, that the other Consul was there . How this might be, if Hannibal were aliue, and in good case, he was not able to coniecture: but thought it the best way, to goe leisurely to worke; till he might be better informed. Vpon confidence in his owne forces, he had not cared hitherto, how neere hee lay to the Romans; nor troubled himselfe perhaps with ouer-strongly fortifying his owne Campe. Yet when hee now perceiued, that somewhat was fallen out beside his ex∣pectation, hee changed his resolution; and held it no dishonour to remoue a little further off. So he secretly by night, intending to get ouer the Riuer Metaurus; whereby to keepe himselfe as long as he could, from necessitie of battaile. But whether it were so, that his guides did steale away from him in the dark, so that he could not finde the way to the Foords; or whether his carriages were too hea∣uie, and hindred his speede: farre hee had not gone, ere the Consul Nero was at his heeles with all the Roman horse, and staied him from passing any further. Soone af∣ter came L. Porcius with the light armature: whom the other Consul followed anon with all the Legions; in good order, and ready for battaile. Asdrubal, seeing him∣selfe ouer-taken with necessitie to fight; omitted no care and circumspection. His Gaules, in whom he reposed least confidence, hee placed in his left wing vpon a Hill, which the Enemie should not, without much difficultie, bee able to climbe: in the right wing he stood himselfe, with his Africans and Spaniards; his Ligurians he pla∣ced in the midst; and his Elephants, hee bestowed in the front of his battailes. On the Roman side, Nero had the leading of the right wing; Liuius of the left; and Por∣cius of the battaile. Both Romans and Carthaginians well vnderstood, how much de∣pended vpon the fortune of this day; and how little hope of safetie there was vnto the vanquished. Only the Romans herein seemed to haue had the beter in conceipt, and opinion; That they were to fight with men desirous to haue fled from them. And according to this presumption, came Liuius the Consul with a proud brauery, to giue charge on the Africans: by whom he was so sharply entertained, that the vi∣ctorie seemed very doubtfull. The Africans and Spaniards were stout soldiers; and well acquainted with the maner of the Roman fight. The Ligurians also were a hardy Nation, and not accustomed to giue ground; which they needed the lesse, or were able now to doe, being placed in the midst. Liuius therefore, and Porcius, found strong opposition: and with great slaughter on both sides, preuailed little or no∣thing. Besides other difficulties, they were exceedingly troubled by the Elephants, that brake their first rankes; and put them in such disorder, as the Roman Ensignes were driuen to fall backe. All this while Claudius Nero, labouring much in vaine a∣gainst a steepe Hill, was vnable to come to blowes with the Gaules; that stood op∣posite vnto him, but out of danger. This made Asarubal the more confident; who seeing his owne left wing safe, did the more boldly and fiercely make impression on the other side, vpon the left wing of the Romans. But Nero, perceiuing that the place wherein he stood, was such as would compell him to remaine idle till the fight were ended; tooke a part of his forces, and led them round behinde the forces of Porcius and Liuins: which hauing compassed, he fell vpon Asdrubal, and charged him in the flanke. Here beganne the victorie to be manifest on the Roman side. For Nero, fin∣ding none to resist him in front, ranne all along the depth of Asdrubal his battaile: and falling vpon the skirts thereof, disordered the Enemies, and put all to rowt. Of the Spaniards therefore and Africans, that were laid at on euery side, the greatest part was slaine. The Ligurians and Gaules escaped as they could; and saued themselues by timely flight. Of the Elephants, foure were taken aliue: the rest were slaine; some by the Enemies weapons; others by their owne guides that rode them. For when any of them, being sore wounded, beganne to waxe , and rush backe vpon their owne battailes following them: the guide had in readinesse a Mallet, and a Chizzell, wherewith he gaue them a stroke betweene the eares, in the joynt of the necke, next vnto the head; wherewith hee killed the beast vpon the suddaine. This speedy way of preuenting such harme as the Elephants, being hurt, were wont to doe to the squadrons following them; is said to haue beene the deuice of Asdrubal himselfe; who died in this battaile. Great commendations are giuen to Asdrubal, both by Polybius, and by . He is said at all times to haue shewed himselfe worthy of Amilcar his father, and Hannibal his brother; to haue striuen with great patience, against many difficulties, whereinto he fell by the meanes of those Captaines, that were sent from Carthage into Spaine; to haue performed in this last battaile all duties of a worthy Generall; and finally when hee saw the losse irreparable, to haue ridden manfully into the thickest of his Enemies; where fighting brauely, hee was slaine. Of the number that died with him in this battaile, the report of Liuie, and of Polybius, doe very much disagree. For Liuie saith, that the Carthaginians had no lesse an ouerthrow, than was that, which they gaue to the Romans at Cannae; that fiftie sixe thousand of them were slaine, fiue thousand & foure hundred taken prisoners; and aboue foure thousand Roman Citizens, whom they had captiues with them, deliuered, and set at libertie. He saith also, that of the Romans and their Associates there were slaine eight thousand: and of the bootie, that it was exceeding great; not only in other kindes; but in gold and siluer. Concerning the bootie; Polybius hath no mention of it. Likely it is to haue beene as rich as reporteth it; for Asdrubal came well sto∣red with monie. But Polybius (who had no desire to make this battaile of Metaurus, a paralel vnto that of Cannae ) reports no more than about ten thousand of the Car∣thaginian side, and two thousand of the Roman, to haue beene slaine. The number of the prisoners he doeth not mention: but only saith, That some of the Carthagi∣nian Princes were taken aliue; and that all the rest died in the battaile. Whereby it may seeme, that they were all Barchines: forasmuch as they preferred the honour of themselues, and of their Countrie, aboue their liues. The joy of this victorie was no lesse in Rome, than had beene the feare of the e∣uent. For euer since it was knowne in what sort Nero had left his Armie; the whole Citie was troubled, as much as lately at Hannibal his cōming thither. Men thought it strange, that the Consul should make such a great aduenture, as thus to put the one halfe of all the Roman forces, vnto hazard of the Dice. For what if Hannibal should chance to haue notice of this his departure; and either pursue him, or set vpon the Armie that staied behinde, much weakned, and without a Generall? Thus did they talke: yet reseruing their censure vnto the successe; with libertie to ap∣proue or condemne, according to the issue. In the meane while the People filled the Market-place; the Women ranne to the Temples, with Vowes and Prayers; and the Senators were daily in counsaile, waitiug still ready at hand vpon the Ma∣gistrates: as some great matter were likely to fall out, that would require euery ones helpe. In briefe, they were all so full of melancholy, that when first newes of the victorie came, there were not many that would it. Afterwards when Messengers arriued from the Consuls, with Letters contayning all that had passed: there was not only great and joyfull concourse of all sorts of men vnto the Tem∣ples, but the very face of the Citie was altered; and men from thenceforth beganne to follow their priuate businesse; making contracts one with another (which they had long forborne to doe) and attending their owne affaires in such wise, as if Han∣nibal were already driuen out of Italie. Nero returning to his campe, threw forth openly the head of Asdrubal before the Carthaginians: and producing his African prisoners bound; sent two of them loose to giue Hannibal notice of what had hapned. These two prisoners might haue serued well enough to certifie Hannibal of this misaduenture, without doing wrong to the dead body of Asdrubal: especially since Hannibal, in honourable, and farre different manner, had giuen buriall to Gracchus and Marcellus; yea to all the Roman Generalls, whose carkasses fell into his hands. But it may seeme, that how∣soeuer the People of Carthage wanted much of the generous disposition, which was found among the Romans, in their loue vnto the Commonweale; yet in dea∣ling with Enemies, they were farre more ciuill, and lesse prone to the insolencie of reuenge. The best excuse of this outrage done by Nero, is, that hee hoped much more by the sudden terrour of such a spectacle, than by the simple relation of that which had passed, to make a deepe impression of feare into the Carthaginians. It may also be said, That he forgot himselfe, being ouer-joyed with the greatnesse of his prosperitie. For it was the battaile of Metaurus that weighed downe the bal∣lance, and turned the Tide of the Roman fortune: which being then at the lowest Ebbe, ceased not afterwards to flow, till it could not be contained within any banks. Hannibal hauing lost in this vnhappy fight (besides that worthy Gentleman his Brother) all the hope that so long sustained him in Italie; with-drew himselfe into the Countrie of the Brutians: and thither hee caused all the Lucans that were of his partie to remoue; as likewise all that dwelt in Metapontum. For he wanted men to defend so many places as he held at the present, because they lay too farre asunder. Wherefore he drew them all into a lesser compasse in the vtmost corner of Italie; it being a Countrie of much fastnesse, and the people exceedingly deuoted to his seruice. In this businesse Nero gaue him no memorable impediment: either be∣cause Hannibal was too strong for him, hauing all his forces vnited; or because it is likely that this remoue of the Lucans and Metapontines, was not before the end of Summer, when their haruest was gathered in; at what time the Senate called him home to Rome. M. Liuius the other Consul tarried among the Cisalpine Gaules vn∣till the end of Summer; there to set things in such order as he thought requisite: which done, hee wrote vnto the Senate, that there was no more neede of him and his Armie in that Prouince; but that L. Porcius, with the two Legions that were there before, might very well discharge the place. For this cause, hee desired leaue to returne home; and that he might bring his Armie with him. The Senate well vnderstood his meaning: which was, to haue the honour of triumph, as he well de∣serued. But forasmuch as it was well knowne, what interest Nero had in the late vi∣ctorie: order was giuen, that not only Liuie with his Armie should come home; but likewise Nero; though leauing his Armie behinde him, to confront Hannibal. So the honour of triumph was granted to them both: in the pompe whereof Liuie made the greater shew, as riding in a Chariot, and followed by his Souldiers; be∣cause in his Prouince, and vpon his day of command, the victorie was gotten; his Armie also being present at the triumph. But Nero that rode on horse-backe, and without such attendance, was the more extolled both by the People and Souldiers; by whom, the victorie was in a manner wholly ascribed vnto his great worth. Nei∣ther wanted L. Veturius Philo, and Q. Caecilius Metellus, Lieutenants to the Generalls, the due acknowledgement of their good seruice. For they were commended vnto the People, as men worthy to bee chosen Consuls: and Consuls they were chosen for the yeere following. But nothing was done by them, worthy of memorie, in their Consulship. Neither indeede from this yeere, which was the thirteenth of the present warre, vntill the eighteenth yeere wherein it ended, was there any mat∣ter of importance wrought in Italie; saue only the taking of Locri from the Carthagi∣nians by . For Hannibal wanted strength, wherewith to make any great of∣fer: and the Romans had little minde to prouoke him; but thought it well that hee was quiet. Such opinion had they conceiued of him; that though all about him went to ruine; yet in him alone they thought there was force enough to hold him∣selfe vpright. And surely very notable are the commendations giuen vnto him by Polybius; whom Liuie therein followes: That making warre vpon a People, of all o∣ther the most warlike, hee obtained so many victories by his owne good conduct: and that leading an Armie, compounded of so many sundry Nations, Africans, Spa∣niards, Gaules, Carthaginians, Italians, and Greekes; which were, neither in Language, Lawes, Conditions, or any other thing, one like to another; hee held them all in such good order, that they neuer fell to sedition among themselues, or against their Generall. But that which Liuie addes hereto, is yet perhaps of greater admiration: That he sustained his Armie, without helpe from other places, from this time for∣ward, vpon the hungry soile of the Brutians: which, when it was best manured in time of peace, could hardly suffice to nourish the Inhabitants. It is therefore appa∣rant, that by his proper worth and vertue, he kept his Armie in such order and obe∣dience, rather than by any greatnesse of reward and bootie: since, after the death of Asdrubal, he made no inuasion vpon the wealthier parts of Italie; but held himselfe still among the poore Brutians. Where we must leaue him, vntill he be drawne into Africk by Scipio; whose doings will henceforth entertaine, and leade vs, vnto the end of this Warre. §. XVII. How P. CORNELIVS SCIPIO the Roman, made entire conquest of Spaine. †. I. How the Carthaginians were driuen by SCIPIO from the Continent into the Isle of Gades. MAGO, & ASDRVBAL the sonne of Gesco, tooke vpon them the charge of Spaine, when the sonne of departed thence into . These agreed together, that Mago should make a voiage to the Baleares; there to leuie a supply of men: and Asdrubal with draw him∣selfe into Lusitania (which is now Portugal ) whither Romans had ill meanes to follow; being altogether vnacquainted in those parts. Mago had soone ended his businesse, and returned into Spaine: where hee met with one Hanno (the same perhaps that had lately beene emploied in Sicil ) who brought forces out of Africk, and came to succeede in place of Asdrubal the Barchine. It is not vnlikely that Spaine was now the better, and more readily furnished with men, and all things needfull from Carthage; when that sonne of Amilcar, whose authoritie had beene greatest, was thence departed. For hereby might the factious diligence of old Hanno approue it selfe, against that noble race of Warriors; when it should appeare, that things did prosper much the better by being left vnto the handling of other men. Whether it were vpon desire to make good some such opinion raised of him at home, or whether vpon confidence in the forces that he brought ouer: tooke the field, and led Mago with him; as purposing afresh to set vpon the Romans. So he entred into the Countrie of the Celtiberians, not very farre from new Carthage: where, by monie, and other perswasions, he leuied aboue nine thousand men. P. Scipio in the meane while contained himselfe in the Easterne parts of : attentiue, as it may seeme, to the proceedings of Asdrubal the sonne of Amilcar; a∣gainst whom, he is reported by some Writers to haue sent part of his forces into Ita∣lie, to the assistance of C. Claudius Nero, and M. Linius the Consuls. But hearing of the leuie made by Hanno and Mago, among the : he sent M. Syllanus the Propretor, with ten thousand foot and fiue hundred horse. Syllanus got intelligence by some fugitiue Celtiberians, who became his guides, that their Countrimen en∣camped apart from the Carthaginians in great disorder: as men fearing no danger, because they were at home. Wherefore as closely as he was able, he drew neere to these Celtiberians: and falling vpon them on the suddaine, gaue them such an ouer∣throw, that Hanno and Mago comming to their succour, in stead of heartning & re∣inforcing them, became partakers of the losse. Mago saued himselfe, with all the horse, and old Companies of foot, which were about two : and in ten daies iourney brought them safe to Asdrubal. The rest of the Africans were either slaine or taken: among whom, Hanno had the ill lucke to be taken prisoner; though he kept himselfe out of the fight vntil all was lost. As for the Celtiberians, they knew better how to make shift; & saued of themselues by running into the woods. It could no otherwise bee, but that Scipio was much troubled with the danger wherein Italie stood, by the comming thither of Asdrubal. Ten thousand foot and eighteene hundred horse he did therefore send out of Spaine (as it is reported by some Authors) to the defence of his owne Countrie: or was perhaps about to send them; and thereupon remained at new Carthage, intentiue to the necessitie & suc∣cesse of his Countrimen at home. But when he had word of the great victory at Me∣taurus, which fell out long before the end of this Summer, then might hee well ad∣uenture, to take in hand the entire conquest of Spaine; which must needs be much alienated from the Carthaginians, by the report of such an ouerthrow. The Spa∣nish Souldiers that serued vnder Hannibal, and those that had beene sent ouer into Africk; were as pledges heretofore, by whom their Countrie was held obnoxious to the Carthaginians. But when it was noised abroad, That all which had followed Asdrubal into Italie, were fallen into the hands of the Romans; and that Hannibal with his Armie, was closed vp in a streight, whence he could not get out: then did it greatly behoue the Spaniards to conforme themselues vnto the will of the Vi∣ctors. That it was the successe of things in Italie, which gaue such confidence vn∣to Scipio; it is the more probable, because hee tooke not this great enterprise in hand, vntill the Summer was almost spent. Asdrubal therefore vsed the benefit of the season; and by disposing his Armie into many Garrisons, hindred the Ene∣mie, from doing any great exploit before Winter. So the very length of way, and the time of the yeere, caused Scipio to returne backe: without any other mat∣ter performed, than that his Brother L. Scipio tooke by assault the Towne of Oringis. Against the next yeeres danger, Asdrubal prepared a great Armie: and spared not cost, nor trauaile, in strengthning himselfe, for the triall of his last fortune in Spaine. With seuentie thousand foot, foure thousand horse, and two and thirtie Elephants, he tooke the field: which number I , that he could hardly haue raised, without boldly denying the truth of those reports that came from Italie. Scipio thought his Roman Legions too weake to encounter with such a multitude. Wherefore hee iudged it needfull to vse the helpe of his Spanish friends. But the death of his Father and Vncle, that were cast away by the treason of such false Auxiliares; made him on the other side very doubtfull, of relying vpon those, that might perhaps betray him in his greatest neede. Yet since one , that was Lord of eight & twentie Townes, had promised him the last Winter, to raise three thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse for his seruice: hee resolued to make vse of those, and some few others; that might helpe to make a shew; and yet not bee able to doe great harme, if they would reuolt. So with fiue and fortie thousand foot, and three thousand horse, he sought out the Enemie; neere to whom hee in∣camped. At his first comming, Mago and Masanissa fell vpon him; with hope to take him vnprepared, whilest hee was making his lodgings. But hee layed certaine troups of horse in couert: which breaking vpon them vnexpected; caused them to fall off. They made at first an orderly retrait: but being more hardly pressed, they shortly betooke themselues to plaine flight. After this encounter, which added some courage to the Romans, and abated the presumption of the Carthaginians: there were daily skirmishes betweene the horse and light armature, on both sides; where∣in was nothing done of importance. Asdrubal drew forth his Armie, and arranged it before his Trenches: the like did Scipio; each of them to shew that he durst fight, yet not proceeding any further. Thus they continued many daies: Asdrubal being still the first that issued forth in the morning; and the first that, in the euening, with∣drew himselfe into his Trenches. The Spanish Auxiliaries were placed on both sides in the wings; the Carthaginians were in the midst, with their Elephants before them; and opposite to these on the other side were the Roman Legions. When they had in this order confronted one another, though at farre distance, many daies toge∣ther: it grew to be the common opinion, that they should shortly meet in the same forme; and be matched on each part, with the Enemies, long before designed. But Scipio, when hee purposed indeed to fight, altered the forme of his Armie; and withall, came forth earlier then he had been wont. He caused his men and horses, to be well fed betimes in the morning before day: and then sent forth his horse and light armature, to traine out the Carthaginians with their bellies : vsing here∣in the same trick, whereby he might remember, that Hannibal had beaten his father in the battaile of Trebia. His Roman Legions he bestowed in the wings; his Spaniards, in the battaile. Asdrubal sent forth his horse in all haste, to entertaine the Romans; whilest he himselfe arranged his men, in their wonted order, at the Hill foot, vpon which he encamped. In the skirmishes of the horse it could not be discerned which part had the better: since being ouer-pressed on either side, they had a safe retrait vnto their foot; and one troupe seconding another by course, returned to charge. This fight was protracted by Scipio to a great length: because his men, hauing well fed themselues, were like to hold out better then the Enemie. But about noone, he caused his wings to aduance a good pace; leauing their battaile of Spaniards farre behinde them, that came on leisurely, according to direction. The Spanish Merci∣naries that stood in Asdrubal his wings, were no way comparable, saue only in num∣ber, to the Latine and Roman Souldiers, that came against them; for they were fresh Souldiers, leuied in haste; and fighting only in respect of their pay. Being therefore charged in front by the Legions, and in flanke, at the same time, by the Roman Veli∣tes, and by some cohorts, that were appointed to wheele about for the same pur∣pose: they were sorely pressed; and with much difficultie made resistance. The Carthaginians would faine haue succoured them, but that they durst not stirre out of their places, because of the Spanish battaile which was cōming against them; though it were as yet farre off. Thus the best part of Asdrubal his Armie stood idle, vn∣till the wings were broken. For, had he aduentured to meet with the Spaniards, hee must haue cast himselfe into the open space that lay before him betweene the Ro∣man wings: to the depth whereof when he had arriued, he should haue found him∣selfe inclosed in such sort, as was the Consul Paulus the of Cannae. Where∣fore he did onely employ his Elephants; which did, according to their manner, no greater harme to his Enemies, than to his Friends. When they were chafed with wounds, they could no longer be ruled by their guides: but ranne, as chance led them, and troubled both parts; or those perhaps the more, that were the more vn∣willing to kill them. In processe of the fight: the Romans, who had well refreshed their bodies in the morning, endured lustie; when the others beganne to faint with and heate of the day. Wherefore perceiuing their aduantage, they followed it the more : and gaue not ouer, till they had forst the enemie to change his pace and runne from him. Asdrubal did his best to haue made an orderly re∣trait; and afterward againe, to haue caused his men turne head, at the Hill foot. But the Romans would not suffer the victorie to be so extorted from them: neither was it easie to put fresh courage into the vanquished; led by the obsti∣nate passion of feare which harkens to no perswasion. The Campe of had that day beene taken; if a storme of raine, which fell violently on the suddaine, and bred some superstition in the Romans, had not caused them to giue ouer. The same night, Asdrubal gaue no rest to his men: but caused them, hungrie, and ouerlaboured as they were, to take paines in fortifying the Campe; wherein hee feared to be assaulted. But little assurance could he haue in the strength of his Trenches; when he had lost the hearts of his Spanish Souldiers. One Attanes, that was Lord of the Turdetani, fled from him to the Romans, with a great Band of his subiects: many followed this example; and soone after, two strong Townes were yeelded vp to Scipio, and the Garrisons betraied. It seemes that the peruerse for∣tune of this late battaile, Asdrubal had set his rest, bred in the Spaniards a disposition, to beleeue the more easily those reports which they heard from Italy. For henceforward, they neuer did good office to the Carthaginians. , per∣ceiuing this, withdrew himselfe, and marched away, faster than an ordinarie pace, toward the Ocean Sea. Scipio followed the next morning: & ouertaking the Cartha∣ginians with his horse, caused them so often to make stand; that they were at length attached by the Roman Legions. Here beganne a cruell slaughter: for there was no resistance made, but all fell to rout, saue onely seuen thousand, that with Asdrubal himselfe recouered a very strong piece of ground, which they fortified in haste. This place he made shift awhile to defend: but wanting there necessaries to sustaine himselfe long, he was forsaken by some of those few, that continued hitherto par∣takers of his fortune. Wherfore he resolued to make shift for one: and stealing from his Companie by night away to the Sea-side, that was not farre thence; he tooke shipping, and set saile for Gades. When Scipio vnderstood that Asdrubal was thus gone: he left Syllanus with ten thousand foot, and a thousand horse to besiege their Campe (which was not taken in haste, for Mago and Masanissa staied in it) whilest he with the rest of the Armie did what was needful in the Countrie abroad. It was not long, ere Mago and Masanissa followed to Gades: and their Armie dispersed it selfe; some flying ouer to the Romans; other taking what way they liked. So vp∣on all the continent of Spaine, there were only three Townes left, , Castulo, and Astapa, that made countenance of warre against the Romans: of which only Ca∣stulo had in it a Carthaginian Garrison; consisting of such as had saued themselues by flight in the late ouerthrowes. Hereby it seemes, that the report of those Historians was ill grounded, who said, that Castulo yeelded long since vnto the Romans; though Hannibal tooke a wife in that Citie. For this was one of the last three Townes that held out on the Carthaginian side. Illiturgi had sometimes beene inclinable to the Romans; if not at their deuotion. Yet after the death of the two elder Scipio's, following too earnestly the Carthaginian fortune; it not onely rebelled; but with great crueltie betraied, and slue, the poore men that escaped thither from the ouerthrowes. Astapa was a Towne, that had still adhered to the Carthaginians; and, which was worse, had thriuen by spoile of the Romans and their Confederates. Wherefore (though not vntill the next yeere) Scipio went against these, and tooke himsefe Illiturgi and Castulo: Illiturgi by assault, and with a generall slaughter of the Inhabitants; Castulo, by treason of one . Astapa was taken by Lucius Mar∣cius; or rather destroyed by the Inhabitants. For a great pile of wood was raised in the Market-place: whereinto was throwne all the gold, and siluer, with whatsoeuer else was precious; the women and children standing by it vnder a sure guard; that should kil and burne them if the Romans got into the Towne. This prouision being made: all the Inhabitants that could beare armes, rushed forth desperately, and fell vpon the Roman campe; where striuing beyond their power, they were euery one slaine. Then was the Towne forth-with set on fire, by those that had taken charge to doe it: and many of the Romans consumed with the ; whilest they rushed ouer-hastily to catch the gold, and siluer, which they saw lying on the pile readie to melt. , being beaten into the Iland of Gades, found no cause of long stay there: but returned home to Carthage, with seuen Gallies; leauing Mago behinde him, to wait vpon occasion, if any should be offered. He visited in his way home, King of the , a people of the Numidians; hoping to winne him to the friend∣ship of the Carthaginians. But he met with Scipio, as it were with his euill Angel, in the Kings Port: who, landing at the same time, carried Syphax quite another way. For Scipio, hauing driuen the Carthaginians out of Spaine, did foorth-with bethinke himselfe, how to finish the warre; by putting them to the like distresse in Africke. Hereunto it seemed, that the helpe of Syphax would be much auailable: a king that had many times fallen out with the Carthaginians, and sustained much hurt by their procurement; of which in all likelihood he might easily be moued to seeke reuenge. He had also beene beholding to P. and Cn. Scipio, that him ouer a Captaine in∣to Africke; who instructed him so well in marshalling his forces, as he therby often became victorious. Vpon these reasons the Numidian King sent Embassadors to Rome, and made league with the Citie, in a time of great extremitie. So that here∣by P. Scipio conceiued hope of laying a good foundation to the warre, which he in∣tended in Africk; vpon the friendship of this ill Neighbour to the Carthaginians. For which cause he sent ouer C. Laelius his Embassadour, to deale with Syphax: who declaring that the Carthaginians did very ill in Italie, and had nothing now at all to doe in Spaine; easily perswaded the King to take part with those that had the better, and were without question his better friends. Only Syphax requested, that the Ro∣man Generall should visite him in person, to conclude the League; by which hee was to enter into conditions of more importance, than in any former Treatie. Hereto Scipio condescended; thinking the friendship of so great a King, that was neighbour to Carthage, and not farre distant from Spaine, well worthy of the ad∣uenture. So with two Quinquereme Gallies he tooke Sea: and arriued in the Kings Port, at the same time, with Asdrubal. This would haue beene very dangerous to him, had he beene discried by his Enemies further at Sea: but in the Hauen, they forbare to make offer one vpon the other. Syphax might well be proud; seeing at one time, two such Captaines of two most powerfull Cities, came to desire his friendship. He would haue brought them to treat of peace: but the Roman ex∣cused himselfe, by want of such commission from the Senate. He feasted them to∣gether: and shortly dismissed Scipio, with whom he readily entred into ; which in time of performance, he as readily brake. †. II. Funerall games held by SCIPIO. A Duell between two Spanish Princes. A digression, concerning Duells. SCIPIO returning into , and resting that winter, tooke vengeance the next yeere, vpon those of Illiturgi, Castulo, and Astapa, as hath beene said before. The Conquest of the Countrie being then in a manner at an end; he performed at new , with great solemnity, some Vowes that he had made, and honoured the memorie of his Father, and Vncle, with funerall games, especially of those that fought at sharpe, according to the manner of the times. Neither was it needfull, that he should trouble himselfe with preparing slaues for that spectacle, to hazard their liues as was vsed in the Citie of Rome: for there were enow, that either offe∣red themselues as voluntaries, or were sent from their Princes; to giue proofe in single combat, of the valour that was in their seuerall Countries. Some also there were, that being in contention, which they could not, or would not otherwise end, agreed to referre the decision of their Controuersies, to triall of the sword, in single fight. Among these, the most eminent, were, Corbis, and Orsua, Cosen-germans: that contended for the principality of a Town called Ibes. Corbis was the elder, and the elder brothers sonne: wherfore he claimed the Lordship, as eldest of the house; after the manner of our Irish Tanistrie. But the father of Orsua stood lately seized of the Principality: which though himselfe receiued by the death of his elder brother; yet this his sonne would not let it goe back; but claimed to hold it as heire vnto his father, and old enough to rule. Faine would Scipio haue compounded the matter. But they answered peremptorily, That all their friends, and kindred, had alreadie laboured in vaine, to take vp that quarrell; and that neither God, nor Man, but on∣ly Mars, their God of battaile, should be Vmpire betweene them. So they had their wills: and the elder, who was also the stronger, and more skilfull at his weapon, ea∣sily vanquished the foole-hardinesse of the yonger. Such combats haue beene very ancient; and perhaps more ancient, than any o∣ther kinde of fight. We reade of many performed before the Warre of Troy, by Theseus, Hercules, Pollux, and others: as also of two at the Warre of Troy; the one betweene Paris and ; the other, betweene Hector and Aiax. Neither want there examples of them among the Hebrewes: whereof that betweene Dauid and Goliah; and others performed by some of Dauids Worthies, against those that chal∣lenged them; are greatly celebrated. Vnto the same kinde appertaines the fight, betweene twelue of the Tribe of Iuda, and as many of the . The Romans had many of them: whereof that was principall, in which they ventured their Do∣minion vpon the heads of three brethren the Horatij, against the three brethren Cu∣riatij that were Albans. The combat of Manlius Torquatus; and shortly after, of Valerius with two Champions of the Gaules, which challenged any Roman; were of lesse importance, as hauing onely reference to brauerie. In England there was a great combat fought, betweene Edmond Ironside and Canutus the Dane, for no lesse than the Kingdome. The vse of them was very frequent in the Saxon-times; almost vpon euery occasion, great or small. In the raigne of Edward the third, who sustained the party of Mountfort against the Earle of Bloys, contending for the Duchie of Brittaine; there was a fight, for honour of the Nations, betweene thirtie of the Britons, and thirtie English: two of which English, were Caluerlie a braue Captaine; and that Sir Robert Knolles, who afterwards became a renowned Commander in the French warres, and did highly honour his bloud, whereof the Lord Knolles is descen∣ded. It were infinite to reckon the examples of the like, found in English, French, and Italian Histories. Most of them haue beene combats of brauerie, and of gaycté de cure, as the French terme it; for honour of seuerall Nations; for loue of Mistresses; or whatsoeuer else gaue occasion vnto men, desirous to set out themselues. But be∣sides those of this sort, there are two other natures of combats; which are, either vpon accusation for life; or vpon triall of Title and Inheritance, as in Writ of right. And of this latter kinde, was that, of which wee spake euen now, betweene Corbis and Orsua. Vnto these (me thinkes) may bee added, as of different condition from the rest, the combat vpon Wager; such as were that betweene Dauid and Goliah; or that betweene the Horatij and Curiatij: in which, without regard of Title, the Domi∣nion of Nations, one ouer the other, is aduentured vpon the head of Champions. Vpon an accusation for life, there was a combat appointed betweene the Lord Hen∣rie Ao. . Ric. 2di. of Boulinbrooke Duke of Hereford, and Moubray Duke of . There was a combat performed by Sir Iohn Ansley and one Cattrington: whom Ansley charged Ao. 3. Ric. 2di. with treason; and proued it vpon him, by being victorious. The like was fought betweene Robert of Mountfort and Henrie of Essex. The like also, betweene a Nauar∣rois Ao. 9. Henr. 2di. and one Welch of Grimsby, who the Nauarrois accused of treason: but, being beaten in fight, confessed that hee had belied him; and was therefore drawne and hanged. Whether our triall by battell doe determine, that the false accuser, if hee be vanquished, shall suffer the punishment which had beene due to the offender, if the accusation had beene proued; I cannot affirme. But we euery where find, That if he which is accused of treason, or, according to the customes of Normandie, of Murder, Rape, or burning of Places (offences punished by death) bee ouer-come; He shall suffer the paines appointed for those crimes. In combats for triall of right, it is not so: neither is the Appellant or Defendant bound to fight in person, but hee may trie it by his Champion, as did Paramor and Lowe, or offered to doe, in the raigne of Queene Elizabeth. And in this case, he that is beaten, or yeeldeth, looseth only his cause, not his lfe. Neither are the combats, vpon accusation, or triall of right, fought in open field, as are those of brauerie; but in Campe close, that is, with∣in railes. Now this triall by combat was so ordinarie in France, before the time of S t . Lewes, and Philip the faire his grand-child, as euery Lord of Fee, Ecclesiasticall or Temporall, had power to grant it within his owne Iurisdiction. And it seemeth, that the French Kings, and other Lords; made their profit hereby. For in the Si de Loraico Vadia Duelli dederint, Me∣morialls of the Chamber of Accompts, is found an Article to this effect: That if a combat were once accepted, and after, by consent of the Lord, were taken vp, each of the par∣ties should pay two shillings sixe pence; but if it were performed, then should the partie vanquished forfeit an hundred and twelue shillings. And vpon this custome grew the French Prouerbe, which they vse when any man hath had an hard or vn∣iust iudgement; saying, That hee was tried by the Law of Loray, or Berne; ou le battu paye l'amende, where he that is beaten giues the recompence. Of these frequent trials by battaile, that great learned man Yuo, Bishop of Chartres, did often complaine, and specially against the French Church-men: as appeares by vesiri nuper ad , qui cause The obaldi Au∣relianis intersu∣erunt, retule∣runt , quod quidam Rodul∣phi quendam militem Comitis ad Mon prouocaucrit, & vestroe iudicio emfirmauerit, &c. his letters to the Bishop of Orleans, to the Arch-deacon of Paris, to Rembert Arch-bishop of Sens, and to o∣thers; wherein he rebukes the iudgement of their Churches, that had ratified such challenges of combat. But this libertie, and kinde of triall, was retrencht by Saint Lewes, and Philip the ; so that no man should decree, or grant it, saue the King himselfe. It hath since beene granted, though more sparingly, by the French Kings; as to the Lord of Carouges against Iaques le Gris; and to Iulian Romero the Spaniard, a∣gainst Moro, his Countriman: wherein Sir Henrie Kneuet, Father of the Lord Kneuet now liuing, was Patron to Romero that had the victorie, and lastly to the Lord of Chast. Now in those Challenges, vpon accusation of Treason, Murder, or other of∣fence deseruing death, (and in those only) the rule held, That le defendeur estoit tenu de proposer ces deffenses per vne dementir; The Defendant was bound to pleade not guil∣tie, by giuing the accuser the Lie: otherwise it was concluded, that the Defendant did taisiblement confesser le crime; silently confesse the crime. But after such time as Francis the French King, vpon some dispute about breach of Faith, had sent the Lie vnto the Emperour Charles the , thereby to draw him to a personall combat: euery pettie Companion in France, in imitation of their Master, made the giuing of the Lie mor∣talitie it selfe; holding it a matter of no small glorie, to haue it said, That the mea∣nest Gentleman in France, would not put vp, what the great Emperour Charles the fift had paciently endured. From this beginning is deriued a challenge of combat, grounded vpon none of those occasions that were knowne to the Ancient. For, the Honour of Nations, the Triall of Right, the Wager vpon Champions, or the Obiection and Refutation of capitall offences, are none of them, nor all of them together, the argument of halfe so many Duells, as are founded vpon meere priuate Anger, yea or vpon matter see∣ming worthie of anger in the opinion of the Duellists. So that in these daies, where∣in euery man takes vnto himselfe a Kingly liberty, to offer, accept, and appoint per∣sonall combats; the giuing of the Lie, which ought to be the Negation only in ac∣cusations for life, is become the most fruitfull root of deadly quarrels. This is held a word so terrible, and a wrong so vnpardonable, as will admit no other recōpence, than the bloud of him that giues it. Thus the fashion, taken vp in haste by the French Gentlemen, after the patterne of their King, is grown to be a custome: whence we haue deriued a kinde of Arte and Philosophie of quarrel; with certaine grounds and rules, from whence the points of honour, and the dependencies thereof, are de∣duced. Yea there are (among many other no lesse ridiculous) some so mysticall cu∣riosities herein, as that it is held a farre greater dishonour, to receiue from an enemy a slight touch with a Cane, than a sound blow with a Sword: the one, hauing relati∣on to a slaue; the other to a souldier. I confesse that the difference is pretie: though, for my owne part, if I had had any such Italionated enemie in former times, I should willingly haue made with him such an exchange; and haue giuen him the point of honour to . But let vs examine indifferently the offence of this terrible word, the Lie; with their conditions who are commonly of all other the most tender in receiuing it. I say, that the most of these, who present death on the points of their swords to all that giue it them; vse nothing so much in their conuersation and course of life, as to speake and sweare falsly. Yea it is thereby, that they shift and shuffle in the World, and abuse it. For how few are there among them, which, hauing assumed & sworne to pay the monies and other things they borrow, doe not breake their word and promise, as often as they ingage it? Nay, how few are there among them, that are not Lyers by Record, by being sued in some Court or other of Instice, vpon breach of word, or bond? For he which hath promised, that he will pay monie by a day; or promised any thing else, wherein he faileth; hath directly lied to him, to whom the promise hath beene made. Nay, what is the profession of loue that men make now∣a-daies? What is the vowing of their seruice, and of all they haue, vsed in their or∣dinarie complements, and (in effect) to euery man whom they bid but good. mor∣row, or salute, other than a courteous and courtlike kinde of lying? It is (saith a wise French-men, deriding therein the Apish custome of his Countrie) vne & complot fait ensemble the se mocquer, mentir, & piper les vns les ; A kinde of mer∣chandize, and complot made among them, to mock, belie, and deride each other: and so farre now-a daies in fashion, and in vse; as he that vseth it not, is accounted either dull, or Cynicall. True it is notwithstanding (omitting the old distinctions) that there is great difference betweene these mannerly & complementall lies, with those which are somtime perswaded by necessity vpon breach of promise; and those which men vse out of cowardize and feare: the latter confessing themselues to be in greater awe of men, than of God; a vice of all other stiled the most villainous. But now for the Lie it selfe, as it is made the subject of all our deadly quarrells in effect: to it I say, That whoso giues another man the Lie, when it is manifest that he hath lied, doth him no wrong at all; neither ought it to be more hainously taken, than to tell him, that he hath broken any promise which he hath otherwise made. For he that pro∣miseth any thing, tells him, to whom he hath promised, that hee will performe it; and, in not performing it, he hath made himselfe a Lier. On the other side, He that giues any man the Lie, when himselfe knowes that he, to whom it is giuen, hath not lied; doth therein giue the Lie directly to himselfe. And what cause haue I, if I say that the Sunne shines when it doth shine, and that another fellow tells me I lie, for it's mid-night; to prosecute such an one to death, for making himselfe a foolish Ruffian, and a Lier in his owne knowledge? For he that giues the Lie in any other dispute, than in defence of his Loyaltie, or Life; giues it impertinently, and Ruffian∣like. I will not denie but it is an extreme rudenesse to taxe any man in publike with an vntruth: (if it be not pernicious, and to his prejudice against whom the vntruth is vttered) but all that is rude, ought not to bee ciuilized with death. That were, more to admire and imitate a French custome, and a wicked one, than to admire and to follow the counsaile of God. But you will say, That these discourses sauour of cowardize. It is true; if you call it cowardize, to feare God or Hell: whereas he that is truly wise, and truly valiant, knowes that there is nothing else to be feared. For a∣gainst an Enemies sword wee shall finde ten thousand seuen-penie-men (waged at that price in the warres) that feare it as little, and perchance lesse, than any profest Sword-man in the World. Diligentissima in tutela sui ; Fortitude is a diligent preseruer of it selfe. It is (saith Aristotle ) a mediocritie between doubting and daring. Sicut non Martyrem poena: sic nec fortem pugna; sed causa; As it is not the punishment that makes the Martyr: so it is not fighting that declares avaliant man; but fighting in a good cause. In which whosoeuer shall resoluedly end his life, resoluedly in respect of the cause, to wit, in defence of his Prince, Religion, or Countrie: as hee may justly bee numbred among the Martyrs of God; so may those that die with malicious hearts, in priuate combats, be called the Martyrs of the Deuill. Neither doe we in∣deede take our owne reuenge, or punish the injuries offered vs, by the death of the injurious. For the true conquest of reuenge is, to giue him, of whom we would bee reuenged, cause to repent him: and not to lay the repentance of another mans death on owne consciences; in vulnere ponere; And to drowne our soules in the wounds and blood of our enemies. Hereupon you will againe aske me, if I condemne in generous and noble spirits the defence of their honours, being prest with injuries? I say that I doe not; if the injuries bee violent. For the Law of Nature, which is a branch of the eternall Law: and the Lawes of all Christian Kings and States; doe fauour him that is assailed, in the slaughter of the Assailant. You will secondly aske me, Whether a Noble-man, or a Gentle-man, being challenged by Cartel by one of like qualitie, bee not bound in point of honour to satisfie the challenger in priuate combat? I answere that he is not: because (omitting the greatest, which is the point of Religion) the point of the Law is directly contrarie and to that, which they call the point of honour; the Law which hath dominion ouer it, which can judge it, which can destroy it; except you will stile those Actes honourable, where the Hang-man giues the Garland. For, seeing the Lawes of this Land haue appoin∣ted the Hang man to second the Conqueror; and the Lawes of God appointed the Deuill to second the conquered dying in malice: I say that he is both base, and a foole, that accepts of any Cartel so accompanied. To this perchance it will bee an∣swered, That the Kings of England, and other Christian Kings, haue seldome taken any such aduantage ouer men of qualitie; who vpon euen termes haue slaine their priuate enemies. It is true, that as in times of trouble and combustion they haue not often done it; so did our Noble-men and Gentle-men in former ages, in all impor∣tant , sue vnto the King, to approue themselues by battaile and publique combat. For as they dared not to braue the Law: so did they disdaine to submit themselues to the shamefull reuenge therof; the same reuenge (because it detesteth murder) that it hath declared against a common Cut-pursse or other Theeues. Nay let it be granted that a pardon be procured for such offenders; Yet is not the Man∣slaier freed by his pardon. For these two remedies hath the partie grieued notwith∣standing; that is, to require justice by Grand Assize, or by battaile, vpon his ap∣peale, which (saith S t . Thomas Smith ) is not denied; and he further saith (for I vse Sir Thomas Smith in his Com. wealth of Engl. his owne wordes) That if the Defendant (to wit, the Man slaier) be conuinced ei∣ther by Great Assize or by Battaile, vpon that appeale; the Man-slaier shall die, not∣with standing the Princes pardon. So fauourable (saith the same learned Gentleman) are our Princes, and the law of our Realme, to justice, and to the punishment of blood violently shed. It may further be demanded, how our Noble-men & Gentle∣men shall be repaired in honour, where an enemie, taking the start either in wordes or blowes, shall lay on them an infamie vnsufferable? I say that a Marshalls Court will easily giue satisfaction in both. And if wee hold it no disgrace to submit our selues for the recouerie of our Debts, Goods, and Lands, and for all things else, by which the liues of our selues, our wiues, and children, are sustained, to the Iudges of the Law; because it may bee fellonie, to take by violence euen that which is our owne: why should we not submit our selues to the Iudges of honour in cases of ho∣nour; because to recouer our reputation by strong hand, may be murder? But yet againe it may be obiected, That the losse of honour ought to be more fearefull vn∣to vs, than either the losse of our goods, of our lands, or of our liues; and I say so too. But what is this honour, I meane honour indeede, and that which ought to bee so deare vnto vs, other than a kinde of historie, or fame following actions of vertue, actions accompanied with difficultie or danger, and vnder-taken for the publike good? In these he that is imploied and trusted, if he faile in the performance, either through cowardize, or any other base affection; it is true that he looseth his honor. But the acting of a priuate combate, for a priuate respect, and most commonly a fri∣uolous one, is not an action of vertue; because it is contrarie to the law of God, and of all Christian Kings: neither is it difficult; because euen and equall in persons and armes: Neither for a publike good, but tending to the contrarie; because the losse or mutilation of an able man, is also a losse to the Common-weale. Now that a Marshall of England hath power to saue euery mans fame and reputa∣tion, as farre as reputation may sustaine iniurie by wordes, I thinke no man doub∣teth. For to repent vs of any ill words that we haue giuen, and to confesse that we haue done him wrong to whom we haue giuen them, is a sufficient satisfaction; and as it may fall out, more than sufficient. For hee that giues ill words in choller, and suddenly denies them, or repents himselfe of them vpon aduisement; hath the disaduantage in point of reputation. Concerning blowes, which are indeede not to be giuen but to those that are seruile, whether sufficient recompence will bee made for them, it shall appeare by a notable example of a most worthy Gentleman Moun∣sieur de Plessis, that was stricken in France not long since by a Baron of the same Na∣tion. The satisfaction which was giuen him by a iudgement of the Constable and Marshalls of France, was this. In the open Court, wherein the Constable gaue iudge∣ment, M. de Plessis was set in a chaire vnder the degrees where the Constable and Marshalls sate: the Baron, who had giuen him the blow, did kneele before him on both his knees, holding in his right hand a sword with the point towards himselfe; and in his left hand the like cudgell or bastinado, wherewith he had stricken M. de Plessis; both which weapons he deliuered into Plessis hands, submitting himselfe to such reuenge, as it should please him to take with either of those weapons; the Con∣stable and Marshalls hauing formerly it to the will of Plessis, to vse his owne dis∣cretion in the reuenge of his owne wrongs. Now whether the Baron had reason to please himselfe, as one beforehand in point of honour, who strucke M. de Plessis, like a Ruffian comming behinde him, and (hauing aduantage of companie, and his horses ready) shifted himselfe away on the suddaine, but being afterward taken, was taught to repent himselfe in this shamefull manner; Or whether Monsieur de Plessis (of whose valour no man doubted) had not farre juster cause to rest satisfied, since he might at his pleasure haue beaten or wounded his enemie, but forgaue him; let any wise man iudge. To this if it be said, That the Baron was constrained to make his submission; that his repentance was enforced and not voluntarie; and there∣fore no disgrace vnto him: I answere, that one may say as well, that it is no disgrace to a Theefe, when he is brought to the Gallows, to repent him of the Robberies by him committed, because his repentance also is constrained. And it is true, that en∣forced repentance is no disgrace in respect of the force, but in respect of the fact: which (but for our sinnes to God) makes all repentance shamefull; because all forced repentance is inflicted vpon vs for somewhat vnworthy of a Gentleman and of an honest man. Nay voluntarie repentance it selfe, as it hath relation to men, ariseth ei∣ther out of the feare of the ill that may befall vs, or out of the acknowledgement of our owne weakenesse. Certainely, as wise men, and valiant men, doe rather deride pettie iniuries or suddaine iniuries, that are not offered from malice forethought, then reuenge them: so men, apt to quarrell, doe commonly suspect their owne va∣lour; and rather desire, that thereby the world should beleeue them to be of great daring, than know any such resolution in themselues. For he that knowes himselfe indeede to be a valiant man, scornes to hunt after the opinion. Now the same power which the Constable and Marshalls of Erance haue, hath also a Marshall of England, or his Deputies; by whose iudgement, in all disputes of honour, euery mans reputation may be preserued; wee may therefore as well sub∣mit our selues to the Iudge of honour in all disputes of honour, as wee doe submit our selues in all controuersies of liuelihood and life, to the Iudges of the Law. And, out of doubt, the institution of this Court of Cheualrie in England, in France, and elsewhere; was no lesse charitable than politike. For the bloud of man, violently spilt, doth not bring forth honie-bees, as that of Bulls doth, which sting but the fin∣gers or the face: but it produceth that monstrous Beast, Reuenge, which hath stung to death, and eaten vp of seuerall Nations, so many noble personages; as there is nothing more lamentable, nor more threatning the wrath of God vpon supreme Gouernours, than the permission. His Majestie therefore (which Henrie the fourth of France also endeuoured) hath done a most Kingly and Christian-like deede in Scotland, which the most renowned of all his Predecessours could neuer doe: in beating downe, and extinguishing, that hereditarie prosecution of malice, called the deadly feud; a conquest, which shall giue him the honour of Prudence and Kingly power, for euer-more. And we haue cause to hope, that his royall care shall be no lesse happy in preuenting the like mischiefe, which threatens England, by the audacious, common, and braue, yet outragious va∣nitie of Duellists. Vnto this that I haue spoken of lying, and of man-slaughter, it must bee added, That each of these are of great Latitude, and worthy of reproofe and vengeance proportionably, more or lesse, in their seuerall degrees. There is much difference betweene Lies of necessitie vpon breach of promise, or complementall lies; and such pernicious lies, as proceed from feare and cowardize, or are vttered by false witnesses: the former sort, being excusable by weakenesse or leuitie; the latter, be∣ing altogether detestable. No lesse, if not more, difference there is, betweene killing of a man in open field, with euen weapons; and that killing, which the Scriptures call killing by guile, dolo or per insidias; though our Lawes doe not much distinguish them in punishment. For in the latter, God, forsaking his owne priuiledge, com∣mandeth, that the guilefull murderer bee drawne by force, from the protection of . his Altar. Neither is euery guilefull murder performed by the sword, nor by ouert violence: but there is a guilefull murder also, by poisoning; and by the pen, or by practice. For such distinction is found, betweene comming presumptuously vpon a man, to slay him with guile; and lying in wait for blood, priuily, for the innocent, without . 21. v. 14. a cause, vpon hope of spoile, after such manner as the net is spred before the eyes of the 1. v. 11. birds. Francis the first, Queene Marie of England, and the Kings Majestie now raig∣ning, haue giuen notable testimonie of their justice, vpon three Noble men, who committed guilefull murder. Of the first kinde, King Francis vpon the Lord of Ta∣lard: who being (saith the French Historian) de haute & ancienne lignee, & supporte de plusieurs grandes alliances; who being of high and ancient linage, and supported by di∣uers great alliances, of which the Cardinall of Bellay (in especiall fauor with the King) was one, was notwithstanding deliuered ouer into the hands of the Hang-man. Queene Marie, vpon a noble man of her owne Religion, and in many other respects very deare vnto her. His Maiestie, vpon a Baron of Scotland; whose house was no lesse ancient and faithfull, than himselfe valiant, and greatly friended both at home and abroad. Of killing guilefully by poison, and of punishment following such wic∣ked Artisans; euery Age hath had too many examples. Of guilefull killing by the pen (that I may not speake of any English Iudge) the Authour of the French Recher∣ches giues vs two notable instances: the one of des Eshars, who (saith Pasquire ) fit mourir Montaigu grand Maistre de France, pour contente de celuy dont il estoit . . . 12. & . . lorsidolastre; & que depuis il fut pendu & estrangle; Who caused Montaigu great Master of France to die, to content his minde (to wit, the Duke of Burgoyne) whom at that time Eshars worshipped as his Idol: but God permitted, that he himselfe was soone af∣ter hanged and strangled. The other was of the Great Francis the first, vpon his Chan∣cellor Poyet: who, to satisfie the Kings passion, practised the destruction of the Ad∣mirall Chabot, a man most nobly descended, and of great seruice. For as in other men, so in Kings, the passion of loue growes old, and weares out by time. So the Kings affection being changed towards the Admirall, hee charged him with some offences which hee had formerly committed. The Admirall, presuming vpon the great good seruice which hee had done the King in Piemont, and in the defence of Marseilles against the Emperour; gaue the King other language than became him; and desired nothing so much, as a publike triall. Hereupon the King (it being easie to prouoke an ill disposition) gaue commission to the Chancellor, as President, and other Iudges, vpon an information of the Kings Aduocate, to question the Admi∣ralls life. The Chancellor, an ambitious man, and of a large conscience, (which is rare in men towards the Law) hoping highly to content the King; wrought with some of the Iudges with so great cunning; with others, with so sharpe threats; and with the rest, with so faire promises; as, albeit nothing could be proued against the Admirall, worthy of the Kings displeasure; yet the Chancellor subscribed, and got others to subscribe, to the forfeiture of his Estate, Offices, and Libertie; though not able to preuaile against his life. But what was the Chancellors reward (the King hating falshood in so great a Magistrate) other than his owne degradation, arraigne∣ment, and condemnation? Belle lecon certes (saith Pasquire) à tout Iudge pour demourer tousiours ensoy, & ne laisser fluctuer sa conscience dedans les vagues d'vne imaginarie fa∣ueur, qui pour fin de ieu le submerge; Afaire lesson to all Iudges, to dwell in them∣selues, and not to suffer their consciences to float vpon the waues of imaginarie fauour, which in the end ouerwhelmes them. And as for the Admirall: though it might haue beene answered vnto his friends, if any bewailed his calamitie as vndeserued, That hee was tried, according to his owne desire, by the Lawes of his Countrie, and by the Iudges of Parliament; yet the Kings justice, surmounting all other his passions, gaue backe vnto him his Honour, his Offices, his Libertie, and his Estate. †. III. The last Acts of SCIPIO in Spaine. His returne to Rome where he is chosen Consul. THe last busines that troubled Scipio in Spaine, grew by the rebellion of the Peo∣ple, and mutinie of his Souldiers. He fell dangerously sicke, in such sort, that the rumor of his death ranne currant throughout Spaine. This encouraged Mandonius and Indibilis, pettie Kings, that had forsaken the Carthaginians, and followed Scipio awhile before, to take armes against the Romans. They were vainely perswaded, that after the Carthaginians were driuen out, they themselues should become the mightiest in all Spaine. But seeing now, that things were no way answerable to the greatnesse of their hopes; they thought it best, to take the present aduantage, and hammer out their owne fortunes. So they rashly fell vpon the Suessetani and Sedeta∣ni, Confederates of the Romans; and wasted their Countrie. Part of the Roman Ar∣mie lying at Sucro, in stead of making head against these Rebells, grew to be affected with the like distemper. They had not reaped such profit of their Roman conquests, as might satisfie their desires; or as they thought easie to bee gotten, if they might be their owne Caruers. Wherefore, when the death of Scipio was reported, they thought, that the time serued very well, to enrich themselues with spoile of the Countrie. Many outrages they committed: and, which was greatest of all, driuing away their Colonells, that should haue bridled their furie; they chose out of their owne number two base fellowes, Albius Calenus, and Atrius Vmber, to be their Com∣manders. These tooke vpon them all the Ensignes of Proconsuls, or Propretors; as if this their election had beene like to that, wherein Lucius Martius was chosen by the Souldiers, after the death of the two Scipio's. But whilest they were deuising, what exploits they might do, for the enriching of themselues, in a time of such com∣bustion, as was expected; there arriued more certaine newes, that Scipio was both aliue, and in good health. There came also new Colonells, sent vnto them from their Generall: who mildly rebuking their want of consideration, and seeming to bee glad that they had no further ouer-shot themselues; led them to Carthagena, there to receiue their pay. Before their comming, Scipio had resolued to doe exem∣plarie justice on the principall offenders; and to put the whole multitude of them in feare, of what they had deserued. Therefore hee caused Syllanus to make readie the Companies which lay before in the Towne, as it were to make an Expedition againe Mandonius, and Indibilis; He caused Albius and Atrius with some thirtie o∣ther of their Complices, to be secretly apprehended in their lodgings; He called the Mutiners to assembly; and hauing them vnarmed as they were, encircled round by Syllanus and his Companies, prepared for the purpose; hee bitterly inueighed a∣gainst them all, as Traitors. This done; Albius, and Atrius, with the other priso∣ners, were haled to the stake; where they were whipt, and beheaded, as was the Ro∣man custome toward such offenders. The rest of the Souldiers, to the number of eight thousand, were caused to take their oath of obedience anew; and receiued e∣uery man his pay when he was sworne. Mandonius and Indibilis continued in armes; notwithstanding that they had certaine word of Scipio his life and health. Well they could haue beene contented to be quiet: but by the vsed to the Roman Souldiers; they stood in feare, as being Spaniards, and greater offenders, of harder measure. Scipio went against them; and found them in a , that was scarce large enough to hold all their Armie. In the entrance thereof hee fought with them: and sending Laelius with all his horse to fetch a compasse about the Hills, and charge them in reare; he ouerthrew them. In∣dibilis and Mandonius had after this no hope remaining, to preserue themselues and their estates, otherwise than by making submission. Mandonius therefore came to Scipio: and humbly crauing pardon, both for himselfe, and for his brother Indibilis, obtained his request; yet so, that they were taught to acknowledge themselues lesse free Princes, then they formerly had beene. Afterward Scipio went toward Gades: and was met on the way by Masanissa; who secretly promised to doe him all seruice, if the People of Rome would send him to make Warre in Africk. Vnto Mago that lay in Gades, came directions from Car∣thage; that letting all care of Spaine alone, he should thence depart with his fleet into Italie; and there wage an Armie of Gaules, and Ligurians, to joyne with Hannibal. For this purpose, was monie sent vnto him from Carthage; and he himselfe laid hold vpon all that he could finde in the Towne of Gades; without sparing either priuate men, the common treasurie, or the Temples. In his voyage thence, hee landed at Carthagena; hoping to haue taken it by surprise. But hee failed in the attempt; and was so beaten to his ships, that he returned back to repose himselfe a while at Gades. The Gaditanes, offended with the robberies and spoile that hee had made at his ta∣king leaue of them, would not suffer him to enter againe into their Citie. By this hee foresaw, that it would not bee long ere they became Roman. Wherefore sen∣ding Messengers into the Towne, to complaine of this vncourteous dealing, hee al∣lured their Magistrates forth vnto him; whom, notwithstanding all the excuse that they could make, he whipt, and crucified. This done, he followed his former inten∣ded voyage; bidding Spaine farewell for euer. The and Citie of Gades, was yeelded to the Romans, presently after the de∣parture of Mago. Then did Scipio deliuer vp the Prouince, to those that were sent from Rome to succeede him therein: and himselfe with ten ships returned home. At his comming to Rome he made suite for the honour of a triumph. But it was denied him: for that it had as yet beene granted vnto no Proconsul; excepting to such, as receiued that dignitie after a Consulship, as it were by prorogation. But to make a∣mends for this repulse: the election of new Consuls being then in hand, by generall voice of the Citie P. Cornelius Scipio was chosen Consul; and P. Licinius Crassus joy∣ned with him. This Crassus, being high Priest, or Bishop of the Romans; might not, by the custome of those times, goe farre from the Citie; as being to intend the matters of their superstition: though Caesar, and others, who in ages following held the same Office; were staied by no such religious impediment, from being farre, and long absent. Hereby it came to passe, that Scipio desiring to haue the Warre transferred into Africk, was in no danger to loose that honourable charge, by any mischance of lot, in the diuision of Prouinces; for that his Colleague was not ca∣pable of emploiment so farre off. §. XVIII. SCIPIO obtaines leaue to make warre in Africk. His preparations. Of MA∣SANISSA who ioyned with SCIPIO. The victories against ASDRVBAL and SYPHAX. PVB. CORNELIVS SCIPIO, and P. LICINIVS CRASSVS, entring into their Consulship, held a meeting of the Senate in the Capitol: wherein it was decreed, that Scipio should bee allowed, to bestow part of the money which he had brought out of Spaine into the treasurie; vpon the setting forth of solemne plaies, that he had vowed to make, whilest he was busied in his Spanish warres. This helped well to the memo∣rie of his victories already gotten; and to giue hope vnto the People of greater vi∣ctories in the warre, which he intended to make in Africk. To the same purpose, did the Spanish embassages auaile much in the Senate, especially that of the Saguntines: who magnified his actions, highly and deseruedly; saying, That they were the most happie of all their Countrimen, since they being present, had seene him chosen Cousul, and should carry home such joyfull newes. The Saguntine Embassadours were louingly entertained by the Senate; as their faith to Rome, though costly it were both to them, and to the Romanes, had well deserued. Neuerthelesse, when Sci∣pio proposed, that Africk might be decreed vnto him for his Prouince: there wan∣ted not many, euen of the principall men, that vehemently gainesaid him. Of these was Q. Fabius Maximus the chiefe: who seemes to haue been troubled with that dis∣ease; which too often causeth men renowned for long approued vertue, to looke asquint vpon the actions of those, that follow them in the same kinde. Hee alleaged many reasons against the purpose of the Consul: whereof the chiefe were, That the treasurie was vnable to sustaine the charges of a warre in Africk; and that it was ex∣tremely perillous to hazard so great forces, where they could not at pleasure bee re∣called vnto the defence of Rome it selfe, if need required. Hereunto he added many words concerning the danger wherein Italie stood, not only of Hannibal, but of Ma∣go his brother, that was arming the Ligurians: as also concerning the honour of the Consul; which would (he said) be greater in setting Italie free from enemies, than it could be in doing any harme to Africk. Neither did he forget, both to eleuate the Spanish warres, as of lesse moment than the intended voiage against Carthage; nor withall to lay great blame vpon Scipio, for hauing suffered Asdrubal to passe into Ita∣lie: shewing, that it was greatly to be , lest the like might happen againe; and that a new Armie, notwithstanding the good successe of Scipio (if it hapned to bee good) might be sent from Carthage, to the vtter endangering of Rome, whilst the Ro∣man forces were employed abroad. But the maine point which he vrged, was, That neither the Senate had ordained, nor the People commanded, Africk to be that yere a Prouince: which the Consul neuerthelesse propounded in such wise, as if it were a matter already concluded, and no longer to be argued. Scipio on the other side, insi∣sted vpon this one point; That it was better to make an offensiue, than a defensiue warre: especially against such as the Carthaginians; who being ill prouided of able men at home, did furnish themselues by helpe of money, with leuies made abroad. As for the care of Italie, he doubted not, but P. Licinius his Colleague would bee as well able to discharge it now, as others had done in times of greater danger. So pro∣mising to draw Hannibal into Africk, for defence of his owne home: and taxing as ci∣uilly as he could, the enuy of Fabius, which withstood such a gallant enterprise; he proposed the matter againe vnto the Senate. Much there was about the manner of his proceeding: for asmuch as it was noy sed abroad, that if he could not bring the Senate to his minde, he would carry it by the People. This offended ma∣ny of the Ancients: who resented in this honourable man a little spice of that arro∣gancie, which in following ages, grew to be much hotter in those that had comman∣ded long abroad. But in conclusion, Scipio referred himselfe wholly vnto the Senates good will and pleasure; whereby hee obtained thus much, That the Isle of Sicil might be appointed vnto him for his Prouince; with leaue to passe ouer into Africk, if he found it expedient. Want of money, and no great liking to his voiage, made the Roman Senate haue little care to furnish out Scipio to the warre, by him intended vpon Africke. Here∣withall it fell out, that , comming on the suddaine from the Baleares to Genua, and winning the Towne, bred a feare of no lesse terrible inuasion vpon Italie, than that which Asdrubal had lately made. He could not indeed raise any great Armie of the Ligurians; for that he found them distracted with ciuill warres. Therefore he was to make choice of his partie; and to helpe those whom hee thought fit∣test for his turne, against the others. This troublesome businesse, though it occupied more of his time than he could willingly haue spared; yet it got him reputation by his victories; and made the vnsteadie Gaules readie to enter into his pay. Hereupon the dispersed Legions of the Romans, that vnder Proconsuls, and Pretors, lay readie to be employed where need should require; were directed vnto the borders of Lom∣bardie and Liguria, there to make head against Mago. But all his menaces passed a∣way in vapour. For a fleet, either comming to his aide from Carthage, or by him sent thither (the report is vncertaine) loaden with the bootie that he had taken; fell in∣to the hands of the Roman Pretor, that gouerned in Sardinia. This did much dis∣able him: and though after a while, there came letters from Carthage, together with store of money, heartning him in his proceedings: yet some impediments which he found, and that fatall voiage of Scipio into Africke, disturbed all; and made him be re∣called home. Against Hannibal, was nothing done this yeere. Neither was any thing done by him, of which the Roman Historians haue beene pleased to take notice. Onely it is said, that he spent the Summer by the Temple of Iuno Lacinia, where hee raised an Altar, with a huge Title of all that he had performed, grauen in Punike, and Greeke letters. Such accompt of winnings past, is commonly in Gamesters that are at the height of their fortune, a cause of remission, and carelesnesse; in those that are vpon the losing hand, a cause both of the same for the present, and shortly after of deje∣ction, when they finde a notable change. A great pestilence, infesting both the Car∣thaginian and the Roman Campe, is said to haue beene the occasion of this yeeres idlenesse, which fell not out much amisse for the Citie of Rome, that was maruai∣lously empouerished by this warre; and had alreadie tryed the vtmost way to de∣fray the charges, which grew insupportable. To relieue the present necessitie, it was well thought vpon, that a great part of Campania (not many yeeres since confisca∣ted) should bee sold, or let out: in which bargaine, that the Citie might receiue no losse; the tenth part of the fine was ordained as a reward, vnto the detectors of lands concealed. Of this, or other money, none was giuen to Scipio. Neither was hee allowed to make presse of Souldiers for his African voiage; neither did hee ouer-much labour to obtaine it. That which the Senate refused, the People did for him: or rather they did it for themselues; that were therein wiser than the Senate. It is vsually found in Councells of estate, that the busie, or obstinate heads of a few, doe car∣rie all the rest. And many times men make a surrender of their owne judgements, to the wisedome that hath gotten it selfe a name, by giuing happie direction in troubles forepast. Therefore, hee that reposeth himselfe vpon the aduice of ma∣ny, shall often finde himselfe deceiued: the counsaile of those many being wholly directed by the empire of a few, that ouer-sway the rest. Q. Fabius was accoun∣ted the Oracle of his time: for his warie nature sorted well with the businesse, that fell out in the chiefe of his employment. Vnto him therefore Q. Fuluius ad∣hered, with other of the Senators, that were growne olde in following one course; from which they could not shift, as the change of times required. But the People (who though they could not well aduise, and deliberate, yet could well apprehend) embraced the needfull resolution of Scipio: in such sort, that besides his Roman forces, he had from diuers parts of Italie about seuen thousand Voluntaries. Hee had also prouision from the seuerall Townes; Corne, Iron, Canuas for sailes, Axes, Beede-hookes, Hand-mills, and the like implements, Firre for building of ships, many thousands of Targets, Helmets, and Speares of all kindes: euery place furnishing him with that commoditie, which it best could affoord. Vnto this wil∣lingnesse of the People, the diligence of Scipio was correspondent. In the compasse of fiue and fortie daies, hee had both feld his Timber, built, and lanched twentie Trireme, and ten Quinquereme Gallies; wherewith hee transported his Armie into Sicil. In Sicil he found, besides other forces, two Legions, that had serued at Cannae: which were olde Souldiers, and (as hee himselfe well knew) not guiltie of the ouer∣throw; for which they had long vnder-gone a heauie censure. They had serued vnder Marcellus and Laeuinus, at the taking of many Cities, and strong peeces: in which regard, they were like to be of good vse to him in Africk, where would bee store of such emploiment. For increasing the number of his horse, hee pressed three hundred Sicilians, all wealthie young men, and such as loued well their . These he afterwards discharged from the Warre, highly to their contentment: but with condition, that they should deliuer their Horse and Armes, to as many Ro∣man Gentlemen, which he brought ouer with him for the purpose. Whilest hee was prouiding, to haue things in a readinesse for , the banished Locrians that followed the Roman side, made him acquainted with an intelligence, whereby they hoped to recouer their Citie. Some handicrafts men, that wrought for the Carthaginians in one of the Ciradells of Locri (for there were two in the Towne) being taken prisoners by the Romans, promised to betray the place, if they might be ransomed, and rewarded. Scipio being aduertised of this, gaue order to haue the attempt made by night: which happily succeeded; and that Citadell was surpri∣sed. The other Citadell was strongly defended by the Carthaginian Garrison, which sent to Hannibal for aide. The Romans in like sort, fearing lest their owne paucitie should make them too weake for Hannibal, craued helpe of the Consul Scipio. The Townesmen were doubtfully affected: but the best, and most of them inclining to the Romans, kept Hannibal out; whom the comming of Scipio caused thence to de∣part; and caused likewise the Carthaginian Garrison to abandon the other Citadell. Many outrages were committed by the Roman Souldiers, that were left by Scipio in custodie of the Towne. Wherefore a vehement complaint was made by the Lo∣crians vnto the Roman Senate; not onely against those of the Garrison: but much more against Pleminius the Captaine, who gaue bad example, and was worse than all the rest. Besides many Murders, Robberies, Rapes, and other Villanies: the Temple of Proserpina, that had a great fame of sanctitie, was spoiled by these bar∣barous . The Locrians therefore aduised the Senate to make present a∣mends to the Goddesse for this sacriledge: saying, that the like had neuer been com∣mitted, without notorious vengeance by her taken vpon the Authors. The Senate gaue good eare to this complaint, comforted the Locrians, and redressed the injuries done vnto them, sent for Pleminius, with other principall the offenders, whom they into prison, & vsed according to their deserts: as also they restored vnto Proser∣pina her money twice told. But old Q. Fabius was not herewithall contented. He laid much of the blame vpon Scipio, that had placed such a man in Locri; and had not carefully harkened to the complaints made against him, but suffered him to runne on in these his wicked courses. By the sharp inuectiue that Fabius made, others tooke courage to speak what they pleased, as well against the demeanor of Scipio, as against the dissolutenesse of his Armie; which lay, as they said, idle in Sicil, neither mindfull of any seruice toward, nor fit for it if neede should require. Finally, things were so farre vrged, that ten Legates were sent ouer into Sicil, together with the Pretor ap∣pointed for that Iland; two of the Tribunes, and one of the Aediles; who should examine these matters; and either cause the Generall to returne into Italie, or con∣tinue him in his charge, as they thought fit. The end of all was: they found him so well prepared against Carthage, as that they hastned him on his journie, and gaue him high commendations at their returne. Scipio had alreadie emploied Laelius in Africk; rather to make discouerie, than to worke any other great effect of warre. He tooke a great bootie: and struck no little terrour into the Carthaginians; who saw their affaires to bee vpon termes of change. But the greatest fruit of his journie was, That speaking with Masanissa, he will in∣formed himselfe of the state of Affrick; and knew what was to bee expected of those two Kings, that had promised to joyne with the Romans at their landing. Concerning Masanissa his reuolt from the Carthaginians, and his compact made vnder-hand with the Romans: Liuie doth professe, That there was no such euident . l. 28. cause thereofat the present; but that the long continuance of his faith and constan∣cie, in following times, must helpe to proue, that this his change was not without some good cause. But Appianus (an Historian farre inferiour to Liuie, both in Worth and Time) giues one reason so probable of this, and many accidents thereto belong∣ing, as that it carries with it a great appearance of necessary trueth. Only the doubt is, How it could any way come to ; that the knowledge of such a matter should haue escaped the diligence of Liuie, if it had beene true: vnlesse we should beleeue, that he wisully forbare to rehearse a Tragedie; the sorrow whereof would cause men to thinke a misse of Scipio. Howsoeuer it was, thus Appian. Alex∣an. de Bell. . Appian tells it: and many circumstances of things done confirme it. Asdrubal, the sonne of Gisco, had a faire daughter, whom both King Syphax and Masanissa loued. Masanissa, being brought vp at Carthage, and being withall a goodly gentleman of person, and excellent in qua∣lities, was chosen by Asdrubal to be his sonne-in-law When the virgin was betrothed vnto him, he went into Spaine, and there did great seruice. But afterwards, the Cartha∣ginian Senate thought the mariage of Asdrubals daughter to be a matter of State: and bestowed her vpon Syphax; without standing to acquaint her father or Masanissa therewithall. This they did, for that Syphax was the more mightie Prince; and for that the indignitie of the repulse, had made him become their enemie. Hereof Masa∣nissa was aduertised: and forthwith entred into intelligence with Scipio, secretly as he thought; yet not so secretly, but that some notice was taken of it: which would haue cost him his life, had he not with great circumspection conueighed himselfe home in∣to his fathers Kingdome. Thus farre forth we may beleeue Appianus: all the narra∣tion well cohering with things past, and following. Only it seemes, that howsoeuer the daughter of Asdrubal, was promised by the Carthaginians vnto Syphax: yet since this their courtesie proceeded from feare, He thought it wisdome to conti∣nue and increase the same their feare, by making faire promises to the Romans; vntill ASDRVBAL had sent for his daughter from Carthage, and the marriage was consum∣mated. In other matters concerning the warre it selfe, wherein Appian differs much Liu. lib. 29. from Liuie, and from Polybius, whom (as appeares by the broken pieces of his works remaining) Liuie did follow; it will be no offence, to take little heed vnto his reports. Masanissa was the sonne of Gala, a King of the Numidians: whose father dying, the Crown descended by order of the Country, vnto Desalces the brother, not vnto Ma∣sanissa the sonne. But this Vncle of Masanissa shortly died: and his elder sonne, who tooke possession of the Kingdome, was vanquished, and slaine in battaile by a Rebel, that made himselfe Protector ouer the yonger which was a child. The Traitor for∣tified himselfe against Masanissa, whose returne hee feared; by Alliances with the Carthaginians and Syphax. But all would not serue: He, and his Pupill, were dispos∣sessed of their Estates by Masanissa; that was a skilfull Warriour, and well beloued for the memorie of his father Gala. The Carthaginians in reason should haue beene glad, that Masanissa, who had done them notable seruice, was thus confirmed in his Estate: had they not beene guiltie of the injurie by them done vnto him; whilst his Vncle or Cousin raigned, and hee seemed vnlikely to stand them in any stead. But Syphax, by their procurement, and perhaps by his owne malice towards his Corriual, warred vpon him; and ouer. charging him with numbers, draue him out of his Kingdome. Neuerthelesse Masanissa still retayned the hearts of his people: and thereby remained strong enough, to infest both Syphax and the Carthaginians; though he was often put in distresse, by great forces that were sent against him. He therefore keeping much about the lesser Syrtis, betweene the borders of the Cartha∣ginians and the Nation of the Garamants, expected the comming of the Romans: yet so, as he made long roades ouer all the Countrie, euen as as to Hippo; and when Laelius arriucd thereabouts, exhorted and encouraged him to hasten on Scipio to the inuasion of Africk. But Syphax, in whose great aide and succour was reposed more hope of good suc∣cesse, than could be expected from the good will of poore Masanissa; sent an Em∣bassage into Sicil about the same time, which was little pleasing vnto Scipio. He ex∣cused himselfe of his promise lately made: and signified his alliance with the Car∣thaginians; adding, That hee could not choose but fight for the defence of Africke, wherein he was borne and raigned; and for defence of his beloued wiues Countrie, if it were inuaded. Neuerthelesse hee promised to remaine a Neuter; so long as the Romans and Carthaginians held warre abroad, farre enough from Africk, as hitherto they had done. This hastened Scipio in his Expedition, much more than any perswasion could haue done. For the promised assistance of Syphax had not a little aduanced his ; in procuring both the assent of the Senate, and the forwardnesse of many Aduenturers. Lest therefore the fayling of this hope, should worke too great a change in common opinion; He thought it the best way to pre∣uent all discourse, and set the warre vndertaken immediatly on foot. The Embas∣sadours he dismissed in all haste, with letters to their King: wherein hee willed him to consider, that what hee had promised hee had also sworne; and therefore should doe well to make it good. Hauing sent them away, Hee called his Souldiers toge∣ther, and bade them make ready for the voyage; which he intended no longer to de∣ferre. For, said he, Masanissa hath beene with Laelius: and Syphax hath newly sent to me; greatly wondring vpon what I should thus ; and saying, that they will prouide for themselues, if I faile their expectation by tarrying any longer. This fine tale preuented all further inquisition, that might else haue beene made concerning the message of these Embassadours; whose followers had beene seene walking vp and downe . And lest any thing should afterwards breake out, that might hinder the businesse, Scipio immediatly sent about his fleet vnto Lilybaeum: and re∣questing by letters M. Pomponius, that was Pretor in Sicil, to meete him there; hasted thither with his Armie. At he agreed with the Pretor, about the diuision of the Legions betweene them; which to leaue behinde for defence of the Iland; and which to carrie with him into Africk. What numbers hee transported, it is not certaine: some Historians reckoning only ten thousand foot, and two and twentie hundred horse; others increasing them to fiue and thirtie thousand, horse and foot. Concerning his directions for embarking, and other matters belonging to their course, I holde it needlesse to set them downe: since they were points of ordinarie care, and which it is like that neither he, when he tooke his voyage into Spaine, nor o∣thers vpon like occasions, haue omitted; they being also word word set downe by an Historian, who borrowed them from Liuie, and fitted them to a Prince of later age. This Roman Armie landed in Africk, neare vnto a Fore-land then called the faire Promontorie: which how farre it was from Carthage, or toward what point of the Compasse, I cannot precisely affirme; because it is vncertaine, whether it were that Cape or Head-land which bore the name of Mercurie, and lay to the Noth-east of Carthage; or whether that of Apollo, which lay Northerly from , and by Weft. The comming of Masanissa vnto Scipio at his first arriuall, helpes to confirme the opinion of Xylander: who thinkes the faire Promontorie to haue beene the same, that was also called Mercuries Cape, since with little difficultie Masanissa might come thither from the lesser Syrtis, whereabout was his common abiding. But forasmuch as without any memorable impediment, soone after his arriuall, Scipio encamped bc∣fore Vtica, that stood Westward from Carthage beyond the Riuer Bagradas: it may rather seeme, that hee landed within the Promontorie of Apollo; whence the way to Vtica was not long. This is also strongly proued; for that out of Carthage were sent, the next day, fiue hundred horse to trouble him in his disembarking. Neither was it so hard for Masanissa, that roued about the Countrie with a troupe of horse, to finde out the Romans, though they landed farre from the place to the which hee vsually resorted, like as before he had met with Laelius at Hippo that was farther off: as it would haue beene for Scipio, with his Armie and Carriages, to ouer-come the trouble of a long journie, and fetch a great compasse to Vtica, by Land; when he might haue disembarqued nearer vnto it. Neuerthelesse it may passe as a conjecture, That Scipio came first of all to , a plentifull Region about the lesser Syrtis; since he gaue charge to the of his ships, at the setting forth from Lilybaeum, to shape their course for that coast. The Countrie thereabout was very rich, and fit for sustenance of an : neither were the Inhabitants warlike, or well prouided to make resistance. Thus much perhaps Masanissa had signified vnto Laelius, when he spake with him at Hippo: thinking that the Romans, how soeuer they made braue promises, would not come strong enough to fight at head. But when hee saw their and Armie to be such, as not only serued to inuade the Lands of Carthage, but threatned a conquest of the Citie, and whole Estate: then might hee better aduise them to set saile for Vtica, and make warre vpon the Enemies at their owne doores. The had at that time neither any Captaine of great worth at home, nor better than of raw Souldiers; that were leuied, or to be leuied in haste. the sonne of Gisco, the same that had lately beene chased out of Spaine by Scipio, was their best man of warre. And good enough perhaps he was thought by and his fellowes, of whose faction he was: or ought were wanting in him, yet his Riches and Nobilitie, together with the affinity of King Syphax, made him passeable. He was at that present with the King his sonne-in-law, working him (no doubt) against the Romans: when letters were brought from Carthage, both to Sy∣phax and to him, informing them of the Inuasion: entreating the one of them to assistance; and commandiug the other to make his repaire vnto the Citie, where he was Generall. But ere these could be readie, Scipio had beaten the troupe of Carthaginian horse, that were sent out of the Citie to disturbe his landing; and Hanno a yong Gentleman, that was their Leader. He had also taken and sac∣ked a Towne of the Carthaginians: wherein, besides other bootie, hee tooke eight thousand prisoners; all which he conueighed aboord his Hulks or ships of burden, and sent them backe loaden into Sicil. Hee tooke likewise a Towne called Salera; which he held and fortified. In Salera lay another Hanno, with foure thousand horse: whose seruice being fitter for the field, than for defence of walled pla∣ces; made Scipio to perceiue the vnskilfulnesse of their Leader, that had thus housed them. Wherefore he sent Masanissa before him: who rode vp to the gates; and, by making a , trained out the improuident Hanno so farre, that hee drew him vnto a place, where the Romans lay in wait for him. The victorie was easily gotten; and Hanno either taken, or slaine. With those that fled, the Romans entred pell-mell into the Towne; which presently they made their owne. Thence went Scipio to Vtica, a Citie of great importance, . 5. cap. 2. §. 3. of which mention hath beene formerly made; and sate downe before it. Fortie dayes hee spent about it: assailing it both by Land and Sea, and vsing all his engines of batterie whereof he had plentie; yet was in no likelihood of preuailing. And now the Summer was quite spent: so that it was time for him to choose a place, and fortifie his Winter-campe; which must bee well sto∣red against the yeere following. Whilest thus necessitie vrged him to leaue Vtica: and shame of taking the repulse in his first great enterprise, rather than any hope of better successe, caused him to stay there: Asdrubal and Syphax gaue him the honour of a faire pretence to leaue the siege. Asdrubal had made a Leuie of thou∣sand , and three thousand horse; yet aduentured not with this ill- Ar∣mie to draw neere vnto the Romans, before the comming of Syphax. Syphax brought with him vnto Carthage thousand foot, and tenne thousand horse: which joy∣ning vnto the forces of Asdrubal, they marched brauely toward Scipio; who there∣by tooke occasion to dislodge. He chose for his Winter-campe the bankes of an In∣let, that had good harbour for his Nauie. His foot-men he lodged on a Promonto∣rie, joyning to the Continent by an arme of Land: his horse-men he bestowed vpon lower ground, on the other shore: in the bottome of the he mored his ships; and there hee quartered the , with all that belonged vnto the fleet. The whole Campe he strongly fortified; and so the season of the yeere, when it should serue him againe to fight. cattaile and other bootie Masanissa had brought in great store; by driuing the Countrie, before the comming of Asdrubal and Syphax. Corne also he had gotten some: and great store was sent him from Si∣cil and Sardinia. Likewise apparrell for his Souldiers, was sent from home, or from Sardinia: though enough to serue turne; for that it was a matter of more cost. The ships that brought these things, he freighted homewards with such part of his bootie, as hee could best spare; especially with Captiues to be sold for slaues. As∣drubal and Syphax encamped neere vnto : not so themselues, did the Romans; either for that they wanted the seuere institution, which the Ro∣mans vsed in discipline of Warre; or for that they presumed vpon their multitude, against which they found in Scipio no disposition to issue foorth of his strength, and fight So the Winter passed without action. When Spring drew neere; Scipio though it good to assay his old friend the Nu∣midian , if perhaps he might bee wonne by perswasions to forsake the Carthagi∣nians. It was considered, that those Barbarians were naturally ; and par∣ticularly, that Syphax had giuen proofe of before this of his much . It might therefore be hoped, That hauing wearied himselfe, by lodging a whole Winter in the Campe: and being peraduenture no lesse wearie with satietie of his wife, who had caused him to enter into this warre: Hee might bee mooued with a little entrea∣tie to with-draw himselfe home into his Kingdome, and rest a Neuter. But it is not vnlikely, that such a friend as this King, had beene highly entertained and honored in the Citie of Carthage, which was neere at hand, as often as during this Winter it had pleased him, or as he had beene inuited, to make a step thither and repose him∣selfe a while: his wife Queene Sophonisba lying also there at the same time, to che∣rish him in his resolution. Howsoeuer it were, did only make an of peace: propounding it as reasonable, That Hannibal should bee recalled out of Italie by the Carthaginians: and that the Romans in like sort should quietly depart out of Africk; and so make an end of the Warre, wherewith now both Africk and Europe were disquieted. Vnto this would not Scipio at the first giue eare: yet being earnestly by many messages from Syphax, and desiring to continue the inter-course of Embassadours: He beganne to make shew, as if he would consider of the motion. He was giuen to vnderstand by those whom he had sent vnto the King, That the E∣nemies had their Campes without any great defence of earth, full of woodden Cab∣bins, and couered with boughes: and that the Numidians, such of them as came first with Syphax, vsed couerings of Mats and Reedes; others, that came later, had thatched their lodgings with drie boughes and leaues: vnder which they lay care∣lesly without their Trenches. Vpon this aduertisement he bethought himselfe, That it would not be hard for him to set their camps on fire; and thereby giue them a notable ouerthrow. Without helpe of some such stratageme, Hee foresaw that it would be a worke of great difficultie for him, to proceede in his warres when time should serue. It was a plaine open Countrie wherein hee lay: and the Enemies had great aduantage of him in number, especially in horse; which, vpon such ground, could not be resisted by the Roman Legions. The longer therefore that he thought vpon the matter; the more needfull he found it for himselfe, to make some sudden attempt vpon their Campe. To this end he sent many Embassadours, vnder pre∣tence of treating about the Peace; but indeede of purpose to discouer all that might concerne the intended surprise. With these Embassadous he sent, as Attendants, many old Souldiers disguised like slaues; that wandring (as it were) idlely vp and downe the Campe, might obserue the waies and entrances, with whatsoeuer else was needfull. When hee had learned as much as hee desired: vpon the sudden hee sent word to Syphax, that it was vaine to hold any longer Treatie, forasmuch as he could not get the consent of his Councell of warre; without whose approbation, all that himselfe could doe was no more, than the good will of one man. This he did, to the end that, without any breach of faith, hee might put his designe in execution. The Truce being thus cut off: Asdrubal and Syphax were very pensiue; as hauing late∣ly perswaded themselues, that their trouble was almost at an end. But since it could be no better, they beganne to deuise, by what arte they might draw Scipio out of his campe; and prouoke him to battaile in those Plaines. This if they could doe; they hoped to make his Councell of warre repent as greatly the refusall of peace, as did M. Atilius after the like presumption. But if he should refuse to come foorth of his Trenches: what else remained than to besiege him? which they themselues were well able to doe by Land; and the Carthaginian fleet should doe by Sea, that was making readie for the purpose. By such discourses these two comforted themselues; in conceipt the losse of their hopes past, with that of victorie to come. But herein they were extremely and worthily disappointed: for that, consulting about the future, they prouided not against present danger; but continued in the same , which was growne vpon them by the long discourse of peace. As for , Hee was not idle: but made preparation out of hand, as it were to doe somewhat against Vtica. Two thousand Souldiers he had made readie, and appoin∣ted to take the same peece of ground, whereon hee lay against Vtica before. This he did, partly to keepe secret that which he had in hand, lest being suspected by his owne Souldiers, the Enemie might happen to haue notice of it; partly to hinder those of from setting vpon the few, that hee purposed to leaue behinde him in his campe. He caused his men that night to suppe well and betimes; that they might be readie for the journie. After supper, he appointed such Companies as he thought fit, vnto the defence of his Campe; all the rest of his Armie he led forth, about nine of the clocke at night. The Carthaginians lay from him seuen miles and an halfe: whom he purposed to vndertake with the one halfe of his armie; the other halfe he committed vnto and , whom hee sent before him to set vp∣on the Campe of Syphax, that was farther off. It was his meaning, that the campe of Syphax should be on a light fire, ere he would meddle with the Carthaginians. For the fire might seeme to haue taken hold by casualtie vpon the Numidians, that lay farther off: whereas if it first appeared in the Campe of Asdrubal, it would bee suspe∣cted as the doing of enemies; and Syphax warning to looke vnto himselfe. To this end therefore Scipio marched faire and softly; that Laelius and Masanissa, who had a longer , and were to fetch a compasse about for feare of being discoue∣red, might haue time to get before him, and doe their feat. It was about two or three of the clock in the morning, when the campe of Syphax beganne to blaze: which not only the Numidians, but their King himselfe, imputed vnto casualtie; as thinking themselues safe enough from Enemies, for that the Carthaginians lay interposed be∣tweene them and the danger. Wherefore as if there were no more to doe, some, starting asleepe; and others, that had sitten vp late at drinking; ranne out of their Cabbins to quench the fire. But such was the tumult, that they neither could rightly vnderstand in what case they were; nor giue remedie to the mischance, as it was supposed. Many were smothered, and burnt in the flame, which grew greater and greater: many, leaping into the Trenches for feare of the sudden mischiefe, were trampled to death by the multitude that followed them. They that escaped the fire, fell vpon the Enemies sword, which was readie to receiue them. Especially Masanissa, that knew the Countrie, did great execution vpon them; hauing laid all the wayes, by which he foresaw that they would seeke to escape. The Carthagi∣nians perceiuing this fire, thought none other than that it was a pittifull mischance: so that some ranne out to helpe the poore Numidians; carrying only what would serue to quench the fire. Others ranne vp to the Rampart: where, fearelesse of any danger towards themselues, they stood beholding the greatnesse of the flame, and lamenting the misfortune. This fell out right as Scipio would haue it. Hee there∣fore lost no time: but setting vpon those that were running towards the Numidians, he killed some, and pursued the rest back into their campe; which in a little while he made to burne as bright, as did that of Syphax. Asdrubal seeing this, and knowing that the Romans were there, did not stand to make resistance, but shifted onely for himselfe, and escaped with a few of his horse about him. If Hannibal, or any of the Barchine faction, had beene taken in such a manner: it is more than probable, that old Hanno would haue judged him worthy to be crucified. It would then haue been said, that with lesse than one halfe of thirtie thousand men, hee might at least haue giuen some bad recompence, to them that were taking paines in kindling these fires, had he not beene only carefull how to saue his owne fearefull head. Neuerthelesse Polybius acknowledgeth, and it is most likely to haue beene true, That if Asdrubal, Excerpt. è . or any of those about him, would haue striuen to shew valour, when the campe was lib. 14. once on fire: He should not thereby haue done any manner of good, because of the tumult and consternation. I shall not neede to tell what a fearefull thing it was, to heare the cries of so many thousands that perished by fire and sword, or to behold the cruell flame that consumed them; which (as Polybius affirms) none that hath be∣ing is able to describe. It is enough to say, That of those many thousands very few did escape; which accompanied Asdrubal and Syphax in their seuerall waies of flight. Besides these also there were some scatterers, especially of the Numidians, that saued themselues in the darke: but they were not many; as after shall appeare. Surely it must needes haue beene very hard to tell, how many were burnt or otherwise made away; and what numbers escaped in the darke of night. Wherefore Liuie, who in the rest of this Relation, as elsewhere, doth follow Polybius; may seeme to haue followed some lesse Author, and him no good Arithmetician, in ca∣sting vp the summe. For hee reckons onely two thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse, to haue escaped; fortie thousand to haue perished by sword or fire; and aboue sixe thousand to haue beene taken prisoners: the whole of all which together, is farre short of fourescore and thirteene thousand, which were in these two Campes. Asdrubal, putting himselfe into the next Towne that was very strongly forti∣fied; thought there to finde the Romans worke, vntill the Carthaginians at good lei∣sure might repaire their Armie He had with him no more than two thousand foot, and fiue hundred horse: which he thought sufficient to defend the Towne; if the Townsmen would not be wanting to themselues. But he found the Inhabitants of the place very earnest in contention, whether it were better to fight, or to yeeld. Vnto this disputation, hee well that the arriuall of Scipio would soone giue an end. Wherefore, lest they should lay hold vpon him, and seeke the Victors fa∣uour by deliuering him vp; He away betimes, and made all haste to Car∣thage. As for the Towne, which hee left; it opened the gates to Scipio, at his first comming: and thereby preserued it selfe from all manner of losse. The two next Townes adjoyning would needes bee valiant, and make countenance of warre: but their strength not being answerable, they were soone taken by Scipio; who abando∣ned them to the pleasure of his Souldiers. This done, hee returned to the siege of . The were sore troubled, as they had good reason; when, in stead of either Peace or Victorie, which they lately hoped for, they heard newes of such a lamentable ouerthrow. Necessitie enforced them to make hastie prouision for the future: but how to doe it, few of them saw any meanes. Some gaue aduice to craue peace of Scipio: others, to send for Hannibal out of Italie; but the most, and they which finally preuailed, were of opinion, That not withstanding the losse of this Armie, might well defend themselues against the Romans, by raysing new for∣ces: especially, if Syphax would not leaue them. It was therefore concluded. That they should bend all their care this way, leuying in all haste another Armie; and sending Embassadours to deale with Syphax, who lay then at a Towne called Abba, not passing eight miles from Carthage. Immediately the same their infortunate Commander, the sonnè of Gisco, was imployed to make new leuies of men: and Queene Sophonisba went forth with Embassadors to her husband Syphax; who hauing gathered together as many as he could of his subjects that had escaped from the late slaughter, was thinking to returne into his owne Kingdome. Sophonisba la∣boured so with her husband, that at length she wonne him to her owne desire. And it fell out at the same time, that foure thousand Spaniards, waged by the Carthagini∣ans, were brought ouer to serue in Africk. Of these were made such braue reports; as if their courage, and the armes which they vsed, were not to be resisted. Euen the multitude within Carthage beleeued these tales, and were more glad than they had cause to be; which is great wonder, since in one Age, the whole Countrie of Spaine had beene twice conquered; first, by the Carthaginians themselues, and after by the Romans. But with Syphax these tales preuailed much: which the Carthaginian Em∣bassadours helped with a lie; saying, that there were come ten thousand of these terrible Spaniards. Vpon this confidence, the people of Carthage and their friends gathered such spirit, that in thirtie daies they made vp an Armie, consisting well∣neare of thirtie thousand men; reckoning the Spaniards, and Syphax with his Numi∣dians, in the number. So they encamped in a Region called the greatfields, about fiue daies journie from Vtica. Scipio hearing of this, came from Vtica thither, to visit them: leauing behinde him his impediments, with some part of his Armie; to make a shew of continuing the siege. Two or three daies after the meeting of both Ar∣mies, passed away in skirmish; without any great thing done. It had now beene time for Asdrubal to follow the example of the Roman, Fabius, and seeke to wearie out the Enemie by delaies. But either (which is likely) he was a farre worse Com∣mander, or else it was not in his power to giue such directions as best pleased him∣selfe. The fourth day the Armies met in battaile: wherein the Romans were mar∣shalled by Scipio after their wonted manner; hauing their Italian horse in the right wing; and Masanissa with his in the left. On the side, Asdru∣bal and his Carthaginians had the right wing; Syphax, the left; and the Spaniards, the Battaile. The victorie was gotten without many blowes: for the vntrained followers of Syphax and Asdrubal, could not sustaine the first charge of the Italians, or of Ma∣sanissa. Onely the Spaniards fought a long time, euen till they were all in a manner slaine: rather as men desperate, and not hoping for mercie, since they were thus come ouer to fight against Scipio, who had otherwise deserued of them; than vpon any likelihood or conccit of victory. This their obstinacy was beneficiall vnto those that fled; for that it hindered the Romans from making any great pursuit. Hereby Asdrubal, and Syphax escaped: Asdrubal, to Carthage; and Syphax home, to his owne Kingdome: whither his wife was either gone before, or immediatly him. Scipio, hauing thus gotten the masterie of thefield, tooke counsaile about the pro∣secution of the Warre. It was resolued vpon as the best course, That hee himselfe, with part of the Armie, should attempt the Cities round about him: and that Ma∣sanissa, with his Numidians, and , with some of the Legions, should fol∣low after Syphax; not permitting him to take rest within his owne Kingdome, where easily else hee might repaire his forces, and put them to new trouble. This aduice it seemes that Masanissa gaue: who knew best the qualitie of the Numidians; and what good might bee done among them, by the reputation of a victorie. The least that could be expected, was his restitution into his owne Kingdom, vsurped by Syphax: which to accomplish, it no lesse concerned the Romans at the present, than it did himselfe. According to this order concluded, was sent away with Ma∣sanissa: and Scipio stayed behinde, carrying the warre from Towne to Towne. Ma∣ny places yeelded for feare: many were taken by force: and all the subjects of Car∣thage wauered in their fidelitie; as if the time were now come, wherein they might take notice of those vnreasonable burdens, which their proud Masters had laid vpon them for of the warre in Spaine and Italie. What to doe in this case the Carthaginians could hardly resolue. Fortune was their Enemie: they had lost their Armies, and many of their Townes: neither durst they make bold to trouble their owne subjects with any violent exaction of men or money; who neuerthelesse of their owne free will were likely to giue little helpe. Very much it grieued them, to send for Hannibal out of Italie: yet since there was no other hope remaining, than in him and his good Armie; it was decreed, that Embassadours should bee forthwith sent to call him home. Some there were that gaue aduice, to set out a fleet against that of Scipio, that rode before Vtica, weakely manned, and easie to be taken, whilst Scipio himselfe was busied in the Inland Countries. Some were of opinion, That it should be their principall care, to fortifie by all meanes the Citie of Carthage: vpon the safetie whereof they said that all depended; adding, that whilest they were true, and at vnitie among themselues, they might well enough subsist, and expect those opportunities, with which Fortune (doubtlesse) would present them. These counsailes were not rejected: but order was forthwith taken, both for all things concerning defence of the Citie, and for the attempt vpon the Roman fleet at Vtica. Neuerthelesse it was considered, that hereby they should onely protract the warre: without any way aduancing their owne affaires towards likelihood of victorie; no, though it should fall out, that all the shippes at Vtica might bee taken or destroyed. Wherefore the determination held concerning Hannibal, That he should immediate∣ly come ouer into Africk, as the last refuge of Carthage. The Councell was no soo∣ner broken vp, than all the Senators betooke themselues to the execution of that which was decreed: some, to fortification of the Towne: some, to make readie the Fleet; and some, appointed thereunto, forthwith to embarque themselues for Ita∣lie. In this their trepidation Scipio comes to Tunes, a Citie in those daies very strong, and standing in prospect almost of euery part of Carthage. This place, or rather some defencible piece adjoyning, he easily tooke; the Garrison forsaking it, and running away as soone as he drew neere. But whilest hee was about there to incampe, and fortifie himselfe against the Citie, He might the Carthaginian fleet setting forth, and making towards Vtica: What this meant, he readily conceiued: and stood in great feare, lest his owne ships, that were very ill prepared for Sea-fight (as being heauily loden with engines of batterie, and wholly disposed in such order, as was most conuenient for assaulting the Towne) should make bad resistance, against a fleet appointed for that speciall seruice. Wherefore he hasted away towards Vtica, to assist with his presence in this needfull case. It fell out well, that hee had sent his carriages, and all the great bootie which he drew along with him, thither before, at his going to Tunes. For had not he now made great expedition, he should haue come too late. Neither could he indeede haue beene there in due time, if the Carthagi∣nians had vsed such diligence as was conucnient. But they rested one night in har∣bour by the way: and at their comming to , they tarried a while to make a bra∣uado; presenting themselues in order of battaile, as if the Romans would haue put forth to Sea against them. But Scipio had no such intent: He thought it would bee sufficient, if hee could preserue his Gallies. As for the pleasure of their at Sea: it should little auaile the Carthaginians, if they got nothing by it, and lost their whole Estate by Land. Wherfore he tooke his ships of burden, and fastning them to∣gether with cables, in foure ranks, one behind another, made a four-fold bridge ouer the Channell of the Hauen; whereon he placed a thousand of his choice men, with store of Darts and other casting weapons, to make defence. Some open spaces hee left, whereat his Frigots, and other small Vessells, might runne out and back againe vpon any aduantage or neede: but these he couered with plancks; vsing the masts and yards of his ships in stead of rafters, to joyne all together, that his men might help one another, and the bridge it selfe not be torne asunder. Scarce was this worke finished; when the Carthaginians, seeing none issue forth against them, came into the Hauen. The fight betweene them and the Romans, that were in the Hulkes, was ra∣ther like to the assaulting of a wall, than to any Sea-fight. For they that stood vpon the bridge, had sure footing, and threw their weapons downwards with their whole strength and violence; which the Carthaginians out of their Gallies, that were lower and vnsteadie, could not doe. But the Roman Frigots and long Boats, aduenturing foorth from behinde the Bridge, were greatly ouer-borne by the force of the Gal∣lies; and were one occasion of that small losse which followed. They that stood vp∣on the Bridge were neither able to relieue them: nor yet could freely their weapons among the Carthaginians, as before; for feare of hurting these their friends, that were entangled and mixed among the enemies. The Carthaginians had brought with them grapling hookes, hanging at Iron chaines. These they threw vpon the masts and yards which serued as Arches to joyne the bridge together: then rowing backwards, they tore all asunder; in such sort that one ship followed another, and all the first ranke was broken, or defaced. The Defendants had no other way, than to saue themselues as hastily as they could, by shifting into the next ranke of ships, that lay behinde them vntouched. Neither did the Carthaginians trouble themselues any further in this laborious worke: but hauing haled away sixe ships of burden, and towed them out of the Hauen, returned home to Carthage. Their wel-come was greater then their victorie: because among so many grieuous losses, onely this ex∣ploit had succeeded well; though it were of small importance. Whilest things thus passed about Carthage; Laelius and Masanissa, in their journie against Syphax, found as good successe as could be desired. The fame of the victories alreadie gotten, restored Masanissa to his Kingdome, without further contention: the Masaesyli, his subjects, joyfully receiuing him; and for saking the Vsurper. But here they stayed not: neither indeede would Syphax permit them to be quiet. Hee had abundance of men and horses, that he felt not greatly the losses past: and, therefore being sollicited by Asdrubal and Sophonisba, hee prepared againe for warre. But beside the instigation of his beloued wife; the losse of the Masaesyli would let him take no rest: neither was it the purpose of Laelius and Masanissa, to giue him any breathing time. It is common in men, to depart no lesse vnwillingly from that which they haue gotten by extortion, than from their proper inheri∣tance: but to thinke all alike their owne, whereof they are in possession; be the title vnto some part neuer so vnjust. Hereunto alludes the fable of the yong Kite; which thought that shee had vomited vp her owne guts, when it was onely the garbage of some other fowle, that she had hastily swallowed, and was not able to digest. But whether or no, Syphax, like the young Kite, beleeued the Kingdome of the Masaesyli to be part of his entrailes: Laelius and Masanissa will shortly giue him som what, that shall make him cast his gorge. For to this purpose chiefly are they come so farre. It concerned the Romans to dispossesse (if it might be) that King: whose false and hol∣low friendship towards them, had beene conuerted into strong enmitie; as also to set in his place another, who might doe them such good offices, as Syphax had lately done vnto the Carthaginians. How easily this might be effected, Masanissa knew best: as being well acquainted with the nature of those Countries; wherein, euen to this day, though there be many strong Townes, yet the fortune of a battell is enough, to translate the Kingdome from one Competitor to another. So they met with Sy∣phax, who came against them with no lesse an Armie, than his former, and marshal∣led in the Roman order; according to the skill, which he had learned of the Roman Centurion, long agoe sent vnto him out of Spaine fron Cn. Scipio. But though hee could teach his men how to march in order; yet could hee not teach them to fight couragiously. They were a rabble of all sorts, gathered vp in haste: and few of them had seene warre before. Encamping neare vnto the Romans, it fell out, as com∣monly, that some small Troupes of Horse on both sides, encountred one another in the mid-way: and they that had the worst, were seconded by other of their fel∣lowes. By continuance of the skirmish, more and more were drawne out from ei∣ther Campe: so that at length Syphax, vnwilling to dishearten his men by taking a∣ny foile at their first meeting with the Enemie, came vp with all his Horse, which were the best part of his forces, and therewith ouercharged Masanissa, whose num∣bers were farre lesse. But whilest he was prosecuting his hope of victorie: some Ro∣man Squadrons of Foot came against him through their owne Troupes of Horse; which fell to the sides, and made a lane for them. So their Battaile standing now more firme, than a little before; Syphax was vnable, though hee laboured much in vaine, to make them giue ground. Masanissa likewise, and his Troupes, grew confi∣dent vpon this assistance: and charging afresh the Enemie, that could not make way forward, caused him to giue backe. Herewithall the Legions came in sight: which terrified so the Numidian Horse, that they beganne presently to disband. Faine would Syphax haue stayed them from flight: and to that end made head in person against the Romans; with hope, that his men would be ashamed to leaue him. But it fell out vnhappily, that he was cast from his Horse, which receiued a wound; and so taken prisoner. Of others that were slaine or taken, the multitude was not great. It sufficed, that they forsooke the place, and fled: and that their King, vpon whom all depended, was in the Romans hand. Masanissa told Laelius, That this victorie should make an end of the Numidian warre, if presently they hasted away to the chiefe Citie of the Kingdome; whither hee himselfe desired to bee sent before with the Horse, carrying Syphax along with him. Hereunto Laelius agreed. Masanissa com∣ming to Cirta, before any newes of the Kings mischance was there arriued, called out the chiefe of the Citie to parlee: wherein by many faire promises and threats, but e∣specially by shewing vnto them Syphax bound, he preuailed so far, that the gates were forth with opened vnto him; and euery one stroue to get his fauour, that was like to be their King hereafter. Among the rest, Queene Sophonisba yeelded her selfe into his hands: and vehemently besought him, that shee might not be deliuered vp vnto the Romans. Her youth, and excellent beautie, so commended her suit, that Masa∣nissa forth with granted it; and to make good his promise, married her himselfe that very day: thereby to preuent Laelius and Scipio from determining otherwise of her, since she was his wife. But Laelius, when he came thither, tooke the matter hainous∣ly; so that at first he would haue haled her away, together with Syphax and other prisoners, and haue sent her vnto Scipio. But being ouer-entreated by Masanissa, he suffered the matter to rest a while as he found it, and referred all to Scipio's discretion: to whom hee sent away Syphax and other Captiues immediatly; following shortly after himselfe with Masanissa, when they had done what was needefull in the Kingdome. At the comming of Syphax there was great ioy in the Roman Campe: the mightie Armies which he had lately brought into the field: and his entertainment of Scipio and Asdrubal, both at one time, when Rome and Carthage together sought his friendship: with such other commemoration of his past and present fortune; mi∣nistring to euery one a large argument of discourse. Scipio demanded of him, what had moued him, not only to forsake the Roman friendship, but to make warre vpon them, vnprouoked. He briefely answered, That his wife had moued him so to doe: calling her a Furie, and a pestilent creature: and saying, That Masanissa was no wiser than himselfe; since hee had now taken the same woman to his wife, who would shortly draw him to the same courses. Hereat Scipio was greatly troubled: and stood in great doubt, lest this perilous woman should depriue him of Masanissa, as shee had done of Syphax. It was not long, ere Masanissa and Laelius came vnto him: both of whom together hee louingly welcommed; and highly commended in pub∣lique, for their notable seruice in this Expedition. Then taking Masanissa apart, he brake with him, as touching Sophonisba: letting him vnderstand, that the Romans had title to her head; and that the was a mischieuous enemie of theirs. Wherefore hee entreated him to moderate his affections: and not to deface the memorie of his great seruices alreadie done, (for which he should be highly rewarded to his owne contentment) by committing a great offence vpon little reason. Masanissa blusht, and wept: and finally promised to be gouerned by Scipio; whom hee neuerthelesse entreated, to thinke vpon his faith giuen to Sophonisba, that she should not be deliue∣red into the Romans power. So he departed to his owne Tent, where, after some time spent in agonie, he called vnto him a seruant of his that had the of his poy∣son (which Princes then vsed to haue in readines, against all mischances that might make them vnwilling to liue:) and tempering a potion for Sophonisba, sent it vnto her with this message; That gladly he would haue had her to liue with him as his wife: but since they who had power to hinder him of his desire, would not yeeld thereto, he sent her a cup, that should preserue her from falling aliue into the handes of the Romans; willing her to remember her birth and estate, and to take or∣der for her selfe. At the receit of this Message and Present, shee onely said, That if her Hus∣band had no better token to send vnto his new wife, she must accept of this; ad∣ding, That sheemight haue died more honourably, if shee had not wedded so late∣ly before her Funerall. And herewithall shee boldly dranke off the poison. Thus Liuie reports. But Appian varies from this: and sets it downe agreeably to that which hath beene spoken before, concerning the praecontract betweene Masanissa and Sophonisba. Hee saith, That after the taking of Syphax, Embassadors from Cirta met with Laelius and Masanissa vpon their way thither, yeelding vp their Citie, and the Kings Palace: and that Sophonisba, for her owne priuate, sent messengers to ex∣cuse her marriage with Syphax; as made against her will, by compulsion of those in whose power she was. Masanissa readily admitted this excuse; and accepted her to wife. But when Scipio had receiued information from Syphax, how cunning in per∣swasion Sophonisba was; and that all her thoughts laboured for the good of Car∣thage: he fell out about her with Masanissa at his returne; and challenged her, as a part of the bootie belonging to the Romans. Masanissa said, she was his owne wife, and vnto him betrothed many yeares before. But Scipio would not heare of this: or if it were true; yet he said it was no reason, that Masanissa should keepe her in pos∣session, as long as it was disputable, vnto whom she might appertaine. Wherefore he willed him first of all to produce her, and then afterwards to make his claime vnto her; wherein he should haue no wrong. Herewithall hee sent to fetch her away: and Masanissa accompanied the messengers, as it were to deliuer her; but making her acquainted with the necessitie, gaue vnto her a cup of poison, wherewith shee ended her life, before they came that should haue apprehended her. So hee shewed vnto the Romans her dead bodie; which he royally enterred. The sudden violence of Masanissa his loue, and the readie consent of Sophonisba to marrie with him: adde not so much credit vnto this relation of Appian, as doth the want of all other eui∣dent cause (which Lib. . Liuie notes) of the sudden falling out betweene him and the Carthaginians; vnder whom he had bin trained vp, & done them great seruice. How∣soeuer it were: Scipio, hearing of this tragicall accident, sent for Masanissa, and com∣forted him as well as he could; lest his should lead him to some incon∣uenience. Hauing therefore gently rebuked him for his rashnesse, he brought him foorth in presence of the Armie: where extolling his noble acts, and shewing how highly he had deserued of the Citie of Rome, he proclaimed him King; and gaue vn∣to him a Crowne of gold, with other royall ornaments. This was indeed the readie way to his thoughts from the sadde remembrance of that which was past, vnto the more cheerefull contemplation of good fortune, that beganne to smile vpon him. This was the first time that the Romans tooke vpon them to create or proclaime a King. Which honour though Masanissa well deserued: yet would not the Title haue redounded vnto his great benefit; neither should he haue beene much behol∣ding to them for it, if he had not by their meanes recouered possession of his Coun∣trie, together with the greatest part of Syphax his Dominions. It seemes not vnlike∣lie, that had he remained a Neuter in these warres, and sustained himselfe with his Troupe of Horse, in such sort as hee did before the comming of the Romans; hee might neuerthelesse haue recouered his proper inheritance, by the loue of his owne subiects, without other helpe, when Syphax had once or twice beene vanquished. As for the enlargement of his Kingdome, it was not more than hee deserued: neither were the Romans then in case, to make a conquest of Numidia for themselues; neither could they wished a fitter opportunitie, than of such a man, vpon whom to be∣stow it that was their assured friend, and passable withall among the Numidians, as being (for the Masaesyli were a Numidian Tribe) a great Prince of the same Nation. Yet this liberalitie of the Romans, was noysed abroad as very glorious: and the Ro∣mans themselues, in a politicke sort of grauitie, tooke highly vpon them; as if euen their saluting him by the name of King, had beene a matter of great consequence. Hee thriued indeed well after it: and by their maintenance waxed mighty in times following, encroaching vpon his neighbours on all sides; but most of all vpon the State of Carthage, whereat they were little displeased. Hence it grew that Vermina the sonne of Syphax (of whom wee shall shortly speake more) which held some piece of his Fathers Kingdome, desiring friendship of the Romans, and promising by all meanes to deserue their loue, requested therewithall, that they would call him King. But though it were so, that neuer any before him had made this a matter of suit: yet the Roman Senate was puntilious herein; and answered very grauely, That it was not their custome to giue the honour of that appellation, saue onely vnto such Liu. l. 31. Kings, as had greatly deserued of their Citie. Thus they made it a matter of State. and in processe of time grew so proud of this their imaginarie praerogatiue, that they imputed as a singular benefit vnto Kings, that no way depended vpon them, the sa∣lutation by . . lib. 1. that name; though it were not accompanied with any other fauour or profit thence redounding. §. XIX. The Carthaginians desire Truce: and breake it. THe Carthaginians were extremely dismaied, when they heard of the great calamitie, that was befalne their good friend Syphax; and vnder∣stood that Masanissa, mortall enemie, had got possession of his Kingdome. To increase their feare, Scipio returned againe to Tunes in view of their Citie: where hee made an ende of that Fortification, which hee had begunne at his last being there. The Carthaginians had neither forces, nor courage, to withstand him: but their hearts so failed them, that they sent forth vnto them thirtie Embassadors, Princes of the Citie, which were their Priuie Councell, to make suit for peace. These being admitted into the presence of Scipio, did not only prostrate themselues on the ground; but kissed the . . lib. 15. . lib. 30. feet of him, and of those that sate in Councell with him. Answerable to this base adoration was their speech that followed. They con∣fessed themselues to haue vniustly broken the Peace betweene them and Rome; and to haue deserued whatsoeuer punishment it should please the Romans to inflict vp∣on them. Yet they humbly besought Scipio and the rest, that in common regard of those misfortunes, whereto all men are subiect, they would shew mercie vnto the Citie of Carthage, and let it remaine, as a Monument of their clemencie; which, by the follie of her Citizens, had now twice deserued to be ouerthrowne. Herewithall they did not forget, to lay the blame vpon Hannibal: who without their appoint∣ment had begunne the warre; and was maintained in his doings by a Faction, with∣out the good liking of the whole Citie. By this it appeares, that these Embassadors were no Barchines: but rather, that they were Hanno and the choice of his companie; who had now their long desired worke in hand, of suing vnto the Romans for peace. Whatsoeuer they were, it must needes be that they were most insolent men ouer those that were subiect vnto their power: for they would not haue made such ado∣ration vnto the Romans, in their owne necessitie; vnlesse they themselues had expc∣cted the like, where they had the aduantage. It was not vnknowne to Scipio, or to his assistants, in what poore case the Citie of Rome then was; and how vnable to defraie the charges of continuing the warre. Neither were the Carthaginians, notwithstanding the losse of so many Armies, in such ill case, as the Romans themselues had very lately beene. For they had monie e∣nough, wherewith to wage more men: they had a Citie farre stronger than Rome; and they had the Sea free. But they wanted the Roman resolution: and therefore distrusted the walls of Carthage; though Vtica, a weaker Citie, had all this while held out against Scipio, and could not yet be forced by him and his Armie, though so of∣ten victorious in the field. Scipio therefore accepted their submission, and told them, That though he came into Africk, to make a Conquest, and not a Peace: yet hauing the Conquest as it were in his hand, hee would not denie to grant them the Peace, which they desired; for thereby should all Nations vnderstand, that the people of Rome did follow the rule of justice, both in making warre, and in concluding it. The conditions which he imposed vpon them, were these: That they should render vp vnto him all prisoners that they had taken, together with all Renegado's and fugi∣tiue slaues: That they should withdraw their Armies out of Italie and Gaule: That they should not meddle in Spaine, nor yet in any Iland between Italie & Africk: That they should deliuer vp all their ships of warre, saue twentie; and That they should pay a great summe of monie, with certaine hundred thousand bushels of Wheat and Barlie. To consider of these Articles, hee gaue them three dayes: and when they had approued them, he granted a Truce; that they might send Embassadours vnto the Roman Senate. This done, Masanissa was dismissed, and went home into his Kingdome, as if the warre had beene alreadie at an end. Syphax was a little before sent with Laelius vnto Rome: where the fame of these victories filled men with ioy; and gaue hope, that the long endured miseries would be shortly at an end. Wherefore all the Temples were set open, and an holy day appointed for thanksgiuing and supplication to their Gods. Laelius was accompanied with Embassadors from King Masanissa: who gra∣tulating the happie successe of the Romans in their African Warre, and giuing thanks vnto the Senate for the benefits done by vnto their Master, made request for the Numidians, such as were now his subiects and prisoners in Rome, that they might be bestowed vpon him; who by rendring them to libertie, should doe an act very plausible, that would make him gracious among his people in the beginning of his reigne. The Roman Senate were not behinde with Masanissa in complement: but shewing themselues to be highly pleased with all that Scipio had done, and should doe for him; they called him King againe; released his Numidians that were cap∣tiues; and sent him two purple Cassocks, that had each of them one gold button; with such other Presents, as in time of their pouerty might serue to testifie their good will. were these and gone from Rome; when the newes came, that Embassadours from Carthage were to desire peace. These Embassadours were not admitted into the Citie, but were lodged without: vntill Laelius being sent for, came backe from , to bee present when their demands were to . Then was audience giuen them in the Temple of Bellona; that stood in the suburbs. The errand of these Embassadours, was Peace: but the meaning of them and of their Citie, was onely to winne time, and get respite from warre; vntill Hannibal and Mago should come out of Italie, either to chace the Romans out of Africk, or to obtain peace for Carthage, by terror of their great names and Armies, vpon more con∣ditions. Wherefore they made an idle discourse of the League, that was concluded betweene them and Luctatius , at the end of the former warre. This League they said, all things well considered, did still remaine in force: neither had there since beene any warre at all, betweene the people of Rome and the . For it was onely Hannibal, that, without any leaue from , had of his owne head besieged and razed the Towne of Saguntum: and after that aduentured in like sort, without Commission, to passe the Alpes, and trouble (as he had done) the of Italie. This being so: their Message was none other, than to desire, that the League before spoken of, made in the time of Catulus, might hereafter stand in force; as in∣deed it hitherto did, and ought to doe. The Senators had cause to wonder at this tale; hearing these Embassadours make (as it were) a jest of a warre, that had beene so terrible. Wherefore they them a great many questions, concerning that Peace made by Luctatius, and other passages following between the two Cities. But they excused themselues by their age: (for they were all yong men) and said, That those things were beyond their knowledge and remembrance. Forthwith it appea∣red, That all was but collusion, and that they sought no other than to gaine time; vntill they might repaire the . Wherefore they were sent home in companie of Laelius; without any conclusion at all of peace; and, in effect, without answere. This notwithstanding, we find in Polybius, That the Senate receiuing aduertisment Excerpt. è Polyb. l. 15. from Scipio, of that which had passed betweene him and the Carthaginians in this Treatie of peace, approued the conditions by him propounded; and gaue him li∣cence thereupon, to vnto conclusion. This may with good reason bee be∣leeued: since it was not vnknowne, that if the warre continued, all these goodly hopes must rest vpon the most vncertaine issue of one battaile betweene Hannibal and Scipio: wherein if fortune should be auerse to them, their forces in Africk were no better than quite lost. Matters thus hanging in suspence, before the Carthaginian Embassadours came backe from Rome: a Fleet out of Sicil, wherein were two hundred ships of burden, and thirtie Gallies, being bound for Africk to victuaile the Roman Campc, was ouer∣taken by foule weather at Sea; and hardly escaping , was dispersed, and dri∣uen aground in diuers parts of the Bay of Carthage, euen in view, and vnder com∣mand of the Citie. There was at that time, as we finde in Appian, and may gather App. de bello Punico. out of Polybius, a great dearth of victuails in Carthage: which caused the people to crie out vpon their Magistrates, that they should not let such a bootie escape them; saying, that the danger of famine was greater and worse, than of breaking Truce. Whether it were so that hunger vrged them, or that they yeelded to their owne greedie desires: the multitude in Carthage vnderstood (as it seemes) that all this dis∣course of peace in hand, was no better than meere mockerie; and therefore cared not for obseruation of particular points, when they meant deceit in the whole. It was . è Polyb. l. 15. the manner in Carthage, as likewise in Alexandria, for all the Rascalitie, together with women and boyes, to be medling in vprores: the clamours of the boyes being in such tumults no lesse violent, than of the men. Wherefore it is no maruaile, if little regard were had of reason, or of honour, in any such commotion A Fleet was sent out vnder Asdrubal, to gather vp the dispersed Roman ships of burden (for the Gal∣lies, by force of Oares, recouered the station whereto their Campe adioyned) and bring them into Carthage: which was done. Scipio was hereat much offendcd: not only for the losse, and for that the Towne was thereby releeued; but for that by this breach of truce, he foresaw the intention of the Carthaginians to renew the war, and put him to more trouble. Wherefore he sent Embassadours vnto them: both to require satisfaction for the iniurie done; and to deterre them from entertaining a∣ny other hope, than in the peace which they had so much desired. These gaue the Carthaginians to vnderstand, That Letters were come from Rome vnto Scipio, with allowance to conclude the peace; vpon those conditions which hee had propoun∣ded. But (said they) we hold it strange, That yee, who so lately haue cast your selues to the ground before vs, and kissed our feet, after an vnusuall manner of humilitie, confessing your selues to haue broken the league that was betweene vs, and thereby to haue deser∣ued such punishment as is due vnto Rebels; should so soone forget what yee then vttered, and runne headlong againe into the same crimes, for which yee acknowledged selues worthie to be , hauing only recourse vnto our mercie. We are not ignorant, that it is the con∣fidence which ye repose in HANNIBAL that thus emboldens you. Yet were it not amisse, yee should consider, how long hee beene pent vp in a corner of Italie, among the Brutians; where he is in a manner besieged, and vnable to stirre: so that yee are like to finde his helpe wanting in your greatest need. Or let it bee supposed, that he were now in , and readie to giue vs battaile: yet should it well agree with your wisdome, to doubt what might befall; remembring that he is a man, and not inuincible. Now if it should happen that he were ; what resuge haue yee left vnto your selues against hereafter? What gods will yee either sweare by, to bee beleeued, or call vpon in your miserie? What wordes, and la∣mentable gesture will yee hencefoorth vse, to moue compassion? Surely yee haue alreadie wa∣sted all your forces of perswasion, and shall not againe deceiue vs, if ye refuse the grace, where∣of at the present ye are capable. It is no maruell though the Carthaginians were angrie, when they heard vpbraided with the base demeanour of their Embas∣sadours. For it was not the generall opinion of the Citie, that the Truce was broken by themselues: though it had pleased Hanno, or such as were of his faction, to gra∣tifie the Romans with all manner of submission; and to not onely their hope of the future, but all iustification of matters past. And indeed it seemes, that the Roman Embassadours were very much delighted, in the rehearsall of that point which was yeelded vnto them; as knowing that thereon depended the justice of the quarrell. But the Carthaginians tooke this in so ill part, that hardly they could re∣fraine from doing violence vnto the men, who had vsed vnto them such insolent speeches. Yet the furie of the multitude was in some sort appeased; either by Hanno, whom Appian (I know not why) calls Hanno the great; or by the very , due vnto the place of those that had vttered such liberall words. So they were dismissed in friendly sort; though it were without answere to their Proposition. There were also two appointed for their safe Conuoy home; though with little intent of good vnto their persons. Asdrubal was then in the mid-way, as men sailed from towards Vtica. Hee, whether onely desirous to please the Multitude, of whose disposition he was informed; or whether directed by publike order, to cut off these Embassadours in their way homeward: lay waiting for them behinde a Cape, that was a little beyond the mouth of the Riuer Bagrada. Their Conuoy ha∣uing brought them on the way, as farre as to the mouth of Bagradas, wished them a good Voyage; and so tooke leaue of them, as if they had beene then in safety; since the Roman Campe was euen in sight. The Embassadours tooke this in ill part: not as fearing any danger toward; but thinking themselues too much neglected, forasmuch as their attendants did so abruptly leaue them. But no sooner had they doubled the Cape, than Asdrubal fell vpon them in such manner, as they might well discerne his purpose; which was to haue stemmed them. They rowed hard there∣fore: and being in a Quinquereme, that had more bankes of Oares, than had any Gallie of Asdrubal; they slipt away, and made him ouer-shoot himselfe. Yet he gaue them chace; and had well-neare surprised them. But they discouered some Roman Companies on the shore ouer against them, and therefore aduentured to run their vessell aground: whereby they saued their owne liues; though a great part of their companie were slaine, or hurt. This practise of the Carthaginians was inex∣cusable: and for the same cause perhaps were the Citizens heartned in such a disho∣nourable attempt, by those that desirous to continue the warre; that thereby they might be driuen to studie nothing else, than how to get the victorie, as hauing none other hope remaining. Yet likely it is, that the same feare, which had caused them to make such earnest suit for peace, would also haue caused them to be better aduised, than thus to abandon all hope of Treatie: had they not beene giuen to vn∣derstand, that Hannibal was alreadie landed in Africk, in whom they reposed no small confidence; but verily perswaded themselues, that he would change their fortune, and teach the Romans to hold contented with more easie conditions, than were those that , in the pride of his fortune, had of late propounded. §. XX. In what sort HANNIBAL spent the time after the battaile of Metaurus. The doings of MAGO in Italie. HANNIBAL and MAGO called out of Italie. How the Romans were diuersly affected by HANNI∣BALS departure. EVer since the losse of that battaile at Metaurus, Hannibal remained in the Countrey of the Brutians; waiting for another supplie from Car∣thage. The Roman Consuls that succeeded vnto and , by whom Asdrubal was ouercome and slaine, were contented to bee quiet all their yeare. Neither did Licinius the Colleague of Scipio ought worthie of remembrance against Hannibal: being hindred by the pestilence that was in his Armie. Sempronius the Consul who followed Licinius, and . Ser∣uilius Caepio, who followed Sempronius, earnestly bent to haue done somewhat: but their diligence was in a manner fruitlesse. In some skirmishes with Hannibal, they had the better; in some, the worse: and a few poore Townes they got from him, as it were by stealth; his care being more to preserue his Armie, than to keepe those places that were weake. The Romans had at this time so many great pieces of worke in hand, that their chiefe enemie was become, not the chiefe part of their care. Their thoughts were mainly bent vpon Africk, wherin they were at no smal charges to maintaine the Ar∣mie, which (as was hoped) should bring the warre to a short and happie conclusion. They stood neuerthelesse in much feare of Mago, the brother of Hannibal: who tookè exceeding paine among the Ligurians and Gaules to raise an Armie, wherewith to kindle anew the warre in Italie, that beganne to waxe colde. Mago sollicited al∣so the Hetrurians; and found them so readie to in his behalfe, that if he could haue entred their Country strong, it might haue proued no lesse needfull for Scipio to returne home out of Africk, than shortly it was for Hannibal, to make speed vnto the defence of Carthage. These dangers caused the Romans to employ one of their Con∣suls or Proconsuls, with an Armie, among the Hetrurians; another among the Gaules; and a third among the Ligurians: forasmuch as it was vncertaine, vpon which side Mago would breake out. Being thus busied, it is no wonder though they forbore to ouercharge Hannibal with any great power. As for Mago; when things were in some readines for his setting forwards, he met in the Countrie of the Insubrians, which is about Milan, with M. Cornelius the Ro∣man Proconsul, and P. Quintilius Varus one of the Praetors. With these hee fought a battaile, wherein though his vertue shewed it selfe worthie of his father and bre∣thren; yet his fortune was Carthaginian. The fight continued a long while doubt∣full; in such sort that the Roman Commanders began to distrust the issue. Where∣fore the Praetor, taking vnto him all the Roman Horse, thought to haue the Enemies to peeces. The Legions at the same time gaue a loud shout: and strained themselues hard; as if at that brunt the victorie should haue beene carried before them. But Mago opposed his Elephants to the Horse: the seruice of those beasts being fitter for such vse, than against the Squadrons of Foot. The figure, sent, and braying of these Elephants, did so affright the Horse, that they aside, and were scattered ouer the field; their Riders being vnable to mannage them. Hereby the Numidians got aduantage vpon them: whose manner of fight was more auaile∣able against those that were loose, than against the Troups that were close and thick. Then fel the Elephants vpon the Legions: which entertained them after the accusto∣med manner, with a showre of darts, and killed foure of them; causing all the rest to giue backe. This notwithstanding, the same Legions were so vehemently pressed by the Enemie; that more for shame of running away, than by any great force to make resistance, they held their ground. The Proconsul brought vp those forces, which he had kept vnto the last, to succour where need should most require. Against these Mago employed some of his Gaules, whom hee had in readinesse for the like occasion. But these Gaules discharged their parts very ill. They were soone beaten off; and recoiled so hastily, that they brought feare vpon all the rest. When Mago saw that his men beganne to , Hee put himselfe in the head of his Armie; and held them so well to it, that keeping their order, they made a faire Retrait, with their faces toward the Enemie. But at length he receiued a wound in his thigh; whereof shortly after hee dyed. He was taken vp, and carried out of danger by some of his owne men: the rest of them, after little further resi∣stance, prouided euery one for himselfe: So the Romans obtained victorie, not with∣out great cost; as purchasing the death of about fiue thousand enemies, with the losse of two thousand and three hundred of the Praetors Armie, besides those that dyed of the Proconsuls Legions; also besides diuers Colonells, Captaines, and Gen∣tlemen of marke, that fell in this hote peece of seruice. Neither were there any prisoners taken; whereby it may seeme that the Enemies did not fall to rout, be∣fore they had recouered some ground that might assure them from pursuit. How e∣uer it were, this victorie would haue much imported for the assurance of Italie, if the State of Carthage could longer haue permitted these valiant sonnes of Amilcar to a∣bide therein. But Mago with-drawing himselfe (by easie iournies, because of his wound) into Liguria, found Embassadours from Carthage attending him: who gaue him to vnderstand the pleasure of their Citie, which was, That both he and Hannibal should presently repaire home with all their forces; not staying any longer to thinke vpon the conquest of Italie, since Carthage it selfe was readie to bee lost. He obeyed this Commandement, and embarqued shortly his Armie, but dyed of his wound about Sardinia, in the way homewards. About the same time Hannibal receiued the like command from Carthage to re∣turne Africk. He heard it with great ; gnashing his teeth, and gro∣ning, and hardly keeping in the teares, that were readie to burst out, whilest the Embassadours were deliuering their errand. When their message was done; Hee told them, That this was yet plaine dealing. For, said He, They that now directly bid mee come home, haue long agoe done their best to hale mee out of Italie; though more closely and crookedly they went to worke, by stopping the supply, that should haue enabled mee to man∣nage the Warre here. SCIPIO therefore shall not neede to bragge, that hee hath drawne me homt by the heeles: it is HANNO, that hath wrought this noble ; and the House of the Barchines, for lacke of other meanes to doe it, with the ruine of Car∣thage. He had before prepared a Fleet in readinesse doubting that which after came to passe: wherein he embarqued, besides his owne men, as many of the Italians, as were content to be partakers of his fortune. Many there were that shrunke backe from him, and refused to doe seruice in this Expedition: of whom such as hee could take he slew; not sparing those that fled into the Temple of Iuno Lacinia, which had been held an inuiolable Sanctuarie vnto that day. He was indeed then wholly trans∣ported with rage; and departed out of Italie no lesse passionate, than men are wont to bee, when they leaue their owne Countries to goe into exile. Hee looked backe vnto the shore: accusing both gods and men; and cursing his owne dulnesse, in that he had not led his Armie from Cannae, hotte and bloudied as it was, directly vnto the wals of Rome. With such vexation of spirit Hee quitted the possession of Italie; wherein he had liued almost halfe his time. If it could haue beene foretold vnto the Romans, in the first beginning of this war, with what exceeding joy in times following they should entertaine the newes of Hannibal his departure out of Italie: they would (I thinke) lesse earnestly haue pressed the Carthaginians to send him ouer thither. When sure aduertisement was brought vnto the Citie, that Hannibal was gone with all his Armie: an Holiday was appointed for thanksgiuing vnto their gods; and extraordinarie great sacrifices pub∣likely made, for joy of such happie tidings. Yet old Q. Fabius was opinion, That the danger did still remaine the same, though the place were changed: for that Hanni∣bal, at his comming into Africk, would finde P. Scipio other manner of worke, he had beene troubled with at any time before; and would doe greater matters in his owne Countrie, than euer he was able to performe abroad in a land of strangers. The remoue of the warre from their owne dores, and the conceit of that victorie for which they hoped; was enough to make them presume further, than at other times they would haue done. When therefore the Saguntine Embassadors brought vnto them a great masse of Golde and Siluer, together with some Agents of the Carthaginians taken by them in Spaine: onely the Carthaginian prisoners were accep∣ted; the treasure was rendred backe vnto the Saguntines that had surprised it. Vpon like confidence of the future, a little before this, order was taken for the repayment of those monies, that had beene borrowed in time of more necessitie from priuate men. Hence also proceeded the seuere chastisement, laid vpon those twelue Colo∣nies, that for want eyther of meanes, or of good will, had refused to giue aid to the Romans. They were commanded, and enforced, to giue double the number of Foot to that which they had beene wont to out for the warres, with a proportion of Horse answerable to the verie most of their abilitie. So confident were the Romans growne (though their wealth were not as yet suteable to the greatnesse of their spirit) vpon the good successe of the Battaile at ; and the hopes which they reposed in Scipio. All this notwithstanding, when they considered more neerely of that which might happen; and were informed, that the terrible Armie, whereof I∣talie had beene few dayes since discharged, was landed safe in : they began to reuolue a thousand in their heads, and to stand in doubt, lest Q. Fabius (who died about the same time) would bee found a true Prophet. For be∣thinking themselues of that which might comfort them in their hopes: they found in the victories against Syphax and Asdrubal no specialitie of such great worth, as might promise the like successe against another manner of Generall, followed by o∣ther manner of men, than were either of those two. The Numidian King had beene wont to bring into the field a rascall multitude of halfe-scullions, that were good for nothing; being himselfe a fit Captaine for such souldiors. Likewise Asdrubal, the sonne of Gisco, was a Commander well thought of by the Cartha∣ginian Senate; but otherwise one, that in the field was onely good at sauing him∣selfe by a swift retrait. But now there came an Armie of men, hardened from their child-hood with incredible patience, fleshed many hundred times in Roman bloud, and wearing the spoiles not onely of good souldiors, but of braue Captaines, by them slaine. Such talke vsed the people of Rome, saying, That Scipio was like to meet in battaile, with many that had slaine Roman Praetors, yea and Consuls, with their owne hands; with many, that had beene first in getting ouer the Trenches of seue∣rall Roman Campes, or in winning the tops of wals at the siege of Townes; briefly, that he should now bee opposed by an Armie, as good as had euer serued in warre, and following the dreadfull Name of Hannibal. §. XXI. HANNIBAL in Africk prepares to fight with SCIPIO; treates with him about peace in vaine; looseth a battaile at Nadagara, and perswades the Car∣thaginians to sue for peace. Of the peace gran∣ted from Rome to Carthage. HANNIBAL disembarqued his Armie at Leptis, almost an hundred miles from Carthage, Eastward from the Headland of Mercurie, and somewhat more than one degree to the South. He was ill prouided of Horse; which it was not easie for him to transport out of Italie. There∣fore it behoued him to land, as he did, somewhat farre from the Ene∣mie; that hee might furnish himselfe with this and the like needfull helpes, against the day of battaile. From Leptis he passed on to Adrumetum, and so along through the In-land Countrie; gathering friends vnto him by the way. Tychaeus a Numidian Prince, and familiar friend of Syphax, was said to haue in those dayes the best Hor∣ses of seruice, that were to be found in Africk. Him therefore did Hannibal allure vnto his partie: making him vnderstand, that if the Romans got the victorie, it should bee easie for Masanissa, by their countenance and helpe to oppresse both him, and as many other of the neighbour Princes as hindred his prospect. This Argument, and the fame of him that vsed it, preuailed with Tychaeus; who shortly after brought vnto the Carthaginian two thousand Horse. Appian further addes, That Mezetullus, (the same who had made himselfe Protectour ouer Masanissa his Cousins; and was Head of a Family, and aduerse to the Numidian Kings of that race) brought vnto Hannibal another thousand Horse: as likewise that Vermina the sonne of Syphax, holding a great part of his Fathers Kingdome, began at the same time to assaile the places that yeelded obedience to Masanissa. This Vermina, as we finde in Liuie, came with more than sixteene thousand men (for he lost more than so manie) to succour Hannibal when it was too late. The Carthaginians were at this time in such hard estate, or (at least) so impatient of the state wherein they were; that they could not attend the leisure of those pre∣parations, which would haue made the victorie assured. When they considered the worth of Hannibal, and the greatnesse of his Acts: it offended them to thinke, that they had beene so base, as to make humble suit vnto the Romans for Peace; whilest they had such a braue Champion aliue, to maintaine their cause by warre. But when they bethought themselues of their owne sufferings, which, for want of Roman magnanimitie to endure them, appeared greater than indeede they were: then cried they out earnestly, that it was no time to linger, but presently to fight; that so they might see an end of these troubles, either good or bad. And to this purpose, they sent their Mandates to Hannibal: requiring him, without any further protraction, to doe what he could doe out of hand. Hannibal made answere, That they were his good Lords, and had power to dispose of him and his Armie: but since he was Generall of their forces, He thought it reasonable, that they should suffer him to doe as a Generall ought to doe; and to choose his owne times. Neuerthelesse, to giue them satisfaction, Hee made great marches to Zama; and there encamped. The breach of Truce, made by the Carthaginians: The violence, done to his Embassadours: and the newes of Hannibal his being landed in Africk; made to vnderstand the resolution of the Carthaginians, which was, not to yeeld vnto any conditions vnprofitable for themselues, as long as they were able to make resistance. Wherefore hee sent vnto Masanissa: and informed him of all that was fallen out; praying him to come away with speed, and lay all other businesse a-part. Ten Ro∣man Companies, of Horse and Foot together, Masanissa had with him; that were lent vnto him by Scipio, to doe him seruice in the establishing and enlarging of his Kingdome. But he well vnderstood, that those and many more besides all his owne forces would little auaile him; if Hannibal should driue the Romans out of Africk. Wherefore taking such order as hee could vpon the sudden, for the of his owne Kingdome; with foure thousand Horse, and sixe Foot, hee made all haste vnto Scipio. Soone after the beginning of these new troubles, the Embassadours that had beene at Rome, returned backe vnder the conduct of Laelius and : who brought them safe into the Roman Campe. There when they arriued, and vnderstood what had lately passed, how their Citizens had behaued them∣selues towards the Roman Embassadours: they made little doubt, how owne heads should answere for such outrage. To confirme them in this opinion. M. Baebius one of the late Embassadours that had beene in Carthage, being left by Scipio to take charge of the Campe, laid hands vpon them, and detained them; sen∣ding word vnto his Generall, who was gone abroad to make warre in the Countrie, that he had them in his power, and that now the Carthaginians might bee repaid in their owne Coyne, for the injurie by them lately done. Scipio was very glad to heare of this; and commanded to vse them with all possible courtesie, and send them safe home. By thus doing He brake the hearts of his Enemies; and cau∣sed them to acknowledge themselues, (which was a great victorie) ho∣nourable than the Romans. This notwithstanding, He made more cruell warre vpon them than before: taking their Townes by force; and putting them to sacke, with∣out to any Composition. It was the manner of the Romans, as often as they tooke a Towne by assault, to put all that came in their way to the sword, whatsoeuer they were, without regard. This they did, to make themselues terrible: and the better to worke such impression in the mindes of those, with whom they had to doe, they vsed oftentimes to kill the very Dogges and other Beasts, that ranne , è Polyb. lib. 10. athwart them in the streets; hewing their bodies asunder, as men delighted in shed∣ding of bloud. This being their practise at other times: it is likely, that now they omitted no peece of crueltie; when they meant to giue proofe of their vehement in∣dignation, and reuengefull mindes, for the injuries receiued. Hence it partly grew, that the Carthaginians were so earnest in pressing Hannibal to fight. Hannibal being encamped at Zama, sent foorth his Scowts and Spies, to discouer where the Romans lay; what they were doing; and as much as might be of their de∣meanour. Some of these were taken, and brought vnto Scipio: who of trus∣sing them vp, gaue them free leaue to view his Campe at pleasure; appointing one to conduct them vp and downe, and shew them whatsoeuer they desired. This done, He gaue them to depart; and sent them away safe vnto their Generall. Hannibal vnderstanding this, admired the brauerie and courage of his Enemie: with whom on the sudden he grew desirous to haue an Enter-view, and personall confe∣rence; and signified so much vnto him, by a messenger sent of purpose. Of this mo∣tion the Roman liked well: and returned answere, that Hee would meet him shortly in place conuenient. The next day Masanissa came with his Armie: whom Scipio taking with him, remoued vnto a Towne called Nadagara; neare vnto which hee sat downe, in a place otherwise commodious, and close by a water that might oppor∣tunely serue his Campe. Thence he sent word vnto the Carthaginian, That the time and place did fitly serue, if He had ought to say to him. Hannibal thereupon remo∣ued from Zama, and came within foure miles of the Enemie: where hee encamped well to his owne good liking in all things else; excepting that his men were driuen to take much paines, in fetching their water somewhat farre off. Then was order taken for their meeting: and the two Generals, each of them with a troupe of Horse, rode foorth of their Campes, till they came vnto a peece of ground; which was before well searched, for feare of ambush. There they will their followers to stand off: and themselues, with each of them one Interpreter, encountred each o∣ther in the mid-way betweene their Companies. They remained a while silent, viewing one the other with mutuall admiration. Then beganne the Carthaginian, sa∣luting the Roman, to deliuer his minde to this effect: That it had beene better both for Carthage and for Rome, if they could haue limited and contained their ambition within the shores of Africke and of Italie; for that the Countries of Sicil and of Spaine, about which their fathers and themselues had striuen, were no sufficient re∣compence for so many Fleets as had beene lost, and of so much bloud as had beene shed, in making those costly purchases. But since things past could not bee recalled: He said, That it was meet for them to consider, vnto what extreme dangers their owne Cities had beene exposed, by the greedie desire of extending their Empires abroad; and that it was euen time for them now at length, to make an end of their obstinate contention, and pray the gods to endue them with greater wisedome hereafter. And to such peaceable disposition He affirmed that his owne yeares, and long triall of Fortune both good and euill, had made him inclinable. But much he feared, that Scipio, by want of the like experience might rather fixe his minde vpon vncertaine hopes, than vpon the contemplation of that mutabilitie, whereto all hu∣mane affaires are subiect. Yet (said He) mine owne example may per aduenture suffice to teach thee moderation. For I am that same HANNIBAL, who after my victorie at Cannae wanne the greatest part of Italie: and deuised with my selfe, what I should doe with your Ci∣tie of Rome; which I hoped verily to haue taken. Once I brought mine Armie to your walles, as thou hast since brought thine to ours of Carthage: but now, see the change! I stand here entreating thee to grant vs peace. This may serue as a document of Fortunes instabilitie. I fought with thy Father, SCIPIO: Hee the first of the Roman Generals, that euer met mee in the field. I did then little thinke; that the time would come, that I should haue such businesse, as now at the present, with his sonne. But this is euen one of Fortunes Pageants, whereof shee hath many. And thou maist haue experience of the like in thy selfe, who knowes how soone? Thinke vpon M. ATILIVS. If hee would haue hearkened vnto such perswasions, as I now vse to thee; hee might haue returned home to Rome an happy man. And so maist thou doe now, if any reasonable offer will giue thee satisfaction. How saist thou? thou be contented, that all Spaine, Sicil, Sardinia, and whatsoeuer Ilands else are situate betweene Italie and Africk, be abandoned by the Carthaginians for euer; and left vnto the Romans, to beare Dominion therein? Thou shalt haue glorie enough by effecting thus much: and the Romans may well be glad of such a bargaine. As for vs: our owne quiet shall henceforth giue vs contentment. And the same contentment of ours, shall make vs faithfully obserue the Peace with you. But if thou thinkest all too little, I must desire thee to ponder well how great an hazzard thou must vndergoe, for the obtaining of a very little more, than that which thou maist haue without contention. It is now in owne power, to lay holde vpon good Fortune, if it please thee: stay but till to morrow night; and thou must take such fortune, as it shall please the gods. The issue of battaile is vncertaine, and many times beguileth ex∣pectation. Men and steele we shall each of vs bring into the field: but of the victory, neither of vs hath assurance. Let vs therefore without more adoe, make peace. And doe not tell me, that some false-hearted Citizens of ours dealt fraudulently of late in the like Treatie: It is I HANNIBAL that now desire peace with thee; which I would doe, if I thought it not expedient for my Countrie. And thinking it expedient, I will alwayes maintaine it: like as I haue maintained vnto my power, as long as the gods did not enuie mee, the Warre by me be∣gunne. Hereunto Scipio made answere, That it was no ambitious desire of ruling in Sicil and in Spaine, which had mooued the Romans to enter into this or the former : but that the defence of the Mamertines, and afterwards of the Saguntines, their confederates, had caused them to put on those armes; which the gods by the issue of the Warres had approued, and would approue to bee most iust. As for the mutabilitie of Fortune: he said, that he was not thereof ignorant; and that with∣out any note of insolence, or ouer-weening, he might well refuse the conditions of∣fered. For was it not plaine, that all these , with which the Carthaginians now so willingly departed, were alreadie wonne from them by the Romans? If, said He, these Con∣ditions had beene propounded whilest as yet yee detained some part of Italie, they might aduenture not haue beene reiected. But as the case now stands, I see no reason, why I should remit vnto you any one peece of those my former demands; to which the Carthaginians yeelded alreadie, and thought mee to deale graciously in being so moderate. Rather I say, that the which they haue done me since, haue made them obtaining peace vpon so friendly termes. But I cannot blame thee, HANNIBAL, though thou wouldest be glad to make thy Citizens vnderstand, from how much of their burden they are by thy meanes eased. Onely thou must thinke, that in like sort it concernes me in honour, not to let them be gainers or sauers by the wrongs which they haue done of late. Thou knowest well, that, be∣sides those offers which thou here hast made, they were well contented to restore vnto vs ran∣some-free all prisoners that they of ours; to pay vs thousand Talents; to deliuer vp their Callies; and to deliuer hostages for assurance of faire dealing. And must they now be discharged of all this, by their breach of Truce; their spoiling of our Fleet; and their viola∣ting our Embassadours? Not so. But if they can be contented, besides all this, to make such as I shall require, for these iniuries newly done: then will I take aduice with my Coun∣cell what answere to giue you; otherwise, you may euen prepare for warre, and blame your owne solues, for that I haue denied you peace. Hereupon they brake off: and returned each to his owne Campe, with no other newes than warre; bidding their Souldiers prepare for a battaile, wherein should be decided the quarrell betweene Rome and Carthage. The next morning at breake of day they issued into the field: a notable Match, and such as hath very seldome beene found; whether we regard the Generals; their Armies; the two Cities that contended; or the great importance of the battaile at hand. Scipio ordered his men after the Roman manner: placing first the Hastaty, diuided into their Maniples, or small Battalions, with a reasonable distance them: Not farre behind these followed the Principes, likewise diuided; and so after them the Triarij. But herein Scipio altered a little the ordinarie custome of the Romans: He placed not the Mani∣ples of his Principes opposite vnto the void spaces betweene the Hastaty, that so the Hastaty, as was vsuall, might fall backe betweene the Principes; but hee placed them directly one behind another, as it were, in File. This Hee did because of the Ele∣phants; whereof Hannibal had many. For of those beasts the danger was lesse, whilest there was open way to let them through. Therefore hee tooke such order, that when they had passed through the spaces betweene the first Battalions, they should not come vpon the Principes in Front. Vnto his Velites or those of the light arma∣ture, that were to beginne the fight, Hee gaue direction, that when they found themselues ouer-charged, eyther by the Enemies, or (which was most to bee fea∣red) by the Elephants, they should runne backe through those lanes that were be∣tweene the Maniples; and that those which were swiftest, or otherwise best able, should continue on their flight, vntill they were got behind all their owne Armie; thereby leauing roome enough vnto those that were wounded, or cast behinde, to saue themselues on the void ground, that was betwixt the first and second, or the second and third Battailes, without cloying vp the way betweene the Maniples, which he desired to keepe open. His Italian Horse hee placed in the left wing vnder C. . In the right wing was with his Numidians. He himselfe riding vp and downe, exhorted his men to doe valiantly; vsing words not many, but verie forcible. He bade them remember what they had atchieued, since their comming into Africke. He told them, That if this day were theirs, the warre was at an end: and that their victorie in this warre, should make them Lords of all the World; for that afterwards, none would be found able to resist them. On the contrary; if they were beaten, he asked them whither they would fly. They were farre from home, yea and from their owne standing Campe: neyther was there any place in Africk, that would giue them shelter; if they fell into the Carthaginians hands, they knew what to expect. And therefore there was none other way, but Death or Vi∣ctory: vnlesse they would liue like wretched slaues vnder most mercilesse Enemies. In such necessitie, he said, that they which consider themselues to be, and take reso∣lution answerable thereunto, haue neuer beene knowne to faile of getting victory. Hannibal on the other side placed his Elephants, that were more than fourescore, in Front of his Battaile. Next behind these, he made his Vantguard all of Merci∣naries; Ligurians, Gaules, Baleares, and Moores. Then followed his Battaile: which was of Carthaginians and Africans, more interessed in the quarrell than were those Mercinaries; though not so good souldiers: but to helpe (if it might be) their want of courage, they had with them foure thousand Macedonians, lately sent from King Philip. More than the space of a furlong behind these came his Rereward, consist∣ing of those braue Souldiers which had serued him in his Italian warres; and were the onely men, in whom he reposed any confidence. Opposite to Laelius, in his owne right wing he bestowed the Carthaginian Horse. Tychaeus and the Numidians he pla∣ced in his left wing against Masanissa. He was indeede farre too weake for the Ene∣mie in Horse, both in number and in goodnesse. For Tychaeus and Mezetullus had no more than three thousand; and those not so well exercised, as were the foure thousand of Masanissa. The Carthaginians also were no more, nor none other than such as could be leuied in the haste of a few dayes; and the remainder of those, that had of late beene often vanquished, and accustomed to fly. But it was no time for Hannibal, neyther had hee perhaps authoritie, to make these his companions alight and serue on foote, setting better men in their saddles. All that he could haue done, was to stay a little longer, and expect more helpe. Had Vermina the sonne of Syphax come thither, as he did in few dayes after, with sixteene thousand and vpwards, the most of them Horse: the aduantage of number might haue serued well to supply all other defect. Yet since the Lords of Carthage would brooke no delay: Hannibal must be faine to comfort himselfe, with the hope that hee reposed in his old Italian Souldiers; whose vertue had wrought greater wonders, when it was more strongly opposed. He encouraged therefore his men, with words agreeable to their seuerall conditions: promising vnto the Mercinaries bountifull rewards: threatning the Carthaginians with ineuitable seruitude, if they lost that day; but anima∣ting his old fellow-souldiers, by the many victories which they had obtained against farre greater numbers. He bade them to looke vpon the Enemies; and make an e∣stimate, whether they were any thing like so many, as that huge Armie which they had slaughtered at Cannae. He willed them to remember, That it was one P. Scipio, euen the father of this man, whom they had first of all compelled to runne away. He told them, that these Legions which they yonder beheld, were, for the most part of them, the very of the Romane Souldiers; euen such, as for their dastardly flight out of sundry battailes, could no longer be trusted to beare Armes in their owne Countrie. As for the rest: they were yong men, the sonnes of Cowards, and bred vp in the continuall feare of those weapons, by which their fathers were daily slaine or chaced. Wherefore he entreated these his old companions, vpon whose vertue he meant wholly to repose himselfe, that they would this day striue to make good their honour; and to purchase the same of . Such exhortations vsed the two Generalls before the fight. When they drew neare together: the Horsemen sides beganne to skirmish. The Trumpets, and other instruments of warre, sounded to battaile: and Hannibal com∣manded his Elephants to breake vpon the . Of these Elephants (as they were alwayes an vncertaine kinde of helpe) those that stood neere vnto the point of the left wing, turned backe for : and vpon their owne Numidian Horse; which they and disordered. this, gaue charge vpon the same Numidians; and not suffering them to , draue them quite out of the field. The rest of those made spoile of the Roman Velites, whom they followed into the spaces betweene the Maniples: but without any harme to the Battalions themselues; which gaue them open way, accordingly as Scipio had well prouided. Diuers of them receiuing many wounds, and growing therewith furious, could no longer be gouerned: but ranne backe vpon the right point of their owne battaile, and beyond that into the open field. Herewithall they disordered the Carthaginian Horse which were in that wing: against whom they gaue to Laelius the same aduantage, that Masanissa had against the Numidians; which hee vsed in like sort. In the meane while, the Battels of foote aduanced, and drew neere toge∣ther with a slow and stately pace, till they were almost within a weapons cast: at what time they gaue a shout, and ranne one at the other. The Mercinaries for a time see∣med both in audacitie, and in quicknesse, to haue the better of the Romanes; wounding many, and doing more harme, than they tooke. But the Romane discipline after a while, preuailed against the boisterous violence of these vntrained Barbarians. Whereunto it helped not a little, that the battell of the , following some∣what neere after the Hastaty, encouraged their fellowes; and shewed themselues rea∣die, if neede were, to them. Contrariwise, the Mercinaries receiued no man∣ner of helpe or COLIfort, from those that should haue seconded them. For the new∣leuied Carthaginians and Africans, when they saw their hired souldiers giue backe, did also themselues retire. This caused the Ligurians, Gaules, and the rest, to thinke themselues betrayed: whereupon they inclined vnto flight. The Carthaginian Bat∣taile was herewith more terrified than before, so as it refused to giue way vnto the Mercinaries for their safe retrait; and yet withall bore to make head against the Enemies, that pursued them. It was no time to aske them what they meant by this: Feare and Indignation caused those that were at once chaced by the Romanes, and betrayed, as they thought, by their owne fellowes, to turne their Armes with an heedlesse furie against both the one and the other. Thus were many of the Cartha∣ginians beaten downe and slaine, through their owne indiscretion, by their owne Mercinaries. The Romane Hastaty in like sort, fighting with desperate men in a throng, had their hands so full of worke; that the Principes were faine to come vp vnto them, and helpe to ouer-beare this great medley of enemies, that were toge∣ther by the eares among themselues. In this place was made a great slaughter, both of the Mercinaries and of the Carthaginians: which hindering one another could nei∣ther fight, nor easily flie. Such of them as escaped, ranne towards Hannibal: who kept his ground, and would not stirre one foote, to helpe or saue these Runne- He caused his men to bend their Pikes at those of his owne side, that would haue rushed vpon him: whom hee thereby compelled to turne aside beyond his Battaile, and saue themselues in the open field. The ground, ouer which the Romanes were now to march, ere they could meete with Hannibal, was couered with such thicke heapes of dead bodies and weapons, and so slippery with bloud: that Scipio began to in great doubt, lest the orders of his Battalions should be dissolued in passing that way. In such case, if he should fight with that warlike Armie, which he saw before him, remayning yet entire, and without feare expecting him; He might be well as∣sured to receiue a notable ouerthrow. Hee caused therefore the Hastaty to make a stand there where they were, opposite vnto the maine battaile of the Hannibalians. Then drawing vp his Principes and Triarij: Hee placed them, when they had ouer∣come the bad way, all in one Front with the Hastaty, and made of them his two Cor∣nets. This done, he aduanced towards Hannibal: who entertained him after ano∣ther manner, than euer he had beene receiued in his life before. All the dayes till now, seemed to haue beene onely a matter of pastime; in regard of the sharpe Conflict, that was maintained betweene these notable Souldiers. The Romanes were encouraged, by their hauing preuailed all the day before: They were also farre the more in number. But these old Souldiers of Hannibal were fresh; and (perhaps) the better men. They fought with such obstinate resolution, that no man gaue backe one foote; but rather chose to die vpon the ground, whereon he stood. So that, af∣ter a long time, it was vncertaine which part had the worse: vnlesse it may seeme, that the Romanes were beginning to shrinke; for as much as the returne of Masanissa and Laelius from pursuit of the Enemies Horse, is said to haue beene most happie and . . 15. in a needfull time. These vpon the sudden charged the Hannibalians in Rere; and ouer∣bearing them by meere violence, compelled them to fall to Rout. In this Battaile there dyed of the Romanes fifteene hundred and vpwards: on the Carthaginian side, aboue twentie thousand, besides as many that were taken; of whom, Sopater Captaine of the Macedonians was one. The singular skill that Han∣nibal shewed in this his last fight, is highly commended by ; and was ac∣knowledged, as Liuie reports, by Scipio himselfe. But the Enemies were too strong for him in Horse: and being enioyned, as hee was, by the State of Carthage to take battaile with such disaduantage, he could worke no maruels. He saued himselfe with a few Horse; and stayed not in his journey, till he came to Adrumetum. Thence was he sent for to Carthage; from which he had beene absent sixe and thirtie yeares. At his comming into the Senate He said plainly, That there was none other way left, than to take such peace as could be gotten. Wherefore the , not know∣ing what other course to take, resolued to send Embassadours againe; and trie the fauour of Scipio, whose Armes they could not now resist. Scipio hauing spoiled the Enemies Campe, returned backe to Vtica: where hee found P. Lentulus newly arriued, with fiftie Gallies and an hundred Shippes of bur∣den. With this Fleet, and that which hee had before, Hee thought it best to make towards Carthage: rather of purpose to terrifie the Citie, than with any hope to take it His Legions he committed vnto Cn. Octauius; whom he willed to meet him there by land. Then sending Laelius away to Rome with newes of the victorie, He set saile from Vtica towards Carthage. He was encountred on the way by ten Embassa∣dours from the Citie: who bearing vp with the Admirall Gallie, beganne to vse the pittifull gesture of suppliants. But they receiued none other answere, than that they should meet him at , where He would giue them audience. So rowing along before the Citie: and viewing it more in , than with meaning to at∣tempt it; He returned backe to Vtica, and called backe Octauius thither, with whom in person Hee set forwards to Tunes. As they were in their journie thither, they heard the newes, that Vermina the sonne of Syphax, was comming with an Armie of more Horse than Foot, to the succour of those that were alreadie vanquished. This Vermina seemes to haue beene both carelesse of getting intelligence how things pas∣sed, and very defectiue in all other duties requisite in the Commander of an Armie. Part of the Roman Foot, with all their power of Horse, was sent against him: which did not onely beat him, but so compasse him in, that hee hardly escaped himselfe with a few; leauing fifteene thousand of his followers dead behinde him, and twelue hundred taken prisoners. If this good companie had beene with Hannibal at Nada∣gara, they should haue beene farre better conducted, and might well haue changed the Fortune of the day; which the Carthaginian lost, by default of Horse. But God had otherwise determined. It is not to bee doubted, that this victorie, though it were no great accesse vnto the former; yet serued well to daunt the Carthaginians, and imprint in them the greater feare of Scipio. When he came to Tunes, there met him thirtie Embassadours from Carthage: whose behauiour though it was more piti∣full than it had beene before; yet procured it lesse commiseration, by reason of their late false dealing, after they had in like sort humbled themselues. Neuerthelesse it was considered, what a long and laborious worke it would proue, to besiege the mightie Citie of Carthage. And particularly Scipio stood in great doubt, left the honor of this warre, if it were protracted, should bee taken out of his handes; and giuen to one of the Consuls. Cn. Seruilius Caepio, that Consul who had charge of the warre a∣gainst Hannibal, at such time as he departed out of Italie: was bold to passe ouer into the Ile of Sicil (as it were in chace of Hannibal by him terrified and driuen away) with a purpose thence to haue proceeded into Africk, and taken from Scipio the Com∣mand of the Armie there. But a Dictator was chosen of purpose, to the ambition of this Consul . After him followed Tiberius Claudius, who made suite for the same Prouince of Africk: and was therein so earnest, that though neyther the Senate, nor People, would grant him his desire; yet hee needes would be going, procuring onely leaue of the Senate, that hee being Consul might ioyne with Scipio, were it with no more than equall authoritie. But ere Hee could haue his Fleete and all things in a readinesse for the journey, wherein no man cared to further him: Winter came on, and hee was onely tost at Sea with foule , first vpon the Coast of Hetruria, and afterwards by Sardinia; where his Consulship expired, and so he returned home a priuate man. Then came the joyfull newes to Rome, of the victorie obtained against Hanmbal, and that the warre was now euen at an end. Yet was Lentulus the new Consul passionate, in desiring Africk for his Prouince, That hee said hee would suffer nothing to passe in the Senate, vntill hee had first his will. Much adoe there was about this: and after many contenti∣ons, both in the Senate, and before the People, at last it was ordered, That if Peace were granted, it should be granted by Scipio; if the warre continued, Scipio should haue command therein by Land, and the Consul at Sea. The ambition of these men, caused Scipio to giue the more fauourable answere vnto the Carthaginian Em∣bassadours. Hee willed them to consider what they had deserued: and in regard thereof to thinke themselues well dealt withall, in that hee was contented to leaue vnto them their libertie and their owne Lawes, without appointing any Gouer∣nour ouer them, or Garrison to hold them in subiection; leauing also vnto them their possessions in Africk, such as they were at the beginning of this warre. As touching the rest hee was at a point, That, before hee granted them Peace or truce, they should make satisfaction for wrongs which they had done, whilest the late Treatie was in dependance. Hereunto if they would yeeld; then re∣quired Hee That immediately they should deliuer vp vnto the Romanes all Prisoners, Fugi∣tiues, and Renegados, that they had of theirs: likewise all their Gallies, excepting ten: and all their Elephants: That they should make no warre at all thence-forth out of Africk, neither yet within Africk, without licence of the Romanes: That the Countries, Townes, goods what∣soeuer, belonging any wise vnto MASANISSA, or to any of his Ancestors, which were in their possession, should be all by them restored vnto him: That they should finde corne for the Romane Armie, and wages for their Auxiliaries, during the time of Truce, vntill the Peace were fully concluded: That they should pay ten thousand Talents of Siluer, in the terme of fifty yeares, by two hundred Talents a yeare; and that for obseruance of Conditions, they should giue an hundred hostages, such as SCIPIO would choose, being none of them vnder foure∣teene yeares of age, nor aboue thirtie. With these conditions the Embassadors returned home; and reported them vn∣to the Citie. They were verie vnpleasing; and therefore one Gisco stood vp to speake against them: and exhorted the People, who gaue good attention, that they should not condescend vnto such intolerable demands. But Hannibal perceiuing this and noting withall what fauourable audience was giuen to this vaine Oratour, by the vnquiet yet vnwarlike Multitude; was bold to pull him downe from his stan∣ding, by plaine force. Hereat all the People murmured; as if their common libertie were too much wronged, by such insolence of this presumptuous Captaine. Which Hannibal perceiuing, rose vp and spake vnto them: saying, That they ought to par∣don him, if he had done otherwise than the customes of the Citie would allow; for∣asmuch as he had beene thence absent euer since he was a Boy of nine yeares old, vn∣till he was now a man of fiue and forty. Hauing thus excused himselfe of the disor∣der, He discoursed vnto them concerning the Peace: and perswaded them to accept it, as wanting abilitie to defend themselues; had the demands of the Enemie beene yet more rigorous. Finally vpon good aduice, they resolued to yeeld vnto the Con∣ditions propounded by Scipio: to whom they payed out of hand fiue and twentie thousand pound weight of Siluer, in recompence of damages, and injuries by them done to his Fleet and Embassadours. Scipio granted them Truce for three moneths; in which time they might negotiate with the State of Rome, about confirmation of the League. But herewithall Hee gaue injunction, that they should neyther in the meane while send Embassadours any whither else, nor yet dismisse any Embas∣sadours to them sent; without first making him acquainted what they were, and what their errand was. At this time Hanno, and they of his Faction, were become wise and honorable nen, by the miseries whereinto Carthage was fallen through their malicious . Asdrubal, surnamed the Kid, a venerable man, and great friend of Hanno, was chiefe of the Embassages which they sent to Rome for obtaining peace. They went thither in company of Scipio his Embassadours; who related vnto the Senate and People these joyfull newes. About the same time arriued at Rome Embassa∣dours from Philip King of Macedon: who, together with the Carthaginians, were faine to wait a while for audience, till the election of new Consuls then in hand was fini∣shed; and order taken, for the Prouinces of them, and the new Praetors. Then were the Macedonian Embassadors called into the Senate: who first answering vnto some points, wherein the Romanes had lately signified vnto their King that they found themselues grieued; returned the blame vpon those Greekes themselues, that had made their complaint at Rome. Then accused they M. Aurelius: who being one of the three Embasiadours, that had lately beene sent from Rome vnto King Philip, tarried in Greece behinde his fellowes; and there leuying men, made warre vpon the King, without any regard at all of the League, that was betweene him and the Ro∣mans. Further they desired of the Senate, That one Sopater, a Macedonian Gentle∣man, with other of their Countrimen, that had lately serued Hannibal for Pay, and being taken Prisoners in , were kept in bonds by Scipio; might be released, and deliuered vnto them. Vnto all this M. Furius, whom Aurelius had sent to Rome for that purpose, made a sharpe answere. Hee said, that the Greekes which were con∣federate with Rome, endured so many iniuries at the hands of Philip, that M. Au∣relius was faine to stay behinde, to helpe them as he might; which else were like to be brought vnder the Kings subiection. As for Sopater: He affirmed him to be one of the Kings Counsaile, and verie inward with him; one that serued not for money, but carried money with him, and foure thousand men, sent from the King to the ayde of Hannibal. About these points when the Macedonian Embassadours could make vnto the Senate no good answere: they were willed to returne, and tell their Master, That warre hee sought, and warre hee should finde, if hee proceeded as hee had begunne. For in two maine pointes Hee had broken the League, that was betweene him and the Romanes: first, in that hee had wronged their Confede∣rates; and secondly, in that hee had ayded their Enemies against them with men and money. These quarrels with Philip, that promised to open a way into Greece and the Ea∣sterne Countries, helped well the Embassadours in their sollicitation of Peace. They appeared a very reuerend company, when they entred into the Senate: and Asdrubal aboue the rest was much respected, as one, whose good offices had kept the Romanes from necessitie of sending Embassadours to Carthage, vpon the like errand. He liberally granted, that the justice of the quarrell had beene wholly on the Romanes side; saying that it was the fault of some violent men, through which the Peace was broken. Yet could he not altogether excuse the Citie; that had beene too vehement in the prosecution of bad counsaile. But if Hanno and himselfe might haue had their wills: the Carthaginians, euen at the best of their Fortune, should haue granted the peace which they now desired. Herewithall hee commended the moderation of the Romanes, as no small argument of their valour; by which alwaies they had beene victorious. To the same effect spake the rest of the Embassadours: all of them entreating to haue the Peace ratified; though some with more lamenta∣ble words than others, according to the diuersitie of their stile. They had patience enough to endure such reproofe of Perjurie, as they themselues might haue laid vp∣on the Romanes; if their diligence and fortune had beene such as the Romanes was. A∣mong the rest, when one of the Senators demanded, by what gods they would sweare to keepe the peace hereafter: Asdrubal made answere; Euen by the same gods, that are so seuere vnto those that violate their Leagues. Lentulus the Consul interposing the authoritie of his Office, would haue hindred the Senate from proceeding vnto conclusion of peace; for that hereby Hee was like to lose the honour, which he purposed to get by making warre in Africk. But the matter was propounded vnto the people, in whom rested the Soueraigne Com∣mand of Rome; and by them referred wholly vnto the pleasure of the . So it was decreed, That Scipio with ten Delegates sent vnto him from Rome of purpose, should make a League with the Carthaginians, vpon such Conditions as seemed best: which were none other, than the same which he had alreadie propounded. For this fauour, the Carthaginian Embassadours humbly thanked the Senate; and craued li∣cence, that they might visite their Countrimen, which were prisoners in Rome: af∣terwards, that they might ransome and carrie home with them some, that were their especiall friends; of whom they gaue in writing almost two hundred names. Where∣upon the Senate ordained, that two hundred of those Prisoners, which the Embas∣sadours would choose, should be sent ouer into Africk, and be freely restored to li∣bertie by Scipio, when the peace was fully concluded. So they tooke leaue, and re∣turned home, in company of the ten Delegates, that were appointed by the Senate to joyne with Scipio in Commission. At their comming into Africk, the Peace was giuen, and accepted, without any controuersie or disputation. The Prisoners, Fugitiues, and , were de∣liuered vp to Scipio: likewise the Gallies, and the Elephants. Scipio tooke more ven∣geance vpon the Renegados, than vpon the Fugitiues; and vpon those of the Ro∣manes, than vpon the Latines or other Italians. The Latines hee beheaded: the Ro∣manes hee crucified. About the first payment of their money; the Carthaginians were somewhat troubled. For though perhaps their common Treasurie could haue spared two hundred Talents for the present: yet since the pension was an∣nuall, and to continue fiftie yeares; it was thought meete to lay the burden vpon the Citizens. At the collecting of the summe there was piteous lamentation, as if now the Romane yoke had begunne to pinch them; so as many, euen of the Sena∣tours, could not forbeare weeping. Contrariwise Hannibal could not refraine from laughter. For which when hee was checked by Asdrubal Haedus and tolde, That it worst of all beseemed him to laugh, since hee had beene the cause why all others did weepe; Hee answered, That laughter did not alwayes proceed from ioy; but sometime from extremitie of indignation. Yet said Hee, My laughter is more , and lesse absurd, than your teares. For yee should haue wept, when yee gaue vp your Shippes and Ele∣phants, and when yee bound your owne hands from the vse of Armes; without the good leaue of the Romanes first obtained. This miserable condition keepes vs vnder; and holds vs in assured seruitude. But of these matters yee had no feeling. Now, when a little mo∣ney is wrung out of your priuate purses, yee haue thereof some sense. God grant that the time come not hereafter, wherein yee shall acknowledge, That it was the very least part of your mi∣serie, for which yee haue shed these teares. Thus discoursed Hannibal vnto those, who tasting the bitter fruits of their owne malicious counsaile, repented when it was too late; and in stead of cursing their owne disorders, which had bred this grieuous dis∣ease, accused that Physicion, whose noble endeauours had beene employed in pro∣curing the remedie. Scipio being to take leaue of Africk, produced Masanissa, and magnified him in presence of the Armie, with high commendations not vndeseruedly. To him also hee consigned ouer those Townes of King Syphax, which the Romanes at that pre∣sent held: wherein, to say truth, hegaue him but his due; and that which otherwise hee knew not well how to . But the loue of the Romanes, and friendship of Scipio, was fully answerable, now and hereafter, to all the deseruings of this Numidi∣an King. About Carthage there rested no more to be done. Wherefore the Romanes embarqued themselues for Sicil: where when they arriued at Lilybaeum, Scipio with some part of his Armie tooke his way home to Rome by land; and sent the rest be∣fore him thither by Sea. His journey through Italie was no lesse glorious than any Triumph: all the people thronging out of the Townes and Villages, to doe him ho∣nour as he passed along. He entered the Citie in Triumph: neither was there euer before, or after, any Triumph celebrated with so great joy of the people, as was this of Scipio; though, in brauery of the pompe, there were others in time shortly fol∣lowing, that exceeded this. Whether Syphax were carried through the Citie in this Triumph; and died soone after in prison: or whether he were dead a while before; it cannot be affirmed. Thus much may be auowed, That it was a barbarous cu∣stome of the Romanes, to insult ouer the calamities of mightie Princes, by leading them contumeliously in Triumph; yea though they were such, as had alwaies made faire and courteous warre. But hereof we shall haue better example, ere the same Age passe. It was neyther the person of Syphax, nor any other glory of the specta∣cle, that so much beautified the Triumph of Scipio; as did the contemplation of that grieuous warre past, whereof the Romanes had beene in a manner without hope, . . lib. 16. that they should set Italie free. This made them looke cheerefully vpon the Au∣thor of so great a conuersion; and filled them with more joy, than they well could moderate. Wherefore they gaue to Scipio the Title of the African: stiling him by the name of that Prouince which he had subdued. This honorable kind of surname, taken from a conquered Prouince, grew afterwards more common, and was vsurped by men of lesse desert: especially by many of the Caesars, who sometimes arrogated vnto themselues the title of Countries, wherein they had performed little or no∣thing; as if such glorious Attributes could haue made them like in vertue vnto the African. CHAP. IIII. Of PHILIP the father of PERSEVS, King of Ma∣cedon; His first Acts and warre with the Romans, by whom he was subdued. §. I. How the Romans grew acquainted in the East Countries, and desirous of warre there. The beginning of many Princes, with great warres, at one time. The Aetolians ouerrun Pelopon∣nesus. PHILIP and his Associates make war against the Aetolians. Alteration of the State in Sparta. The Aetolians inuade Greece and Macedon, and are inuaded at home by PHILIP. OF the great similitude found in worldly euents, the li∣mitation of matter hath beene assigned as a proba∣ble Plut. in vita . cause. For since Nature is confined vnto a sub∣iect that is not vnbounded; the workes of Nature must needes be finite, and many of them resemble one the other. Now in those actions, that seeme to haue their whole dependance vpon the will of man, we are lesse to wonder, if we find lesse varietie: since it is no great portion of things which is obnoxious vnto humane power; and since they are the same affections, by which the wills of sundrie men are o∣uer-ruled, in mannaging the of our daily life. It may bee obserued in the change of Empires, before those times whereof we now write, how the Assyrians or Chaldaeans inuaded the kingdome of the Medes, with two hundred thousand foote and threescore thousand horse: but fayling in their intended conquest, they became subiect within a while themselues vnto the Medes and Persians. In like manner Darius, and after him Xerxes, fell vpon the Greekes with such numbers of men, as might haue seemed . But that the were beaten home, their Empire was neuer secure of the Greekes: who at all times of leasure from intestine warre deuised vpon that conquest thereof, which finally they made vnder the great Alexander. If Nabuchodonosor with his rough old souldiours, had vndertaken the Medes: or Cyrus with his well trayned Armie, had made the attempt vpon Greece; the issue might, in humane reason, haue beene farre different. Yet would it then haue beene expedient for them, to employ the trauell and vertue of their men, ra∣ther than the greatnesse of their names, against those people; that were no lesse va∣liant, though lesse renowned, than their owne. For the menacing wordes vsed by Cyrus, and some small displeasures done to the Greekes (in which kind it may bee, that Nabuchodonosor likewise offended the Medes and Persians ) were not so auailea∣ble to victory, as to draw on reuenge in the future. Great Kingdomes, when they decay in strength, suffer as did the old Lyon, for the oppression done in his youth; being pinched by the Wolfe, gored by the Bull, yea and kickt by the Asse. But Princes are often carried away from reason, by misse-vnderstanding the language of Fame: and despising the vertue that makes little noise, aduenture to prouoke it against themselues; as if it were not possible that their owne glory should be foyled by any of lesse-noted excellence. Against the same stone, whereat Xerxes, and before him (as I take it) Euilmerodach, had stumbled; Pyrrhus the Epirot hath dash his foot. Hee was not indeed the King of all Greece; though most of marke, and a better soul∣diour than any other Greekish King, when he entred into war against the Romans. This war he vndertooke as it were for his mindes sake: hauing receiued no iniurie; but hoping by the glory of his name, and of the Greekes that serued vnder him, to preuaile so easily against the barbarous Romans, that they should onely serue as a step to his further intended conquests, of Sicil and Africk. But when the Romans, by their victory against Pyrrhus; had found their owne vertue to bee of richer mettall, than was the more shining valour of the Greekes: then did all the brauery of the Epirot (his Elephants and whatsoeuer else had serued to make him terrible) serue onely to make the Romans, in time following, to thinke more highly of themselues. The King of Spaines pre∣tended inuin∣cible Nauie, being beaten out of the Bri∣tish seas, inui∣ted vs to those of Spaine: and hauing broken the greatest Fleet that euer the Spaniards gathered to∣gether; wee neuer made account of a∣ny his pre∣parations after that time. For since they had ouercome the best Warriour in Greece, euen Him; that, being thus beaten by them, could in a yeere after make himselfe Lord of Greece and Mace∣don: what should them from the conquest of all those vnwarlike Prouinces, which in compasse of twelue yeeres a Macedonian King of late memory had won? Certainly there was hereunto requisite no more, than to bring to their owne deuo∣tion by some good meanes, the whole Country of Greece: all the rest, this done, would follow of itselfe. How to deale with the Greekes; Philip and Alexander had shewed a way: which, or perhaps a better, they might learne, by getting more ac∣quaintance with the Nation. When therefore the first Punick war was ended, which followed soone after the wars of Pyrrhus and of the Tarentines: then were the Romans at good leisure to hear∣ken after newes in Greece; and to entertaine any good occasion, that should bee on that side presented. They had also then a strong Fleet: and were become, though not otherwise very skilfull Mariners, yet good fighters at Sea. So it fell out as hap∣pily as could be wished, that the Illyrian Queene Teuta made at the same time cru∣ell warre vpon the Greekes: wasting their Country, and sacking their Townes, only because they were vnable to resist, though they had done her none offence. Into this quarrell if the Romans were desirous to enter; the Queene was not slow to giue them Lib. 5. cb. 2. §. 7. cause. And their happy accomplishing of that war which they made with Her, was, in their owne opinion, a matter not vnworthy to make their Patronage to be desired by the Greekes. But no such thing happened: though they sent Embas∣sadours, as it were to offer themselues; by signifying, that for the loue of Greece they had vndertaken this Illyrian warre. Thus began the first acquaintance betwixt the Greekes and Romanes: which afterwards encreased very hastily, through the indiscre∣tion of King Philip the Macedonian; whose businesse with them being now the sub∣iect of our storie, it is meet that we should relate (though somewhat briefely) the be∣ginning of his reigne, and his first Actions. It was like to proue a busie time in the world, when, within the space of foure yeares, new Kings began to reigne in the most of all Countries knowne; and three of them yong boyes, in three of the greatest Kingdomes. This happened from the third yeare of the hundred thirty ninth Olympiad, vnto the third of the Olympiad fol∣lowing. For in this time died Seleucus Ceraunus King of Asia and Syria, in whose roome succeeded his brother Antiochus, afterwards called the great. Ptolemie Philo∣pator succeeded in the Kingdome of Aegypt vnto his father Euergetes. And Philip the sonne of Demetrius, being sixteene or seuenteene yeares old, receiued the Kingdome of Macedon, together with the Patronage of the Achaeans and most of the Greekes; by the decease of his Vncle Antigonus Doson, that was called the Tutor or Protector. A∣bout the same time also was the like change in Cappadocia, Lacedaemon, and the Coun∣tries about Mount Taurus. For Ariarathes then beganne his reigne in Cappadocia. Ly∣curgus found meanes to make himselfe King ouer the Lacedaemonians, whose Com∣mon-weale, the flight of Cleomenes, had continued in a manner headlesse; and Achaeus, a kinsman of Antiochus, but a Rebell vnto him, occupied the Regions neare vnto Mount Taurus, and kept a while the State of a mighty King. Lastly, in the second and third yeares of the hundred and fortieth Olympiad it was, that open war brake out betweene Rome and Carthage; and that Hannibal began his great Inuasion vpon Italie. Those troubles of the Westerne world, which were indeed the greatest, we haue alreadie followed vnto an end: Of Antiochus, Ptolemie, and the rest, we shall speake hereafter, when the Romanes finde them out. Philip, soone after the beginning of his reigne, came into Pcloponnesus; greatly de∣sired of the Achaeans, and many others his dependants. That Country, hauing freed it selfe by the helpe of Antigonus from the danger (accounted great) of an easie sub∣iection vnto Cleomenes: was now become no lesse obnoxious to the Macedonian, than it should haue beene to the Spartan; and therewithall it lay open vnto the violence of the Aetolians, who despised euen the Macedonian Kings, that were Patrons ther∣of. These Aetolians were no men to be idle; nor were much addicted to any other Art, than warre. Therefore wanting employment, they fell vpon the Messenians that were their owne Clients, and excepting the Eleans, that were anciently of their con∣sanguinitie) the onely good friends which they had at the present in Peloponnesus. Their inuasion was no lesse vnexpected, then it was vniust: whereby with greater ease they made spoile of the Countrey; finding none prepared to make resistance. The Achaeans, were called by the Messenians to helpe: which they did the more wil∣lingly; because the Aetolians passing without leaue through their Territorie, had (as was their manner) done what harme they listed. Olde Aratus could ill abide these Aetolians; as both knowing well their nature, and remembring the iniuries, wherewith most vngratefully they had required no small benefits done to them by the Achaeans. He was therefore so hasty to fall vpon this their Armie, that hee could hardly endure to stay a few dayes vntill the time of his owne Office came; being chosen Praetor of the Achaeans for the yeare following. But his anger was greater Lib. 5. chap. 2. §. 6. than his courage: and he shewed himselfe a man fitter (as hath beene alreadie no∣ted . of him) for any other seruice, than leading of an Armie. He suffered them to passe quietly along with their bootie, through a great part of the Countrie, wherein he might easily haue distressed them; and afterwards pressed them so neare, when they had recouered ground of aduantage, that they easily defeated all his Armie. So they departed home rich, and well animated to returne againe. As for the Achae∣ans; they got hereby onely the friendship of the Messenians: with whom, by licence of King Philip, they made confederacie. Shortly after, the Aetolians inuaded Pelo∣ponnesus againe; hauing no more to doe, than to passe ouer the narrow Streights of the Corinthian Bay, called now the Gulfe of Lepanto, where they might land in the Country of the Eleans. There ioyned with them in this their second Inuasion a great number of the Illyrians: who neglecting that condition imposed vpon them by the Romans, of setting out no ships of warre vnto the Coast of Greece; made bold to seeke aduentures againe, and did great mischiefe. Demetrius Phartus, a creature of Chap. 3. §. 1. the Romans, commanded a part of these Illyrians: who shortly repented him of this his voyage; which caused him to lose his Kingdome, as is shewed before. But this Demetrius went another way, and fell vpon the Ilands of the Cyclades in the Aegean Sea: whence returning, he did some good offices for King Philip or his friends. The rest of the Illyrians vnder , or Scerdiletus, hauing gotten what they could else-where by rouing at Sea, accompanied the Aetolians into Peloponnesus: who made greater hauocke in the Countrie now, than in their former Expedition; and returned home, without finding any resistance. Of these things great complaint was made vnto Philip, when he came to Corinth. And because men were desirous to satisfie themselues with some speedie reuenge: there were that vrged to haue some grieuous punishment laid vpon the Lacedaemoni∣ans: who were thought vnder-hand to haue fauoured the Aetolians, in de∣spight of the Achaeans and Macedonians, by whom themselues had lately beene sub∣dued. It is true, that the Lacedaemonians had beene so affected: and (which was worse) at the arriuall of Philip, they slue such friends of his, as hauing checked their inclination, seemed likely to appeach them of the intended rebellion. Neither durst they well commit themselues to iudgement: but entreated the King, that he would abstaine from comming to them with an Armie: since their Towne was lately much disquieted with ciuill discord, which they hoped soone to appease, and meant al∣wayes to remaine at his deuotion. Philip was easily satisfied with this: not for that he (or rather old Aratus, who then wholly gouerned him) did misse-vnderstand the Lacedaemonians: but for that a greater worke was in hand, which ought not to be interrupted. There met at Corinth, in presence of the King, the Embassadours of the Achaeans, Boeotians, Phocians, Epirots, and Acarnanians: all complaining vpon the Aetolians: and desiring to haue warre decreed against them, by common assent. Philip sent his letters vnto the Aetolians: requiring them to make ready their answer in some conuenient time if they could alleadge any thing in excuse of that which they had done. They returned word, that a Diet should be holden at Rhium for that purpose: whither if it pleased him to come or send, hee should be well informed of them and their whole meaning. The King prepared to haue beene there at the day. But when the vnderstood this for certaintie, they adiourned the Councell vnto a further time: saying, That such weightie matters ought not to be handled, saue in the great Parliament of all Aetolia. This tricke of Law not withstanding, open warre was proclaimed against them. And they, as it were to shew how well they had deserued it, made election of Scopas to be their Praetor, that was Author of these In∣uasions made on Peloponnesus; and the onely man, in a sort, vpon whom they must haue laid the blame of these actions, if they would haue shifted it from the publike. After this, Philip went into Macedon; where he prepared busily for the warre a∣gainst the yeere following. He also assayed the , Scerdilaidas, with faire and promises: whom he easily won from the Aetolian side, forasmuch as the had cousened him of his share, when he was partner with them in their late rob∣beries. In like sort the Achaeans, who had first of all others proclaimed the warre in their owne Country, sent vnto the , Epirots, Messenians, and Lacedaemo∣nians: requesting them forth with to declare themselues, and to denounce warre vnto the Aetolians, without staying (as it were) to await the euent. Hereunto they receiued diuerse answeres, according to the qualities of those with whom they dealt. The Acarnanians, a free-hearted and valiant, though a small Nation, and bordering vpon the Aetolians, of whom they stood in continuall danger; said, that they could not honestly refuse to shew their faithfull meaning in that warre, which was concluded by generall assent. The Epirots that were more mightie, were more cunning and reserued: so that they stood vpon a needlesse point; and desired to bee held excused, vntill Philip (of whose meaning they needed not to haue made any doubt) should first proclaime the warre. The Messenians, for whose cause the warre was vndertaken, excused themselues, by reason of a Towne which the Aetolians held vpon their borders; and said, that they durst not be ouer-bold, vntill that bridle were taken out of their mouthes. As for the Lacedaemonians; the chiefe of them stu∣died onely how to mannage that treason, for which their Citie had beene so lately pardoned: and therefore dismissed the Embassadours of the Confederates, without any answere at all. They had three yeares together continued subiect against their wils to the Macedonians, expecting still when Cleomenes should returne out of Ae∣gypt to raigne ouer them againe; and maintaine, as he was wont, the honour of their Citie. In this regard they chose not any Kings; but were contented with the rule of Ephori. Of these there were some, that thought the publike safetie to consist, in holding their faith with the Macedonian that had preserued them: And hereto they referred all their counsailes; being perhaps not a little moued with respect of the benefit, which might redound vnto themselues, by adhering firmely to those which at the present rule ouer them. Others, and those the greater part, were still deuising, how to make all readie for Cleomenes against his returne; and therefore sought to ioyne with the Aetolians, which were the most likely to giue him strong assistance. The Macedonian faction had the more authoritie, and durst more freely speake their mindes: but the contrary side was the more passionate; and spared not by murders, or any other violent courses, to set forward their desire. Neyther did it suffice, that about these times there came certaine report of Cleomenes his death. For it was the liberty and honour of Sparta, which these intended: fancying vnto them∣selues the glory of their Ancestors in such Agespast, as were not like to come againe. Cleomenes was, they knew, the most able man to restore them vnto their greatnesse and lustre; which once he had in a manner performed: But since he was dead, and that, without iniury to his well-deseruing vertue, they might proceed to the electi∣on of new Kings: Kings they would haue, and those of the race of Hercules, as in former times; for that without such helpes, they must continue little better than subiects vnto the Macedonian, and farre lesse by him respected, than were the Achae∣ans. Thus were they transported, by contemplation of their old Nobility and fame. Some of the most working spirits among them, procured the Aetolians to send an Embassie to Sparta: which propounded the matter openly vnto the people; where∣of no one of the Citizens durst haue made himselfe the Author. Much disputation and hot there was, betweene those of the Macedonian partie and these their oppo∣sites: in such wise that nothing could be concluded; vntill by massacre or banish∣ment of all, or the chiefe, that spake against the Aetolians, the diuersitie of opinion was taken quite away. Then forth with a League was concluded betweene the La∣cedaemonians and Aetolians: without all regard of the Macedonians or Achaeans; who had spared the Citie, when they haue destroyed it. Then also they went in hand with the election of new Kings: wherein their diligence was so nice, and so re∣gardfull of their ancient Lawes, as touching the choosing of the one King; that we may iustly wonder, how they grew so in making choyce of the other. In the one of their Royall Families they found Agesipolis, the sonne of Agesipolis the son of King Cleombrotus: and him they admitted to raigne ouer them, as heire apparant to his Grandfather. This Agesipolis was a yong boy, standing in neede of a Guar∣dian; and had an Vncle, his fathers brother, that was fit for the Gouernment. Yet because the Law required, that the sonne, how yong soeuer, should haue his fa∣thers whole right and title: the Lacedaemonians, though standing in neede of a man, were so punctuall in obseruation of the Law; that they made this childe their King, and appointed his Vncle Cleomenes to bee his Protector. But in the other branch of the Royall family, though there was no want of heires: yet would not the people trouble themselues about any of them, to examine the goodnesse of his Claime; but made election of one , who hauing no manner of title to the kingdome, bestowed vpon each of the Ephori a Talent, and thereby made himselfe be saluted King of Sparta, and a Gentleman of the race of Hercules. This , to gratifie his Partisans, and to approue his worth by Action; inuaded the Countrie of the Argiues: which lay open and vngarded, as in a time of peace. There hee did great spoile, and wanne diuers Townes; whereof two hee retained, and annexed vnto the State of Lacedaemon. After such open hostilitie, the Lacedaemonians de∣clared themselues on the Aetolian side; and proclaimed warre against the A∣chaeans. Thus the beginnings of the warre fell out much otherwise, than the Achaeans and their Confederates had expected, when they first made preparation. Philip was not readie: the Epirots gaue vncertaine answere: the Messenians would not stirre: all the burden must lie vpon themselues and the poore , whom the Aeto∣lians, by fauour of the Eleans, could inuade at pleasure, as they were like to ; and by helpe of the Lacedaemonians, could assaile on all parts at once. It was not long ere the Aetolians, passing ouer the Bay of Corinth, surprised the Towne of Aegira: which they could haue held, they should thereby grieuously haue molested the Achaeans; for that it stood in the mid-way betweene Aegium and Sicyon two of their principall Cities, and gaue open way into the heart of all their Countrie. But as Aegira was taken by surprise: so was it presently lost againe, through greedinesse of spoile; whilest they that should haue made it their first care to assure the place vnto themselues, by occupying the Cittadell and other of strength, fell heed∣lessely to ransack priuate houses, and thereby gaue the Citizens leaue to make head, by whom they were driuen with great slaughter backe vnto their Fleet. About the same time, another Aetolian landing among the Eleans, fell vpon the Westerne Coast of Achaia; wasting all the of the Dymaeans and other peo∣ple, that were first beginners of the Achaean Confederacie. The and their neighbours made head against these Inuaders; but were so well beaten, that the ene∣mie grew bolder with them than before. They sent for helpe vnto their Praetor, and to all the Townes of their Societie. In vaine. For the Achaeans hauing lately beene much weakened by Cleomenes, were now able to doe little of themselues: nei∣ther could they get any strength of Mercinaries; for asmuch as at the end of Cleome∣nes his war, they had with-held part of their due from those that serued them therein. So through this disabilitie of the Achaeans, and insufficiencie of their Praetor; the Dymaeans, with others, were driuen to with-hold their contribution here∣tolore made for the publike seruice, and to conuert the monie to their owne defence. Lycurgus also with his Lacedaemonians, began to winne vpon the Arcadians; that were confederate with Philip and the Achaeans. Philip came to the borders of the Aetolians, whilst their Armie was thus employed a farre off in Peloponnesus. The Epirots ioyned all their forces with him: and by such their willing readines, drew him to the siege of a Frontier , which they desired to get into their owne hands; for that, by commoditie thereof, they hoped shortly to make themselues Masters of Ambracia. There he spent fortie dayes, ere he could end the busines; which tended onely to the benefit of the Epirots. Had he entred into the heart of Aetolia at his first comming; it was thought that he might haue made an end of the war. But it happens oft, that the violence of great Armies is broken vpon small Townes or Forts: and not seldome, that the importunitie of Associates, to haue their own desires fulfilled, conuerts the preparations of great Kings to those for which they neuer were intended; thereby hindering the prosecution of their dessignes. Thus was our King Henrie the eight led aside, and quite out of his way, by Maximilian the Emperour to the siege of Tournay: at such time as the French King Lewes the twelfth, hearing that the strong Citie of Terwin was lost, and that of his Cauellerie, wherein rested his chiefe confidence, two thousand were beaten by the Earle of Essex with seuen hundred English; was thinking to withdraw himselfe into Brittaine, in feare that Henrie would haue come to Paris. The stay that Philip made at Ambracus, did wondrously embolden the Aetolians: in such sort, as their Praetor Scopas aduentured to lead all their forces out of the Countrie; and therewith not onely to ouer-runne Thessalie, but to make impression into Macedon. He ranne as farre as to Dium, a Citie of Macedon vpon the Aegean Sea: which, being forsaken by the Inhabitants at his comming, Hee tooke, and ra∣zed to the ground. Hee spared neither Temple, nor any other of the goodly buildings therein, but ouerturned all: and among the rest, he threw downe the Sta∣tua's that were there erected, of the Kings. For this he was highly ho∣noured by his Countrimen at his returne; forasmuch as hereby they thought their Nation to be growne terrible, not onely (as before) vnto Peloponnesus, but euen to Macedon it selfe. But this their pride was soone abated; and they rewarded shortly at home in their owne Countrie, for their paines taken at Dium. Philip hauing dis∣patched his worke at Ambracus, made a strong inuasion vpon Aetolia. Hee tooke Phoetiae, Metropolis, Oeniade, Paeanium, Elaeus, and diuers other Townes and Castles of theirs: of which hee burnt some, and fortified others. Hee also beat the Aeto∣lians in sundrie skirmishes; and wasted all the Countrie ouer, without receiuing any harme. This done, while he was about to make a cut ouer the Streights into Pelo∣ponnesus, and to doe the like spoile in the Countrie of the Eleans, whereto he was ve∣hemently sollicited by the Achaean Embassadours: newes came out of Macedon, that the Dardanians were readie with a great Armie to fall vpon the Countrie. These Dardanians were a barbarous people, by Mount Haemus from the Northerne part of Macedon; and were accustomed to seeke bootie in that wealthie Kingdome, when they found their owne times. Hauing therefore intelligence, that Philip was a∣bout to make a journie into Peloponnesus: they purposed in his absence, which they thought would bee long, to get what they could for themselues in his Countrie; as had beene their manner vpon the like aduantages. This made the King to dismisse the Achaean Embassadours, (whom hee should haue accompanied home with his Armie) and to bid them haue patience vntill another yeare. So Hee tooke his way home: and as he was passing out of Acarnania into Epirus, there came to him Deme∣trius Pharius with no more than one Ship; that was newly chaced out of his King∣dome by the Romans. This Demetrius had lately shewed himselfe a friend to Anti∣gonus Doson, in the warres of Cleomenes: and returning in his last Voyage from the Cyclades, was readie, at their first request, to take part with Philips Captaines. These, or the like considerations, made him welcome vnto the Macedonian King: whose Counsailor he was euer after. The Dardanians hearing of the Kings returne, brake vp their Armie; and gaue ouer for the present their inuasion of , towardes which they were alreadie on their way. All that Summer following the King rested at Larissa in Thessalie, whilest his peo∣ple gathered in their Haruest. But the Aetolians rested not. They auenged them∣selues vpon the Epirots: whom for the harmes by them and Philip done in Aetolia, they requited with all extremities of warre, among which, the most notable was the ruine of the famous Temple of Dodona. When Winter grew on, and all thought of warre vntill another yeare was laid aside: Philip stole a journie into Peloponnesus, with fiue thousand Foot, and about foure hundred Horse. As soone as hee was within Corinth; He comanded the Gates to be shut, that no word might bee carried foorth of his arriuall. He sent priuily for old Aratus to come thither vnto him: with whom he tooke order, when, and in what places, hee would haue the Achaean Soul∣diors readie to meet him. The Enemies were then abroad in the Countrie, with somewhat more than two thousand Foot and an hundred Horse; little thinking to meete with such opposition. Indeed they had little cause to feare: since the Achaeans themselues were not aware that the King was in their Land with his Macedonians; vntill they heard, these two thousand Eleans, Aetolians, and their fellowes, were by him surprised and all made prisoners, or slaine. By this exploit which hee did at his first comming, Philip got very much reputation: as likewise hee purchased both reputation and loue, by diuers actions immediately following. He wanne Pso∣phis, an exceeding strong Towne, in the borders of Arcadia; which the Eleans and Aetolians then held. Hee wanne it by assault at his first comming: wherein it much auailed him, that the Enemie, not beleeuing that he would vndertake such a peece of worke at such an vnseasonable time of the yeere, was carelesse of prouiding euen such store of weapons, as might haue serued to defend it. The Towne was preser∣ued by the King from sacke; and giuen to the Achaeans, of his owne meere motion, before they requested it. Thence went he to , which yeelded for very feare; hearing how easily he had taken Psophis This Towne also he gaue to the Achaeans. The like liberality he vsed towards others; that had ancient title vnto places by him recouered. Then fell he vpon the Countrie of Elis, where was much wealth to bee gotten: for that the people were addicted to husbandrie, and liued abroad in Villages; euen such as were of the sort among them. So he came to the Citie of Olympia: where hauing done sacrifice to Iupiter, feasted his Captaines, and refreshed his Armie three dayes; Hee proceeded on to the spoile of those, that had taken pleasure to share with the Aetolians, in the spoiles of their other-wise-deser∣uing neighbours. Great abundance of Cattatle hee tooke, with great numbers of slaues, and much wealth of all sorts; such as could bee found in rich villages. Then fell he in band with the Townes whereinto a great multitude of the Countrie-peo∣ple were fled. Some of these were taken at the first assault. Some yeelded for feare. Some preuented the labour of his journie, by sending Embassadours to yeeld be∣fore hee came. And some that were held with against their wils, tooke courage to set themselues at libertie, by seeing the King so neare; to whose Patro∣nage thenceforth they betooke themselues. And many places were spoiled by the Aetolian Captaines; because they distrusted their ability to hold them. So the King wanne more Townes in the Countrie, than the sharpenesse of Winter would suffer him to stay there dayes. Faine he would haue fought with the Aetolians: but they made such hast from him, that he could not them, vntill they had couered themselues within the Towne of Samicum; where they thought to haue beene safe. But Philip assaulted them therein so forcibly, that hee made them glad to yeeld the place; obtaining licence to depart, with their liues and armes. Hauing performed so much in this Expedition, the King reposed himselfe a while in Megalopolis; and then remoued to Argos, where he spent all the rest of the Winter. Before the Kings sarriuall in , the Lacedaemonians with their new King, had gotten somewhat in Arcadia; and threatned to doe great matters. But when they were admonished, by the calamitie that fell vpon the Eleans, of the danger hanging ouer their owne heads; they quitted their winnings and withdrew themselues home. This Lycurgus, as hee had no other right to the Kingdome of Sparta, than that which he could buy with monie: so was hee neither free from dan∣ger of conspiracies made against him; nor from those jealousies, with which Vsur∣pers are commonly perplexed. There was one Chilon, of the Royall bloud, that thinking himselfe to haue best right vnto the Kingdome, purposed to make way thereunto, by massacre of his opposites; and afterwards to confirme himselfe, by propounding vnto the Multitude such reformation of the State as was most popu∣lar: namely, by making an equall distribution of all the Lands among the whole number of the Citizens, according to the ancient institution of that Common∣wealth. He wanne to his partie some two hundred men; with whom hee sell vpon the Ephori as they were together at supper, and slew them all. Then went he to Ly∣curgus his house: wo the danger, stole away and fled. It remained that he should giue account of these doings to the people, and procure them to take part with him. But their mindes being not hereto praedisposed; they so little regarded his goodly offers, as euen whilst he was vsing his best perswasions, they were consul∣ting how to apprehend him. Chilon perceiued whereabout they went, and shifted presently away. So hee liued afterwards among the Achaeans a banished man, and hated of his own people. As for Lycurgus, he returned home: and suspecting thence∣forth all those of Hercules his race, found meanes to driue out his fellow. King yong Agesipolis; whereby he made himselfe Lord alone. His doings grew to be suspected, in such sort as once he should haue beene apprehended by the Ephori. But though his actions hitherto might haue beene defended; yet rather than to aduenture him∣selfe into iudgement, hee chose to flie for a time, and sojourne among his friendes the Aetolians. His wel-knowne vehemencie in opposition to the Macedonians, had procured vnto him such good liking among the people, that in his absence they be∣ganne to consider the of their owne surmises against him; and pronoun∣cing him innocent, recalled him home to his Estate. But in time following, Hee tooke better heed vnto himselfe: not by amending his condition (for he grew a Ty∣rant, and was so acknowledged) but by taking order, that it should not bee in the power of the Citizens to expell him when they listed. By what actions hee got the name of a Tyrant: or at what time it was, that he chaced Agesipolis out of the Ci∣tie; I not certainly finde. Like enough it is, That his being the first of three vsurpers, which followed in order one after another, made him to bee placed in the ranke of Tyrants; which the last of the three very iustly deserued. Whatsoeuer he was towards some priuate Citizens: in the war against Philip, He behaued himselfe as a prouident man, and carefull of his Countries good. §. II. How PHILIP was misseaduised by ill Counsailors: Who afterwards wrought treason against him, and were iustly punished. Hee inuadeth the Aeto∣lians a second time: And forceth them to sue for peace: Which is granted vn∣to them. WHilest the King lay at Argos, deuising vpon his businesse for the yeare following; some ambitious men that were about him, studied so dili∣gently their owne greatnesse, as they were like to haue spoiled all that he tooke in hand. Antigonus Doson had left vnto Philip such Counsai∣lors, as to him did seeme the fittest men for gouerning of his youth. The chiefe of these was Apelles; that had the charge of his person, and ordering of his Treasures. This man, seeming to himselfe a great Politician, thought that he should do a notable peece of seruice to his Prince; if he could reduce the Achaeans vn∣to the same degree of subjection, wherein the Macedonians liued. To bring this to passe; during the late Expedition hee had caused some of the Macedonians to thrust the Achaeans out of their lodgings, and to strip them of the bootie that they had got∣ten. Proceeding further, as occasion fell out, He was bold to chastice some of that Nation; causing his Ministers to take and whippe them. If any of them offered (as there were some of them that could not refraine) to helpe their fellowes; them hee laid by the heeles, and punished as Mutiners. Hereby hee thought to bring it to passe by little and little, that they should bee qualified with an habite of blind obe∣dience; and thinke nothing vniust that pleased the King. But these Achaeans were tenderly sensible in matter of libertie: whereof if they could haue been contented to suffer any little diminution, they needed not haue troubled the Macedonians to them in the warre against Cleomenes: They bemoned old Aratus; and besought him to thinke vpon some good order, that they might not bee op∣pressed by degrees. Aratus foorthwith dealt with the King; as in a matter more weightie, than at first it might seeme. The King bellowed gracious words vpon those that had bene wronged; and forbad Apelles to follow the course begunne. Hereat Apelles was inwardly vexed, though he dissembled his for a time. He thought so well of his owne , that he could not endure to lay it aside; being perhaps vnable to doe the King any valuable seruice, in of o∣ther nature. Hee purposed therefore hereafter to beginne at the head; since, in bi∣ting at the taile, the fish had shot away from his mouth. It could not otherwise bee than that among the Achaeans there were some, who bore no heartie affection to Ara∣tus. These he enquired out: and sending for them, entertained them with wordes of Court; promising to become their especiall friend, and commend them vnto the King. Then brake he his purpose with the King himselfe: letting him know, that as long as he continued to make much of Aratus, He must be faine to deale precisely with the Achaeans, and, as it were by Indenture, according to the letter of the : whereas if he would be pleased, to giue countenance vnto those others whom he himselfe commended, then should the Achaeans, and all other Peloponnesians, bee quickly brought to conforme themselues vnto the of obedient Subiects. By such perswasions, He drew the King to be present at Aegium, where the Achaeans were to hold election of a new . There with much more labour, than would haue beene needfull in a businesse of more importance; the King, by faire and threatnings together, obtained so much, That Eperatus, a very insufficient man, but one of Apelles his new Fauorites, was chosen Praetor, instead of one more , for whom Aratus had laboured. This was thought a good introduction vnto greater matters that should follow. The King from thence passed along by Pa∣tras and Dyma, to a very strong Castle held by the Eleans, which was called Tichos. The Garrison yeelded it vp for feare, at his first comming: whereof hee was glad; for that hee had an earnest desire to bestow it vpon the Dymaeans, as hee pre∣sently did. The King thought it strange, that all this while he heard of no messengers from the Eleans, to sue for peace. For at his departure out of their Countrie the last Winter, hee had let loose one Amphidamus a Captaine of theirs, that was his Prisoner; be∣cause hee found him an intelligent man, and one that vndertooke to make them for∣sake their alliance with the Aetolians, and joyne with him vpon reasonable termes. This if they could be cōtented to do, He willed Amphidamus to let them vnderstand, That he would render vnto them freely all prisoners which hee had of theirs; That he would defend them from all forrein inuasion; and that they should hold their libertie entire, liuing after their owne Lawes, without paying any manner of Tri∣bute, or being kept vnder by any Garrison. These Conditions were not to be , if they had found credit as they might haue done. But when Philip came to the Castle of Tichos, and made a new inuasion vpon their Countrie: then beganne the Eleans, (that were not before ouer-hastie to beleeue such faire promises) to sus∣pect Amphidamus as a Traitour, and one that was set on worke for no other , than to breed a mutuall diffidence betweene them and the Aetolians. Wherefore they purposed to lay hands vpon him, and send him Prisoner into Aetolia. But hee perceiued their , and gotaway to Dyma: in good time for ; in better for Aratus. For the King (as was said) maruailing what should be the cause, that he heard no news from the Eleans, concerning the offers which he had made vnto them by Amphidamus: Appelles, his Counsailor, thereby tooke occasion to supplant Aratus. He said that old Aratus, and his sonne together, had such deuices in their heads, as tended little to the Kings good; And long of them he said it was, that the Eleans did thus hold out; For when Amphidamus was dismissed home, the two Arati (the fa∣ther and the sonne) had taken him aside and giuen him to vnderstand, that it would be very praejudiciall to all Peloponnesus, if the Eleans once became at the deuotion of the Macedonian; And this was the true cause, why neither Amphidamus was very carefull in doing this message, nor the Eleans in hearkning to the Kings offers. All this was a false lie; deuised by Apelles himselfe, vpon no other ground than his owne malice. Philip had no sooner heard his tale, but in a great rage hee sent for the two Arati; and bad Apelles rehearse it ouer againe to their faces. Apelles did so, and with a bold countenance, talking to them as to men already conuicted. And he had said all the rest, ere either Philip or they spake any word; Hee added this clause as it were in the Kings name: Since the King hath found you such vngratefull wretches; it is his meaning to hold a Parliament of the Achaeans; and therein hauing made it knowne what yee are, to depart into Macedon, and leaue you to your selues. Olde Aratus grauely admonished the King; That whensoeuer hee heard any accusation, especially against a friend of his owne or a man of worth; He should forbeare a while to giue credit, vntill he had diligently examined the businesse. For such deliberati∣on was Kingly, and hee should neuer thereof repent him. At the present hee said there needed no more, than to call in those that had heard his talke with Amphida∣mus; and especially him that had brought this goodly tale to Apelles. For it would be a very absurd thing, That the King should make himselfe Authour of a report in the open Parliament of Achaia, whereof there was none euidence, than one mans yea, and anothers no. Hereof the King liked well; and said that he would make sufficient inquirie. So passed a few dayes: wherein whilest Apelles delaied to bring in the proofe, which indeed he wanted; Amphidamus came from Elis, and told what had befalne him there. The King was not forgetfull, to examine him about the conspiracie of the Arati: which when hee found no better than a meere deuice a∣gainst his honourable friends; Hee entertained them in louing manner as before. As for his loue to Apelles, though it was hereby somewhat cooled; yet by meanes of long acquaintance and daily employment, no remission therein could be discerned. The vnrestfull temper of Apelles, hauing with much vehemencie brought no∣thing to passe; began (as commonly Ambition vseth) to swell and grow venomous for want of his free motion. Hee betakes himselfe to his cunning againe: and as be∣fore, being checkt in his doings with those of the vulgar, hee had prepared a snare for the Arati; so fayling of them, he thinkes it wisedome to lay for the King him∣selfe, and for all at once which were about him. In such manner sometime, the Spider thought to haue taken the Swallow which draue away Flies out of the chim∣nie; but was carried (net and all) into the Ayre by the bird, that was too strong to be caught and held by the subtile workemanship of a Cob-web. Of the foure that next vnto Apelles were left by Antigonus in chiefe place about Philip; Taurion, his Lieutenant in Peloponnesus, and Alexander Captaine of the Guard, were faithful men, and such as would not bee corrupted. The other two, Leontius Captaine of the Targuetiers, and Megaleas chiefe of the , were easily wonne to bee at A∣pelles his disposition. This Politician therefore studied how to remooue the o∣ther two from their places, and put some Creatures of his owne into their roomes. Against Alexander He went to worke the ordinarie way, by calumniation and pri∣uie detraction. But for the supplanting of Taurion hee vsed more finenesse; loading him with daily commendations, as a notable man of warre, and one, whom for his many vertues, the King might ill spare from being alwayes in his presence. By such Art he thought to haue remoued him, as wee say, Out of Gods blessing into a warme Sunne. In the meane season Aratus retired himselfe; and sought to auoid the dange∣rous friendship of the King, by forbearing to meddle in affaires of State. As for the new Praetor of Achaia, lately chosen by such vehement instance of the King; He was a man of no dispatch, and one that had no grace with the People. Wherefore a great deale of time was lost, whilest Philip wanted both the monie and the Corne, wherewith he should haue furnished by the Achaeans. This made the King vnderstand his owne errour; which he wisely sought to reforme betimes. He per∣swaded the Achaeans to rejourne their Parliament from Aegium, to Sicyon the Towne of Aratus. There he dealt with the old man and his sonne: perswading them to forget what was past; & laying all the blame vpon Apelles, on whom thence∣forth he intended to keepe a more diligent eye. So by the trauell of these worthy men, Hee easily obtained what hee would of the Achaeans. Fifty talents they gaue him out of hand; with great store of Corne: and further decreed, That so long as he himselfe in person followed the warres in Peloponnesus, he should receiue ten talents a moneth. Being thus enabled, he began to prouide shipping, that so hee might in∣uade the Aetolians, Eleans, and Lacedaemonians, that were maritime people, at his plea∣sure, and hinder their excursions by Sea. It vexed Apelles beyond measure, to see things goe forward so well without his helpe; euen by the ministery of those whom hee most hated. Wherefore hee en∣tred into conspiracie with Leontius and Megaleas: binding himselfe and them by oath, to crosse and bring to nought, as well as they were able, all that the King should take in hand. By so doing, they thought to bring it to passe, that very want of abilitie to doe any thing without them, should make him speake them faire; and be glad to submit himselfe to their directions. The King it is like had stood in some awe of them whilest he was a childe; and therefore these wise men perswaded them∣selues, that, by looking bigge vpon him, and imputing vnto him all that fell out ill through their owne misgouernement of his affaires, they might rule him as a child still. Apelles would needes goe to Chalcis, there to take order for the prouisions, which were to come that way out of Macedon: The other two staid behind with the King, to play their parts; all more mindfull of their wicked oath, than of their dutie. His fleet and Armie being in a readines: Philip made countenance, as if he would haue bent all his forces against the Eleans; to whose aid therefore the Aetolians sent men, little fearing that the mischiefe would haue fallen as soone after it did, vpon themselues. But against the Eleans and those that came to help them, Philip thought it enough to leaue the Achaeans, with some part of his and their Mercinaries. He himselfe with the body of his Armie putting to Sea, landed in the Isle of Cephalle∣nia: whence the Aetolians, dwelling ouer against it, vsed to furnish themselues of shipping, when they went to roue abroad. There he besieged the Towne of Pa∣laea, that had been very seruiceable to the Enemie against him and his Confederates; and might bee very vse-full to him, if hee could get it. Whilest hee lay before this Towne, there came vnto him fifteene ships of warre from Scerdilaidas; and many good Souldiers, from the Epirots, Acarnanians, and Messenians. But the Towne was obstinate; and would not be terrified with numbers. It was naturally fenced on all parts saue one, on which side Philip carried a Mine to the wall, wherewith he ouer∣threw two hundred foote thereof Leontius Captaine of the Targettiers, was ap∣pointed by the King to make the assault. But hee, remembring his couenant with Apelles; did both wilfully forbeare to doe his best; and caused others to doe the like. So the Macedonians were put to foile, and many slaine; not of the worst souldiers, but such as had gotten ouer the breach, and would haue carried the Towne, if the Treason of their Captaine, and some by him corrupted, had not hindered the vi∣ctory. The King was angry with this; but there was no remedie; and therefore he thought vpon breaking vp the siege. For it was easier vnto the Townes-men to make vp the gap in their wall, than for him to make it wider. Whilest he stood thus perplexed, and vncertaine what course to take: the Messenians and Acarnanians lay hard vpon him, each of them desirous to draw him into their owne Countrey. The Messenians alleadged, that Lycurgus was busie in wasting their Countrey: vpon whom the King might come vnawares in one day; the Etesian windes which then blew, seruing fitly for his Nauigation. Hereto also Leontius perswaded; who con∣sidered that those windes, as they would easily carrie him thither, so would they detaine him there perforce (blowing all the Dog-dayes) and make him spend the Summer to small purpose. But Aratus gaue better counsaile, and preuailed. Hee shewed how vnfitting it were, to let the Aetolians ouer-run all Thessalie againe, and some part of Macedon, whilest the King withdrew his Armie farre off to seeke small aduentures. Rather, he said, that the time now serued well to carry the warre into Aetolia; since the Praetor was gone thence abroad on rouing, with the one halfe of their strength. As for Lycurgus; hee was not strong enough to doe much harme in Peloponnesus: and it might suffice, if the Achaeans were appointed to make head a∣gainst him. According to this aduice, the King sets saile for Aetolia; and enters the Bay of Ambracia, which diuided the Aetolians from Acarnania The Acarnanians were glad to see him on their borders; and ioyned with him as many of them as could beare armes, to helpe in taking vengeance vpon their bad neighbours. Hee marched vp into the in-land Countrie: and taking some places by the way, which he filled with Garrisons to assure his Retrait; Hee passed on to Thermum; which was the Receptacle of the Aetolians, and surest place of defence in all extremities. The Country round about was a great Fastnesse, enuironed with rockie Mountaines of very narrow, steepe, and difficult ascent. There did the Aetolians vse to hold all their chiefe meetings, their Faires, their election of Magistrates, and their solemne games. There also they vsed to bestow the most precious of their goods, as in a place of greatest securitie. This opinion of the naturall strength, had made them carelesse in looking vnto it. When Philip therefore had ouercome the bad way, there was nothing else to doe than to take spoile: whereof hee found such plentie, that hee thought the paines of his iournie well recompenced. So hee loaded his Armie: and consuming all that could not be carried away, forgot not to raze a goodly Temple, the chiefe of all belonging vnto the Aetolians; in remembrance of the like their cour∣tesie, shewed vpon the Temples of Dium and Dodona. This burning of the Tem∣ple, might (questionlesse) more for the Kings honour haue beene forborne. But perhaps he thought, as Monsieur du Gourgues the French Captaine told the Spaniards in Florida, That they which had no faith, needed no Church. At his returne from Thermum, the Aetolians laid for him: which that they would doe, hee beleeued be∣fore; and therefore was not taken vnawares. Three thousand of them there were that lying in ambush fell vpon his skirts: but hee had laide a Counter-ambush for them of his Illyrians; who staying behind the rest, did set vpon the backes of the Aeto∣lians, whilest they were busily charging in Rere the Armie that went before. So with slaughter of the enemie, he returned the same way that he came: and burning downe those places that he had taken before, as also wasting the Country round a∣bout him, Hee safely carried all that hee had gotten aboord his Fleet. Once the Aetolians made countenance of fight, issuing out of Stratus in great brauerie. But they were beaten home faster than they came, and followed to their very gates. The ioy of this victorious Expedition being euery way complete, and not de∣formed (as commonly happens) by any sinister accident; it pleased the King to make a great feast vnto all his friends and Captaines. Thither were inuited among the rest , with his fellow Megaleas. They came, because they could not choose: but their heauie lookes argued, what little pleasure they tooke in the Kings prosperitie. It grieued them to thinke, that they should bee able to giue no better account vnto Apelles, of their hindering the Kings businesse; since Apelles himselfe, as will be shewed anon, had plaied his owne part with a most mischieuous dexteritie. The sorrow and indignation, which they could ill dissemble in their fa∣ces, brake out after supper, when they had warmed themselues with drinke, into o∣pen riot. Finding Aratus on the way home to his Tent: they fell to reuiling him, throwing stones at him, so that they caused a great vprore; many running in (as happens in such cases) to take part with the one or the other. The King sending to inquire of the matter, was truly informed of all that had passed. Which made him send for Leontius and his fellowes. But Leontius was gotten out of the way: Megaleas, and another with him, came. The King began to rate them for their dis∣order; and they, to giue him froward answeres: insomuch as they said at length, That they would neuer giue ouer, till they had rewarded Aratus with a mischiefe as hee deserued. Hereupon the King committed them to ward. Leontius hearing of this, comes boldly to the King, with his Targettiers at his heeles: and with a proud grace demanded, who it was that had dared to lay hands vpon Megaleas, yea and to cast him into prison? Why, said the King, It was euen I. This resolute an∣swere, which Leontius had not expected, made him depart both sad and angrie; see∣ing himselfe out-frowned, and not knowing how to remedie the matter. Shortly after, Megaleas was called forth to his answere, and was charged by Aratus with ma∣ny great crimes. Among which were, The hinderance of the Kings victorie at Pa∣laea, and the Compact made with Apelles: matters no lesse touching Leontius, that stood by as a looker on than Megaleas that was accused. In conclusion, the presump∣tions against him were so strong, and his answeres thereto so weake; that he, and Cri∣non one of his fellowes, were condemned in twentie Talents: Crinon being reman∣ded backe to prison; and Leontius becomming Bayle for Megaleas. This was done vpon the way home-ward, as the King was returning to Corinth. Philip dispatched well a great deale of businesse this yeere. For as soone as he was at Corinth, he tooke in hand an Expedition against the Lacaedemonians. These and the Eleans had done what harme they could in Peloponnesus, whilest the King was absent. The Achaeans had opposed them as well as they could; ill successe: yet so, as they hindered them from doing such harme as else they would haue done. But when Philip came, hee ouer-ran the Countrie about Lacedaemon: and was in a manner at the gates of Sparta, ere men could well beleeue that he was returned out of Aetolia. He tooke not in this Expedition any Cities, but made great waste in the fields: and hauing beaten the enemie in some skirmishes, carried backe with him to Corinth a rich bootie of Cattell, slaues, and other Countrie-spoile. At Corinth hee found attending him, Embassadors from the Rhodians & Chians: that requested him to set Greece at quiet, by granting peace vnto the Aetolians. They had gracious audience: and he willed them to deale first with the Aetolians; who, if they would make the same request, should not finde him vnreasonable. The Aetolians had sped ill that yeere: neither saw they any likely hopes for the yeeres following. The Armie that they had sent forth to wast Thessalie and Macedon, found such opposition on the way; that not daring to , it returned home without bringing any thing to effect. In the meane season they had beene grieuously afflicted, as before is shewed, by Philip in the center of their owne Countrie. All Greece and Macedon was vp in armes against them, and their weake Allies the Eleans and Lacedaemonians. Nei∣ther was it certaine, how long the one or other of these their Peloponnesian friends should bee able to hold out; since they were not strong enough to keepe the feild, but had alreadie suffered those miseries of war, which by a little continuance would make them glad, each, to seeke their owne peace, without regard of their Confede∣rates. Wherefore the Aetolians readily entertained this Negotiation of peace: and taking truce for thirtie dayes with the King, dealt with him by intercession of the same Embassadours, to entreat his presence at a Diet of their Nation, that should bee held at Rhium; whither if he would vouchsafe to come, they promised that hee should finde them conformable to any good reason. Whilest these things were in hand; Leontius and Megaleas thought to haue ter∣rified the King, by raising sedition against him in the Armie. But this deuice sorted to no good effect. The souldiours were easily and quickly incensed against many of the Kings friends; who were said to be the cause, why they were not rewarded with so much of the bootie, as they thought to belong of right vnto them. But their anger spent it selfe in a noise, and breaking open of dores; without further harme done. This was enough to informe the king (who easily pacified his men with gentle words) that some about him were very false. Yea the souldiours them∣selues, repenting of their insolence, desired to haue the Authors of the tumult sought out, and punished according to their deserts. The King made shew as if he had not cared to make such inquisition. But Leontius and Megaleas were sore afraid, left the matter would soone come out of it selfe to their extreme danger. Wherefore they sent vnto Apelles, the Head and Archetect of their treason; re∣questing him speedily to repaire to Corinth, where hee might stand betweene them and the kings displeasure. Apelles had not all this while beene wanting to the busi∣nesse, vndertaken by him and his treacherous companions. He had taken vpon him, as a man that had the Kings heart in his owne hand: and thereby was hee growne into such credit, that all the Kings officers in Macedon and Thessalie addressed them∣selues vnto him; and receiued from him their dispatch in euery businesse. Likewise the Greekes in all their flattering Decrees, tooke occasion to magnifie the vertue of Apelles; making slight mention (onely for fashion sake) of the king: who seemed no better than the Minister and Executioner of Apelles his will and pleasure. Such was the arrogancie of this great man, in setting himselfe out vnto the people: but in mannaging the kings affaires, he made it his speciall care, that monie, and all things needfull for the publicke seruice, should be wanting. Yea he enforced the king, for very neede, to sell his owne Plate and houshold vessels: thinking to resolue these and all other difficulties, by onely saying, Sir, be ruled wholly by mee, and all shall be as you would wish. Hereto if the king would giue assent; then had this Politician ob∣tained his hearts desire. Now taking his iournie from Chalcis in the Isle of Euboea, to the Citie of Corinth where Philip then lay: hee was fetcht in with great pompe and royaltie, by a great number of the Captaines and souldiours; which Leontius and Megaleas drew forth to him on the way. So entering the Citie with a goodly traine; he went directly to the Court, and towards the Kings Chamber. But Philip was well aware of his pride; and had vehement suspition of his falshood. Wherfore one was sent to tell him, that he should waite a while, or come another time; for the king was not now at leisure to be spoken with. It was a pretie thing, that such a check as this made all his attendants forsake him, as a man in disgrace; in such sort that go∣ing thence to his lodging, he had none to follow him saue his owne Pages. After this, the King vouchsafed him now and then some slender graces: but in consultations, or other matters of priuacie, he vsed him not at all. This taught Megaleas to looke vnto himselfe, and runne away betimes. Hereupon the King sent forth Taurion his Lieutenant of Peloponnesus, with all the Targettiers, as it were to doe some peece of seruice, but indeed of purpose to apprehend Leontius in the absence of his follow∣ers. Leontius being taken, dispatched away a messenger presently to his Targetti∣ers, to signifie what was befallen him: and they foorthwith sent vnto the King in his behalfe. They made request, That if any other thing were obiected against him, hee might not be called forth to triall before their returne: as for the debt of Megaleas, if that were all the matter, they said that they were readie to make a purse for his discharge. This affection of the souldiours, made Philip more hastie than else he would haue beene, to take away the Traitors life. Neither was it long, ere let∣ters of Megaleas were intercepted, which he wrote vnto the Aetolians; vilifying the king with opprobrious wordes; and bidding them not to hearken after peace, but to hold out a while, for that Philip was euen readie to sinke vnder the burden of his owne . By this the king vnderstood more perfectly the falshood, not one∣ly of Megaleas, but of Apelles; whose cunning head had laboured all this while to keepe him so poore. Wherefore hee sent one to pursue Megaleas, that was fled to Thebes. As for Apelles, he committed both him, his sonne, and another that was in∣ward with him, to prison; wherein all of them shortly ended their liues. Megaleas also, neither daring to stand to triall, nor knowing whither to flie, was wearie of his owne life; and slew himselfe about the same time. The Aetolians, as they had begun this warre vpon hope of accomplishing what they listed in the Nonage of Philip: so finding that the vigour of this yong Prince, tempered with the cold aduice of Aratus, wrought very effectually toward their ; they grew very desirous to make an end of it. Neuerthelesse being a turbulent Nation, and readie to lay hold vpon all aduantages: when they heard what was happened in the Court, the death of Apelles, Leontius, and Magaleus, to∣gether with some indignation thereupon conceiued by the Kings Targettiers; they began to hope anew, that these troubles would be long lasting, and therevpon brake the day appointed for the meeting at Rhium. Of this was Philip nothing sorie. For being in good hope throughly to tame this vnquiet Nation; He thought it much to concerne his owne honour, that all the blame of the beginning and continuing the warre should rest vpon themselues. Wherfore he willed his Confederates, to lay a∣side all thought of peace, and to prepare for war against the yeere following; where∣in hee hoped to bring it to an end. Then gratified he his Macedonian souldiors, by yeelding to let them winter in their owne Countrie. In his returne homeward, he called into iudgement one Ptolemie, a companion with Apelles and Leontius in their Treasons: who was therefore condemned by the Macedonians; and suffered death. These were the same Macedonians, that lately could not endure to heare of Leontius his imprisonment: yet now they thinke the man worthie to die, that was but his adherent. So vaine is the confidence, on which Rebels vse to build, in their fauour with the Multitude. During his abode in Macedon, Philip wan some bordering Townes; from which the Dardanians, Aetolians, and other his ill neighbours, were accustomed to make rodes into his kingdome: when hee had thus prouided for safetie of his owne; the Aetolians might well know what they were to expect. But there came againe Em∣bassadours from the Rhodians and Chians, with others from Ptolemie King of Aegypt, and from the Citie of Byzantium, recontinuing the former sollicitation about the Peace. This fashion had beene taken vp in matters of Greece, euer since the Kings that raigned after Alexander, had taken vpon them to set the whole Countrie at li∣bertie: No sooner was any Prouince or Citie in danger to be oppressed, and subdued by force of war, but presently there were found intercessours, who pittying the ef∣fusion of Greekish bloud, would importune the stronger to relinquish his aduan∣tage. By doing such friendly offices in time of neede, the Princes and States abroad sought to binde vnto them those people, that were howsoeuer weake in numbers, yet very good souldiours. But hereby it came to passe, that the more froward sort, especially the Aetolians, whose whole Nation was addicted to falshood and rob∣berie, durst enter boldly into quarrels with all their neighbours: being well assured, that if they had the worst, The loue of Greece would be sufficient to redeeme their quiet. They had, since the late Treatie of peace, done what harme they could in Peloponnesus: but being beaten by the Achaeans, and standing in feare to bee more soundly beaten at home, they desired now, more earnestly than before, to make an end of the warre as soone as they might. Philip made such answere to the Embassa∣dours, as he had done the former yeere; That he gaue not occasion to the beginning of this warre, nor was at the present either afraid to continue it, or vnwilling to end it: but that the Aetolians, if they had a desire to liue in rest, must first be dealt withall, to signifie plainly their determination, whereto himselfe would returne such an∣swere as he should thinke fit. Philip had at this time no great liking vnto the Peace, being a yong Prince, and in hope to increase the honour which he daily got by the warre. But it happened in the middest of this Negotiation, that he was aduertised by letters out of Macedon, what a notable victorie Hannibal had obtained against the Romans in the battaile at Thrasymene. These letters he communicated vnto Demetrius Pharius: who greatly encouraged him to take part with Hannibal: and to sit still, as an idle beholder of the Italian warre. Hereby he grew more inclinable than before vnto Peace with the Aetolians: which was concluded shortly in a meeting at Naupactus. There did Agelaus an Aetolian make a great Oration: telling, how happie it was for the Greekes, that they might at their owne pleasure dispute about finishing war betweene them∣selues, without being molested by the Barbarians. For when once either the Ro∣mans, or the Carthaginians, had subdued one the other; it was not to bee doubted, that they would forthwith looke Eastward, and seeke by all meanes to set footing in Greece. For this cause he said it were good, that their Countrie should be at peace within it selfe: and that Philip, if he were desirous of war, should lay hold on the op∣portunitie, now fitly seruing, to enlarge his dominion, by winning somewhat in Italie. Such aduice could the Aetolians then giue, when they stood in feare of dan∣ger threatning them at hand: but being soone after wearie of rest, as accustomed to enrich themselues by pillage, they were so farre from obseruing and following their owne good counsel, that they inuited the Romans into Greece; wherby they brought themselues and the whole Countrie, (but themselues before any other part of the Countrie) vnder seruitude of strangers. The Condition of this Peace was simple, That euery one should keepe what they held at the present, without making resti∣tution, or any amends for damages past. §. III. PHILIP, at the perswasion of DEMETRIVS PHARIVS, enters into League with HANNIBAL, against the Romans. The Tenour of the League betweene HANNIBAL and PHILIP. THis being agreed vpon: the Greekes betooke themselues to quiet cour∣ses of life; and Philip, to prepare for the businesse of Italie, about which hee consulted with Demetrius Pharius. And thus passed the time away, till the great battaile of Cannae: after which hee ioyned in League with Hannibal, as hath beene shewed before. Demetrius Pha∣rius bore great malice vnto the Romans; and knew no other way to bee auenged vp∣on them, or to recouer his owne lost Kingdome, than by procuring the Macedonian, that was in a manner wholly guided by his counsaile, to take part with their ene∣mies. It had otherwise beene farre more expedient for Philip, to haue supported the weaker of these two great Cities against the more mightie. For by so doing, hee should perhaps haue brought them to peace vpon some equall termes; and there∣by, as did Hiero a farre weaker Prince, haue both secured his owne Estate, and cau∣sed each of them to be desirous of chiefe place in his friendship. The issue of the counsaile which he followed, will appeare soone after this. His first quarrell with the Romans; the trouble which they and the Aetolians did put him to in Greece; and the Peace which they made with him for a time, vpon Conditions that might easily be broken: haue beene related in another place as belonging vnto the second Punick warre. Wherefore I will onely here set downe the tenour of the League betweene Him and Carthage: which may seeme not vn worthie to be read, if onely in regard of the forme it selfe then vsed; though it had beene ouer-long to haue beene inserted into a more busie peece. THE OATH AND COVENANTS BETWEENE HANNIBAL, GENERALL OF THE CARTHAGINIANS; and XENOPHANES, Embassador of PHILIP King of Macedon. THIS is the League ratified by oath, which HAN∣NIBAL the Generall, and with him MAGO, MYRCAL, and BARMOCAL, as also the Se∣natours of Carthage that are present, and all the Carthaginians that are in his Armie, haue made with XE∣NOPHANES the sonne of CLEOMACHVS Athenian, whom King PHILIP the sonne of DEMETRIVS hath sent vnto vs, for himselfe and the Macedonians, and his Asso∣ciates: Before , and Iuno, and Apollo: before Daemon. The god of the Carthaginians, Hercules, and lolaus, before Mars, Triton, Neptune: before The Gods accom∣panying Armes, the Sun, the Moone, and the Earth; before Riuers, and Meddowes, and Waters; before all the Gods that haue power ouer ; before all the Gods, that rule ouer Macedon, and the rest of Greece; before all the Gods, that are Presidents of War, and present at the making of this League. HANNIBAL the Generall hath said, and all the Senatours that are with him, and all the in his Armie: Be it agreed betweene You and Vs, that this Oath stand for friendship and louing affection, that Wee become friends, familiar, and brethren, Vpon Couenant, that the safe∣tie of the Lords the Carthaginians, and of HANNIBAL the Generall and those that are with him, and of the Rulers of Prouinces of the Carthaginians the same Lawes, and of the Vticans, and as many Cities and Nations as obey the Carthaginians, and of the Souldiors and Associates, and of all Townes and Nations with which We hold friendship in , Gaule, and Liguria, and with whom We shall hold friend∣ship or make Alliance hereafter in this Region; be preserued by King PHILIP and the Macedonians, and such of the Greekes as are their Associates. In like manner shall King PHILIP and the Macedonians, and other the Greekes his Associates, bee saued and preserued by the Carthaginian. Ar∣mies, and by the Vticans, and by all Cities and Nations that obey the Carthaginians, and by their Associates and Souldiers, and by all Nations and Cities in , Gaule and Liguria, that are of our Alliance, or shall hereafter ioyne with Vsin I∣talie. Wee shall not take counsaile one against the other, nor deale one with the other. Withall readinesse and good will, without deceit or subtiltie, We shall be enemies vn∣to the enemies of the Carthaginians, excepting those Kings, Townes, and Hauens, with which We haue alreadie league and friendship. Wee also shall be enemies to the enemies of King PHILIP, excepting those Kings, Cities, and Nati∣ons, with which VVee haue alreadie league and friendship. The war that VVe haue with the Romans, haue Ye also with them, vntill the Gods shall giue vs a new and happie end. Ye shall aide Vs with those things whereof VVee haue neede, and shall doe according to the betweene Vs. But if the Gods shall not giue vnto You and Vs their helpe in this warre against the Romans and their Associates; then if the Ro∣mans offer friendship, We shall make friendship in such wise that Ye shall be partakers of the same friendship, With Con∣dition, That they shall not haue power to make war vpon you: Neither shall the Romans bee Lords ouer the , nor ouer those of Apollonia, nor Dyrrachium, nor ouer Pha∣rus, nor Dimalle, nor the Parthini, nor Atintania. They shall also render vnto DEMETRIVS PHARIVS all those that belong vnto him, as many as are within the Ro∣mans Dominions. But if the Romans (after such peace made) shall make war vpon Ye or Vs; We will succour one another in that warre, as either shall haue neede. The same shall be obserued in warre made by any other, excepting those Kings, Cities, and States, with whom Wee hold alreadie league and friendship. To this League if VVe or Ye shall thinke fit to adde or detract, such addition or detraction shall be made by our common consent. §. IIII. How PHILIP yeelded to his naturall vices being therein soothed by DEMETRIVS PHARIVS. His desire to tyr annize vpon the free States his Associates: With the troubles, into which hee thereby fell, he bore a part in the second warre. He poisoneth ARATVS: and growes hatefull to the . HItherto Philip had carried himselfe as a vertuous Prince. And though with more commendation of his wisdome, he might haue offered his friendship to the Romans, that were like to be oppressed, than to the Carthaginians who had the better hand: yet this his meddling in the Punicke warre, proceeded from a royall greatnesse of minde, with a desire to secure and increase his owne estate, adding there withall reputation to his Countrie. But in this businesse he was guided (as hath beene said) by Deme∣trius Pharius: who, looking throughly into his nature, did accommodate himselfe to his desires: and thereby shortly gouerned him, euen as he listed. For the vertues of Philip were not indeed such as they seemed. He was , bloudie, and tyran∣nicall: desirous of power to doe what hee listed, and not otherwise listing to doe what hee ought, than so farre foorth, as by making a faire shew he might breede in men such a good opinion of him, as should helpe to serue his turne in all that hee tooke in hand. Before he should busie himselfe in Italie, hee thought it requisite in good policie, to bring the Greekes that were his Associates vnder a more absolute forme of subiection. Hereunto Apelles had aduised him before: and hee had liked reasonably well of the course. But Apelles was a boisterous Counsellor, and one that referring all to his owne glory, thought himselfe deepely wronged if he might not wholy haue his owne way, but were driuen to await the Kings opportunitie at better times. Demetrius Pharius could well be contented to obserue the Kings hu∣mours: and guided, like a Coach-man with the reines in his hand, those affections which himselfe did onely seeme to follow. Therefore hee grew daily more and more in credit: so as, without any manner of contention, hee supplanted Aratus: which the violence of Apelles could neuer doe. There arose about these times a very hote Faction among the Messenians, be∣tweene the Nobilitie and Commons: their vehement thoughts being rather diuer∣ted (as happens often after a forrein warre) vnto domesticall obiects: than allayed and reduced vnto a more quiet temper. In processe of no long time, the contention among them grew so violent, that Philip was entreated to compound the differen∣ces. Hee was glad of this: resoluing so to end the matter, that they should not hencefoorth striue any more about their Gouernment: for that he would assume it wholly to himselfe. At his comming thither, hee found Aratus busie among them to make all friends, after a better manner than agreed with his owne secret purpose. Wherfore he consulted not with this reuerend old man: but talked in priuate with such of the Messenians as repaired vnto him. He asked the Gouernours, what they meant to stand thus disputing: and whether they had not Lawes, to bridle the in∣solence of the vnruly Rabble: Contrariwise, in talking with the heades of the po∣pular Faction, He said it was strange, that they being so many, would suffer them∣selues to be by a few; as if they had not hands to themselues from Tyrants. Thus whilest each of them presumed on the Kings assistance; they thought it best to goe roundly to worke, ere he were gone that should countenance their doings. The Gouernours therefore would haue apprehended some seditious Oratours, that were, they said, the stirrers vp of the multitude vnto sedition. Vpon this occasion the People tooke Armes: and running vpon the Nobilitie and Magi∣strates, killed of them in a rage almost two hundred. Philip thought, it seemes, that it would be easie to worrie the sheepe, when the Dogges their guardians were . But his falshood and double dealing was immediatly found out. Neyther did the yonger Aratus forbeare, to tell him of it in publike, with very bitter and disgracefull words. The King was angrie at this. But hauing alreadie done more than was commendable, or excusable: and yet further intending to take other things in hand wherein hee should neede the helpe and countenance of his best friends; Hee was content to smother his displeasure, and make as faire weather as he could. Hee led old Aratus aside by the hand; and went vp into the Castle of Ithome, that was ouer Messene. There he pretended to doe sacrifice: and sacrifice he did. But it was his purpose to keepe the place to his owne vse; for that it was of notable strength, and would serue to command the further parts of Peloponnesus, as the Citadell of Corinth, which hee had alreadie, commaunded the entrance into that Countrie. Whilest hee was therefore sacrificing, and had the entrailes of the beast deliuered into his hands, as was the manner; He shewed them to Aratus, and gently asked him, whether the tokens that he saw therein did signifie, That being now in posses∣sion of this place, hee should quietly goe out of it, or rather keepe it to himselfe. He thought perhaps, that the old man would haue soothed him a little; were it onely for desire to make amends, for the angrie words newly spoken by his sonne. But as Aratus stood doubtfull what to answere, Demetrius Pharius gaue this verdict: If thou bee a Southsayer, thou maist goe thy wayes, and let slippe this good aduantage; If thou be a King, thou must not neglect the oportunitie, but hold the Oxe by both his hornes. Thus he spake, resembling Ithome and Acrocorinthus vnto the two hornes of Peloponnesus. Yet would Philip needes heare the opinion of Aratus: who told him plainly, That it were well done to keepe the place, if it might be kept without breach of his faith vnto the Messenians: But if, by seizing vpon Ithome, Hee must lose all the other Castles that hee held, and especially the strongest Castle of all that was left vnto him by Antigonus, which was his credit; then were it farre better to depart with his soul∣diers, and keepe men in dutie, as hee had done hitherto, by their owne good wils, than by fortifying any strong places against them, to make them of his friends become his Enemies. To this good aduice Philip yeelded at the present: but not without some dislike, thencefoorth growing betweene Him and the Arati; whom he thought more fro∣ward than beseemed them, in contradicting his will. Neyther was the old man de∣sirous at all, to deale any longer in the Kings affaires, or be in ward with him. For as he plainly discouered his Tyrannous purposes: so likewise he perceiued, that in resorting to his house, He had beene dishonest with his sonnes wife. Hee therefore staid at home: where at good leisure he might repent, that in despight of Cleomenes, his owne Countriman, and a temperate Prince, he had brought the Macedonians into Peloponnesus. Philip made a Voyage out of Peloponnesus into Epirus, wherein Aratus refused to beare him companie. In this journie He found by experience what Aratus had late∣ly told him; That vnhonest counsailes are not so profitable in deed, as in appea∣rance. The Epirots were his followers and dependants; and so they purposed to continue. But He would needes haue them so to remaine, whether they purposed it or not. Wherefore to make them the more obnoxious vnto his will, Hee seized vpon their Towne of Oricum, and laid siege to Apollonia; no good colour of these doings: but thinking himselfe strong enough to doe what hee listed, and not seeing whence they should procure friends to helpe them. Thus in stead of settling the country, as his intended Voyage into Italie required: He kindled a fire in it which he could neuer quench; vntill it had laid hold on his owne Palace. Whilest he was thus labouring to bind the hands that should haue fought for him in Italie: M. Vale∣rius the Roman came into those parts; who not onely maintained the Epirots against him, but procured the Aetolians to breake the Peace, which they had lately made with him. Thus began that warre; the occurrents whereof wee haue related before, in Chap. 3. §. . place whereto it belonged. In mannaging whereof though Philip did the offices of a good Captaine: yet when leisure serued, He made it apparant that he was a vicious King. He had not quite left his former desire, of oppressing the libertie of the ; but made another journie into their Countrie, with hope to deceiue them, as before. They vnderstood him better now than before; and therefore were not hastie to trust him too farre. When he saw that his cunning would not serue, Hee went to worke by force; and calling them his Enemies, inuaded them with open warre. But in that warre could doe little good; perhaps, because none of his Confederates were desirous to helpe him in such an enterprise. In this attempt vp∣on Messene he lost Demetrius Pharius; that was his Counsailor, and Flatterer, not his peruerter; as appeares by his growing daily more naught in following times. The worse that he sped, the more angrie he waxed against those, that seemed not to fa∣uour his iniurious doings. Wherefore by the Ministerie of Taurion, his Lieutenant, he poysoned old Aratus; and shortly after that, hee poysoned also the yonger Ara∣tus: hoping that these things would neuer haue beene knowne, because they were done secretly, and the poysons themselues were more sure, than manifest in opera∣tion. The Sicyonians, and all the people of , decreed vnto Aratus more than humane honours, as Sacrifices, Hymnes, and Processions, to bee celebrated euery yeere twice, with a Priest ordained vnto him for that purpose; as was accustomed vnto the Heroes, or men, whom they thought to bee translated into the number of the gods. Hereunto they are said to haue beene encouraged by an Oracle of Apollo: which is like enough to haue beene true; since the helpe of the Deuill is neuer fai∣ling to the increase of Idolatrie. The louing memorie of Aratus their Patron, and singular Benefactor, could not but worke in the a marueilous dislike, of that wicked King which had made him thus away. He shall therefore heare of this hereafter, when they better dare to take counsaile for themselues. At the present, the murder was not generally knowne or beleeued: neither were they in case to subsist, without his help that had comitted it. The Aetolians were a most outragious people, great darers, and shamelesse robbers. With these the Romans had made a League: whereof the Conditions were soone diuulged, especially that maine point, concerning the diuision of the purchase which they should make; namely, That the Aetolians should haue the country and townes; but the Romans the spoile, and carrie away the people to sell for slaues. The , who in times of greater quiet could not endure to make streight alliance with the Aetolians, as knowing their vnciuill disposition; were much the more auerse from them, when they perceiued how they had called in the Barbarians (for such did the Greekes account all other Nations except their owne) to make hauocke of the Country. The same consideration moued also the Lacedoemonians, to stand off awhile, before they would declare themselues for the Aetolians; whose friendship they had embraced in the late warre. The industrie therefore of Philip, and the great care which he seemed to take of the his Confederates, sufficed to retaine them: especially at such time, as their owne necessitie was thereto concurrent. More par∣ticularly he obliged vnto himselfe the , by an inestimable benefit: their Towne, after it had beene taken by the Romans and Aetolians; and redee∣ming their people wheresoeuer they might bee found, that had beene carried away Captiue, and sold abroad for slaues. Thus might he haue blotted out the memorie of offences past; if the malignitie of his naturall condition had not other whiles bro∣ken out, and giuen men to vnder stand; that it was the Time, and not his Vertue, which caused him to make such a shew of goodnesse. Among other foule acts, whereof he was not ashamed; He tooke Polycratia the wife of the yonger Aratus, and carried her into Macedon: little regarding how this might serue to confirme in the people their opinion, that he was guiltie of the old mans death. But of such faults he shall be told, when the Romans make warre vpon him the second time: for of that which happened in this their first Inuasion, I holde it superfluous to make re∣petition. §. V. Of PHILOPOEMEN Generall of the Achaeans: and MACHANIDAS, Tyrant of Lacedaemon. A battaile betweene them, where∣in MACHANIDAS is slaine. IT happens often, that the decease of one eminent man discouers the vertue of another. In the place of Aratus there stood vp Philopoemen: whose notable valour, and great skill in Armes, made the Nation of the Achaeans redoubtable among all the Greekes, and carelesse of such protection, as in former times they had needed against the violence of their neighbours. This is that Philopoemen: who being then a yong man, and hauing no command; did especiall seruice to Antigonus at the battaile of Sellasia a∣gainst Cleomenes. Thence-forward vntill now he had spent the most part of his time in the Ile of Crete: the Inhabitants whereof being a valiant people, and seldome or neuer at peace betweene themselues; He bettered among them his knowledge, and practice in the Art of warre. At his returne home, Hee had charge of the Horse: wherein he carried himselfe so strictly, trauailing with all the Cities of the Confede∣racie to haue his followers well mounted, and armed at all pieces: as also he so dili∣gently trained them vp in all exercise of seruice, that hee made the Achaeans very strong in that part of their forces. Being after chosen Praetor or Generall of the Nation, Hee had no lesse care to reforme their militarie discipline throughout, whereby his Countrie might be strong enough to defend it selfe, and not any longer (as in former times) need to depend vpon the helpe of others. Hee perswaded the Achaeans to cut off their vaine expence of brauerie, in apparrell, housholdstuffe, and curious fare, and to that cost vpon their Armes: wherein by how much they were the more gallant, by so much were they like to proue the better Souldiours; and suteable in behauiour, vnto the pride of their furniture. They had serued hi∣therto with little light Bucklers, and slender Darts, to cast afarre off: that were vse∣full in skirmishing at some distance, or for Surprises, or sudden and hastie Expediti∣ons; whereto Aratus had beene most accustomed. But when they came to handie strokes, they were good for nothing: so as they were wholly driuen to relie vpon the courage of their Mercinaries. Philopoemen altered this: causing them to arme them∣selues more weightily, to vse a larger kind of shield, with good swords, and strong pikes, fit for seruice at hand. He taught them also to fight in close order; and alte∣red the forme of their embattailing: not making the Files so deepe as had beene ac∣customed, but extending the Front, that he might vse the scruice of many hands. Eight Moneths were spent of that yeere, in which hee first was Praetor of the Achaeans; when Machanidas the Tyrant of Lacedaemon caused him to make triall, how his Souldiers had profited by his discipline. This Machanidas was the succes∣sor vnto Lycurgus; a man more violent than his fore-goer. He kept in pay a strong Armie of Mercinaries: and he kept them not onely to fight for Sparta; but to hold the Citie in obedience to himselfe perforce. Wherefore it behoued him not to take part with the Achaeans, that were fauourers of libertie; but to strengthen himselfe by friendship of the Aetolians: who, in making Alliances, tooke no further notice of Vice or Vertue, than as it had reference to their owne profit. The people also of Lacedaemon, through their inueterate hatred vnto the Argiucs, Achaeans, and Mace∣donians; were in like sort (all or most of them) inclinable to the Aetolian Faction. Very vnwisely. For in seeking to take reuenge vpon those, that had lately hindered them from getting the Lordship of Peloponnesus; they hindred themselues thereby from recouering the Mastrie of their owne Citie. This affection of the , to∣gether with the regard of his owne securitie, and no small hope of good that would follow, suffered not Machanidas to be idle; but made him alwayes ready to vp∣on his neighbours backes, and take of theirs what he could, whilest they were en∣forced, by greater necessitie, to turne face another way. Thus had hee often done, especially in the absence of Philip: whose sudden comming into those parts, or some other opposition made against him, had vsually made him faile of his at∣tempts. At the present He was stronger in men, than were the Achaeans; and thought his owne men better Souldiours than were theirs. Whilest Philip therefore was busied else-where, hee entred the Countrie of the Mantinaeans: being not without hope to doe as Cleomenes had done before him; yea and perhaps to get the Excerpt. è . l. . Lordship of Peloponnesus, as hauing stronger friendes, and weaker opposition, than Cleomenes had found. But Philopoemen was readie to Plut in . entertaine him at Mantinaea; where was fought betweene them a great battaile. The Tyrant had brought into the fielde vpon Cartes a great many of En∣gines; wherewith to beate vpon the Squadrons of his Enemies, and put them in disorder. To preuent this danger, Philopoemen sent foorth his light ar∣mature a good way before him; so as Machanidas was faine to doe the like. To se∣cond these, from the one and the other side came in continuall supplie; till at length all the Mercinaries, both of the Achaeans and of Machanidas, were drawne vp to the fight: being so far aduanced, each before their owne Phalanx, that it could no otherwise be discerned which pressed forward, or which recoyled, than by rising of the dust. Thus were Machanidas his Engines made vnseruiceable, by the inter∣position of his owne men; in such manner as the Canon is hindered from doing exe∣cution, in most of the battailes fought in these our times. The Mercinaries of the Tyrant preuailed at length: not onely by their aduantage of number, but (as Poly∣bius Polyb. ibid. well obserueth) by surmounting their opposites in degree of courage; wherein vsually the hired souldiers of Tyrants exceed those that are waged by free States. For as it is true, that a free people are much more valiant, than they which liue op∣pressed by Tyrannie, since the one, by doing their best in fight, haue hope to ac∣quire somewhat beneficiall to themselues, whereas the other doe fight (as it were) to assure their owne seruitude: so the Mercinaries of a Tyrant, being made parta∣kers with him in the fruites of his prosperitie, haue good cause to maintaine his quarrell as their owne; whereas they that serue vnder a free State, haue no other motiue to doe manfully, than their bare stipend. Further than this, When a free State hath gotten the Victorie: many Companies (if not all) of forrein Auxiliaries are presently cast; and therefore such good fellowes will not take much paines to bring the warre to an end. But the victorie of a Tyrant, makes him stand in neede of more such helpers: because that after it he doth wrong to more, as hauing more subjects; and therefore stands in feare of more, that should seeke to take reuenge vpon him. The stipendaries therefore of the Achaeans, being forced to giue ground, were vrged so violently in their retrait by those of Machanidas, that shortly they be∣tooke themselues to flight; and could not bee staid by any perswasions of Philopoe∣men, but ranne away quite beyond the battaile of the Achaeans. This disaster had beene sufficient to take from Philopoemen the honour of the day; had hee not wisely obserued the demeanour of Machanidas, and found in him that errour which might restore the victorie. The Tyrant with his Mercinaries gaue chace vnto those that fled: leauing behind him in good order of battaile his Lacedaemonians; whom hee thought sufficient to deale with the Achaeans, that were alreadie disheartned by the flight of their companions. But when this his rashnesse had carried him out of sight; Philopoemen aduanced towards the Lacedaemonians that stood before him. There lay betweene them ath wart the Country a long ditch, without water at that time; and therefore passable (as it seemed) without much difficultie, especially for Foot. The Lacedaemontans aduentured ouer it, as thinking themselues better souldiers than the Achaeans; who had in a manner alreadie the day. But hereby they greatly disordered their owne Battaile; and had no sooner the foremost of them re∣couered the further banke, than they were stoutly charged by the Achaeans, who draue them headlong into the ditch againe. Their first rankes being broken, all the rest began to shrinke: so as Philopoemen getting ouer the ditch, easily chaced them out of the Field. Philopoemen knew better how to vse his aduantage, than Machanidas had done. Hee suffered not all his Armie to disband and follow the chace: but re∣tained with him a sufficient strength, for the custodie of a bridge that was ouer the ditch, by which he knew that the Tyrant must come backe. The Tyrant with his Mercinaries returning from the chace, looked very heauily when he saw what was fallen out. Yet with a lustie Troupe of Horse about him Hee made towards the bridge: hoping to find the Achaeans in disorder; and to set vpon their backes, as they were carelessely pursuing their Victorie. But when he and his Companie saw Phi∣lopoemen ready to make good the bridge against them; then beganne euerie one to looke, which way he might shift for himselfe. The Tyrant, with no more than two in his companie, rode along the ditch side; and searched for an easie passage ouer. He was easily discouered by his purple Cassocke, and the costly trappings of his Horse. Philopoemen therefore leauing the charge of the bridge vnto another, coa∣sted him all the way as he rode; and falling vpon him at length in the ditch it selfe, as he was getting ouer it, slew him there with his owne hand. There died in this Bat∣taile on the Lacedaemonians side about foure thousand: and more than foure thousand were taken Prisoners. Of the Achaean Mercinaries, probable it is that the losse was not greatly cared sor; since that War was at an end, and for their monie they might hire more when they should haue need. §. VI. PHILIP hauing peace with Rome, and with all Greece, prepares against Asia. Of the Kings of Pergamus, Cappadocia, Pontus, Paphlagona, Bithynia; and their Linages. Of the Galatians. BY this victorie the Achaeans learned to thinke well of themselues. Nci∣ther needed they indeed after awhile (such was their discipline, and continuall exercise) to account themselues in matter of war inferiour to any, that should haue brought against them no great oddes of number. As for the Macedonian, He made no great vse of them: But when he had once concluded peace with the Romans and Aetolians, He studied how to enlarge his Dominion Eastward; since the fortune of his friends the Carthaginians declined in the West. He tooke in hand many matters together, or very necrely together, and some of them not honest: wherein if the Achaeans would haue done him seruice; they must, by helping him to oppresse others that neuer had wronged him, haue taught him the way how to deale with themselues. He greatly hated At∣talus King of Pergamus, who had joyned with the Romans and Aetolians in warre a∣gainst him. This Attalus, though a King, was scarce yet a Noble-man, otherwise as he was ennobled by his owne, and by his Fathers vertue. His fortune beganne in Phi∣letaerus his Vncle: who being guelded, by reason of a mishap which hee had when he was a child, grew afterwards thereby to bee the more eneemed: as great men in those times reposed much confidence in Eunuches, whose affections could not be obliged vnto wiues or children. He was entertained into familie of Docimus, a Captaine following Antigonus the first; and after the death of Antigonus, he accom∣panied his Master, that betooke himselfe to Lysimachus King of Thrace. Lysimachus had good opinion of him; and put him in with his monie and accompts. But when at length hee stood in feare of this King, that grew a blondie Tyrant: Hee fled into Asia, where he seized vpon the Towne of Pergamus, and nine thousand ta∣lents belonging to Lysimachus. The towne and monie, together with his owne ser∣uice, He offered vnto Seleucus the first, that then was readie to giue Lysimachus battel. His offer was kindly accepted, but neuer performed; for that Seleucus hauing slaine , died shortly after himselfe, before he made vse of or his mo∣nie. So this Eunuch still retained Pergamus with the Countrie about it; and reig∣ned therein twentie yeeres as an absolute King. Hee had two brethren: of which the elder is said to haue been a poore Carter; and the yonger perhaps was not much better; before such time as they were raised by the fortune of this . Philetae∣rus lest his Kingdome to the elder of these, or to the sonne of the elder called Eume∣nes. This Eumenes enlarged his kingdome; making his aduantage of the dissension, betweene Seleucus Calinicus and Antiochus Hierax, the sonnes of the second Antiochus. He fought a battaile with Hierax, neere vnto Sardes; and wan the victorie. At which time, to animate his men against the Gaules that serued vnder his Enemie, he vsed a pretie deuice. He wrote the word Iul. Front. Strat. L. 1. C. 11. VICTORIE vpon the hand of his Soothsayer, in such colours as would easily come off: and when the hote liuer of the beast that was sacrificed, had cleanly taken the print of the letters, He published this vnto his Ar∣mie as a Miracle, plainely fore-shewing that the gods would bee assistant in that Battaile. After this victorie, he grew a dreadfull enemie to : who neuer durst at∣tempt to recouer from him, by warre, the Territorie that hee had gotten and held. Finally, when hee had reigned two and twentie yeeres, hee died by a surfet of ouer∣much drinke; and left his Kingdome to Attalus, of whom wee now entreat, that was sonne vnto the yongest brother of Philetaerus. Attalus was an vnderta∣king Prince, very bountifull, and no lesse valiant. By his owne proper forces He re∣stored his friend Ariarathes the Cappadocian into his Kingdome, whence he had been expelled. He was grieuously molested by Achaeus: who setting vp himselfe as King against Antiochus the great, reigned in the lesser Asia. He was in his owne Citie of Pergamus: but by helpe of the Tectosagae, a Nation of the Gaules, whom hee called ouer out of Thrace, He recouered all that he had lost. When these Gaules had once gotten footing in Asia, they neuer wanted employment: but were either en∣tertained by some of the Princes reigning in those quarters; or interposed them∣selues, without inuitation, and found themselues worke in quarrels of their owne making. They caused Prusias King of to cease from his warre against By∣zantium. Whereunto when hee had condescended; they neuerthelesse within a∣while after inuaded his Kingdome. Hee obtained against them a great victorie; and vsed it with great crueltie, sparing neither age nor sexe. But the swarme of them in∣creasing; they occupied the Region about Hellespont: where, in seating themselues, they were much beholding vnto Attalus. Neuerthelesse, presuming afterwards vpon their strength; they forced their neighbour Princes and Cities to pay them tribute. In the sharpe exaction whereof, they had no more respect vnto Attalus than to any that had worse deserued of them. By this they compelled him to fight against them: and Hee being victorious, compelled them to containe themselues within the bounds of that Prouince, which tooke name from them in time follow∣ing, and was called Galatia. Yet continued they still to oppresse the weakest of their neighbours; and to fill vp the Armies of those, that could best hire them. The Kings reigning in those parts, were the posteritie of such, as had saued them∣selues and their Prouinces, in the slothful reigne of the Persians; or in the busie times of Alexander, and his Macedonian followers. The Cappadocians were verie ancient. For the first of their line had married with Atossa, sifter vnto the great King Cyrus. Their Countrie was taken from them by Perdiccas, as is shewed before. But the son of that King, whom Perdiccas crucified, espying his time while the Macedonians were at ciuill warres among themselues; recouered his dominion, and passed it ouer to his off-spring. The Kings of Pontus had also their beginning from the Persian Empire; and are said to haue issued from the royall house of Achaemenes. The Pa∣phlagonians deriued themselues from Pylaemenes, a King that assisted Priamus at the warre of Troy. These, applying themselues vnto the times, were alwayes confor∣mable vnto the strongest. The Ancestors of Prusias had begun to reigne in Bithynia, some few generations before that of the great Alexander. They lay somewhat out of the Macedonians way: by whom therfore, hauing other employment, they were the lesse molested. Calantus, one of Alexanders Captaines, made an Expedition into their Countrie; where hee was vanquished. They had afterwards to doe with a Lieutenant of Antigonus, that made them somewhat more humble. And thus they shuffled, as did the rest, vntill the reigne of Prusias, whom wee haue alreadie some∣times mentioned. §. VII. The Towne of Cios taken by PHILIP, at the instance of PRVSIAS King of Bi∣thynia, and cruelly destroyed. By this and like actions, PHILIP growes hatefull to many of the Greekes: and is warred vpon by ATTALVS King of Pergamus, and by the Rhodians. PRVSIAS as a neighbour King, had many quarrels with Attalus; whose greatnesse he suspected. He therefore strengthned himselfe, by taking to wife the daughter of Philip; as Attalus, on the contrarie side, entred into a strict Confederacie with the Aetolians, Rhodians, and other of the Greekes. But when Philip had ended his Aetolian warre, and was deuising with Antiochus about sharing betweene them two the Kingdome of Egypt, wherein Ptolomie Philopater a friend vnto them both was newly dead, and had left his sonne Ptol. Epiphanes a yong child his heire; the Bithynian entreated this his Fa∣ther-in-law to come ouer into Asia, there to winne the Towne of the Ciani, and be∣stow it vpon him. Prusias had no right vnto the Towne, nor just matter of quarrell against it: but it was fitly seated for him; and therewithall rich. Philip came; as one that could not well denie to helpe his Sonne-in-law. But hereby hee mighti∣ly offended no small part of Greece. Embassadours came to him whilest hee lay at the siege, from the Rhodians, and diuers other States: entreating him to forsake the Enterprise. He gaue dilatorie, but otherwise gentle answeres: making shew as if he would condiscend to their request; when he intended nothing lesse. At length hee got the Towne: where, euen in presence of the Embassadours, of whose sollici∣tation he had seemed so regardfull, Hee omitted no part of . Hereby hee rendred himselfe odious to his neighbours, as a perfidious and cruell Prince. Espe∣cially his Fact was detested of the Rhodians: who had made vehement intercession for the poore Ciani; and were aduertised by Embassadours of purpose sent vnto them from Philip, That, howsoeuer it were in his power to winne the Towne as soone as he listed: yet in regard of his loue to the Rhodians, Hee was contented to giue it ouer. And by this his the Embassadours said, that he would ma∣nifest vnto the World, what slanderous tongues they were; which noysed abroad such reports, as went of his falshood and oppressions. the Embassadours were declaming at Rhodes in the Theater to this ; there came some that made a true relation of what had hapned: shewing that Philip had sacked and destroyed the Towne of Cios, and, after a cruell slaughter of the Inhabitants, had made slaues of all that escaped the sword. If the tooke this in great despight, no lesse were the Aetolians inflamed against him: since they had sent a Captaine to take charge of the Towne; being warned before by his doings at Lysimachia and Chal∣cedon (which he had withdrawne from their Confederacie to his owne) what little trust was to be reposed in the faith of this King. But most of all others was Attalus moued, with consideration of the Macedonians violent ambition, and of his owne e∣state. He had much to lose; and was not without hope of getting , he could make a strong Partie in Greece. He had alreadie, as a new King, followed the exam∣ple of Alexanders Captaines, in purchasing with much liberalitie the loue of the A∣thenians; which were notable Trumpetters of other mens vertue, hauing lost their owne. On the friendship of the Aetolians he had cause to presume; hauing bound them vnto him by good offices, many and great, in their late warre with Philip. The Rhodians that were mightie at Sea, and held very good intelligence with the Aegyp∣tians, Syrians, and many other Princes and States, easily drew into a streight Al∣liance with him; by their hatred newly conceiued against Philip. Vpon confidence in these his friends, but most of all in the readie assistance of the Rhodians, Attalus prepared to deale with the Macedonian by open warre. It had been vnseasonable to procrastinate, and expect whereto the doings of the Enemie ten∣ded; since his desire to fasten vpon Asia was manifest, and his falshood no lesse ma∣nifest, than was such his . They met with him shortly not farre from Chios, and fought with him a battaile at Sea: wherin though Attalus was driuen to runne his owne ship on ground, hardly escaping to land: though the Admiral of the Rho∣dians tooke his deaths wound: and though Philip after the battaile tooke harbour vnder a Promontorie, by which they had fought, so that he had the gathering of the Wracks vpon the shore: Yet forasmuch as He had suffered farre greater losse of ships and men than had the Enemie: and since He durst not in few dayes after forth to Sea, when Attalus and the Rhodians came to braue him in his Port; the ho∣nour of the victorie was adjudged to his Enemies. This notwithstanding, af∣terwards besieged and wanne some Townes in Caria: whether onely in a brauerie, and to despight his opposites; or whether vpon any hopefull desire of conquest; it is vncertaine. The stratageme, by which he wonne , is worthie of noting. He attempted it by a Myne: and finding the Earth so stonie, that it resisted his worke, He neuerthelesse commanded the Pyoners to make a noyse vnder ground; and secretly in the night-time Hee raysed great Mounts about the entrance of the Myne, to breed an opinion in the besieged, that the worke went marucilously for∣ward. At length he sent word to the Townesmen, that by his vnder myning, two acres of their wall onely vpon woodden props: to which if he gaue fire, and entred by a breach, they should expect no mercie. The Prinasstans little thought, that he had fetcht all his earth and rubbish by night a great way off, to raise vp those heapes which they saw; but rather that all had extracted out of the Myne. Wherfore they suffered themselues to be outfaced; and gaue vp the Towne as lost, which the Enemie had no hope to winne by force. But Philip could not stay to settle himselfe in those parts. Attalus and the Rhodians were too strong for him at Sea, and compelled him to make haste backe into Macedon; whither they followed him all the way in manner of pursuit. §. VIII. The Romans, after their Carthaginian warre, seeke matter of quarrell against PHILIP. The Athenians, vpon slight cause, proclaime warre against PHILIP; mouedthere∣to by ATTALVS; whom they flatter. PHILIP winnes diuers Townes: and makes peremptorie answere to the Roman Embassa∣dour. The resolution of the Abydeni. THese Asiatique matters, which no way concerned the Romans, yet ser∣ued well to make a noyse in Rome; and fill the peoples heads, if not with a desire of making warre in Macedon, at least with a conceit that it were expedient so to doe. The Roman Senate was perfectly informed of the state of those Easterne Countries; and knew, that there was none other Nation than the Greekes, which lay betweene them and the Lordship of Asia. These Greekes were factious, and seldome or neuer at peace. As for the Macedonian, though length of time, and continuall dealings in Greece euer since the Reignes of Philip and Alexander, had left no difference betweene him and the Naturals: yet most of them abhorred his Dominion, because He was original∣ly forsooth a Barbarian: many of them hated him vpon ancient quarrels: and they that had been most beholding vnto him, were neuerthelesse wearie of him, by rea∣son of his personall faults. All this gaue hope, that the affaires of Greece would not long detaine the Roman Armies: especially since the diuisions of the Country were such, that euerie pettie Estate was apt to take counsaile apart for it selfe; without much regarding the generalitie. But the poore Commonaltie of Rome had no great affection to such a chargeable enterprise. They were alreadie quite exhausted, by that grieuous war with Hannibal: wherein they had giuen by Loane to the Repub∣like all their monie: neither had they as yet receiued, neither did they receiue vntill fifteene or sixteene yeeres after this, their whole summe backe againe. That part of paiment also which was alreadie made, being not in present monie, but much of it in Land: it behoued them to rest a while; and bestow the more diligence in tilling their grounds, by how much they were the lesse able to bestow cost. Wherefore they took no pleasure to heare, that Attalus and the Rhodians had sent Embassadors to sollicite them against Philip, with report of his bold attempts in Asia: or that M. Aurelius, their Agent in Greece, had sent letters of the same tenour to the Senate, and magnified his intelligence, by setting out the preparations of this dangerous e∣nemie, that sollicited not onely the Townes vpon the Continent, but all the Ilands in those Seas, visiting them in person, or sending Embassadours, as one that meant shortly to hold warre with the Romans vpon their owne ground. Philip had indeed no such intent: neither was he much too strong either of himselfe, or by his alliance in Greece, to be resisted by Attalus and the Rhodians, especially with the helpe of the Aetolians their good friends, and (in a manner) his owne enemies. But such things must be published abroad, if onely to predispose men vnto the warre, and giue it the more honest colour. Philip was a man of ill condition; and therefore could not thriue by intermeddling in the affaires of those, that were more mightie than himselfe. He was too vnskil∣full, or otherwise too vnapt, to retaine his old friends: yet would he needes be sec∣king new enemies. And he found them such, as he deserued to haue them: for he offered his helpe to their destruction, when they were in miserie, and had done him no harme. It behoued him therefore, either to haue strained his forces to the vtmost in making warre vpon them; or, in desisting from that injurious course, to haue made amends for the wrongs past, by doing friendly offices of his owne ac∣cord. But He, hauing broken that League of peace which is of all other the most naturall, binding all men to offer no violence willingly, vnlesse they think themselues iustly prouoked; was afterwards too fondly perswaded, that he might wel be secure of the Romans, because of the written Couenants of peace betweene him and them. There is not any forme of oath, whereby such articles of peace can be held , saue onely Sir Fr. Bacon de Sap. . by the water of Styx, that is, by Necessitie: which whilest it bindes one partie, or both vnto performance, making it apparent that he shall bee a loser who starts from the Conditions; it may so long (and so long onely) bee presumed, that there shall be no breach. Till Hannibal was vanquished, the Romans neuer hearke∣ned after Philip: for necessitie made them let him alone. But when once they had peace with Carthage, then was this Riuer of Styx dried vp: and then could they sweare as Plaut. . Mercurie did in the Comedie, by their owne selues, euen by their good swords, that they had good reason to make warre vpon him. The Voyage of Sopa∣ter into Africke, and the present warre against Attalus; were matter of quarrell as much as needed: or if this were not enough, the Athenians helped to furnish them with more. The Athenians, being at this time Lords of no more than their owne barren Ter∣ritorie, tooke state vpon them neuerthelesse, as in their ancient fortune. Two yong Gentlemen of entring into the Temple of Ceres, in the dayes of Initiation, (wherein were deliuered the mysteries of Religion, or rather of Idolatrous super∣stition, vainly saide to bee auaileable vnto felicitie after this life) discouered them∣selues by some impertinent questions, to be none of those that were initiated. Here∣vpon they were brought before the Officers: and though it was apparent, that they came into the place by meere errour, not thinking to haue therein done amisse; yet, as it had beene for some hainous crime, they were put to death. All their Coun∣trymen at home tooke this in ill part; and sought to reuenge it as a publike injurie, by warre vpon the Athenians. Procuring therefore of Philip some Macedonians to helpe them, they entred into Attica: who wasted it with fire and sword; and carried thence away with them a great bootie. This indignitie stirred vp the high-minded Athe∣nians; and made them thinke vpon doing more, than they had abilitie to performe. All which at the they could doe, was to send Embassadours to King Attalus; gratulating his happie successe against Philip, and entreating him to visit their Citie. Attalus was hereto the more willing; because he vnderstood, that the Roman Em∣bassadours, houering about Greece for matter of intelligence, had a purpose to bee there at the same time. So he went thither, accompanied, besides his owne followers, with some of the Rhodians. Landing in the Piraeus, hee found the Romans there, with whom he had much friendly conference: they rejoycing that he continued enemy to Philip; and He being no lesse glad, when he heard of their purpose to renew the warre. The Athenians came foorth of their Citie, all the Magistrates, Priests, and Ci∣tizens, with their wiues and children, in as solemne a pompe as they could deuise, to meet and honour the King. They entertained the Romans that were with him, in very louing manner: but towards Attalus they omitted no point of ob∣seruance, which their flatterie could suggest. At his first comming into the Citie they called the people to Assembly: where they desired him to honour them with his presence, and let them heare him speake. But he excused himselfe; saying, That with an euill grace he should recount vnto them those many benefits, by which he studied to make them know what loue he bore them. Wherefore it was thought fit, that he should deliuer in writing, what he would haue to be propounded. He did so. The points of his Declaration were; first, what he had willingly done for their sake: then, what had lately passed betweene him and Philip: lastly, an exhortation vnto them, to declare themselues against the Macedonian, whilest he with the Rho∣dians, and the Romans, were willing and readie to take their part: which if they now refused to doe, He protested, that afterwards it would bee vaine to craue his helpe. There needed little entreatie: for they were as willing to proclaime the warre, as Hee to desire it. As for other matters; they loaded him with immoderate honours: and ordained, That vnto the ten Tribes, whereof the bodie of their Citizens consi∣sted, should be added another, and called after his name; as if Hee were in part one of their Founders. To the Rhodians they also decreed a Crowne of Gold, in reward of their vertue; and made all the Rhodians free Citizens of Athens. Thus beganne a great noyse of , wherein little was left vnto the Romans for their part; and the Rhodians taking all vpon them. But while these were vainly mis-spending the time, in seeking to draw the Aetolians to their partie: that contrarie to their olde manner were glad to bee at quiet: Philip wanne the Townes of Maronea and Aenus, with many other strong places about the Hellespont. Likewise passing ouer the Hellespont, Hee layd siege vnto Abydus; and wanne it, though Hee was faine to stay there long. The Towne held out, rather vp∣on an obstinate resolution, and hope of succour from Attalus and the Rhodi∣ans, then any great ability to defend it selfe against so mightie an Enemie. But the Rhodians sent thither onely one Quadrireme Gallie: and Attalus no more than three hundred men; farre too weake an aide to make good the place. The Roman Embas∣sadours wondred much at this great negligence, of them that had taken so much vpon them. These Embassadours C. Claudius, M. Aemylius, and P. Sempronius, were sent vnto Ptolemie Epiphanes King of Aegypt, to acquaint him with their victorie against Han∣nibal and the ; as also to thanke him for his fauour vnto them shewed in that warre; and to desire the continuance thereof, if they should neede it against Philip. This Aegyptian King was now in the third or fourth yeere of his Reigne, which (as his Father Philopator had done before him) Hee beganne a very young boy. The courtesie for which the Romans were to thanke him, was, That out of Aegypt they had lately beene supplied with Corne, in a time of extreme Dearth; when the miseries of Warre had made all their owne Prouinces vnable to them. This message could not but bee welcome to the Aegyptian: since it was well knowne, how Philip and Antiochus had combined themselues against him; conspiring to take away his Kingdome. And therefore it might in reason bee hoped, that Hee, or his Councell for him, should offer to supplie the Romans with Corne: since this their Macedonian Expedition concerned his Estate no lesse than theirs. But as the errand was for the most part complementall: so had the Embassadours both leisure, and direction from the Senate, to looke vnto the things of Greece by the way. Wherefore they agreed, that M. Aemylius the yongest of them should steppe aside, and visit Philip, to trie if he could make him leaue the siege of Abydus; which else He was like to carry. Aemylius, comming to Philip, telles him, that his doings are contrarie to the League that Hee had made with the Romans. For and the Rhodians, vpon whom Hee made warre, were Confederate with Rome: and the Towne of Abydus, which Hee was now besieging, had a kind of dependancie vpon Attalus. Hereto Philip answered, That Attalus and the Rhodians had made warre vpon him: and that He did onely requite them with the like. Doe you al∣so (sayd Aemylius) requite these poore ABYDENI with such terrible Warre, for any the like by them first made vpon you? The King was angry to heare himselfe thus taken short: and therefore Hee roundly made answere to Aemylius; It is your youth, Sir, and your beautie, and (aboue all,) your beeing a Roman, that makes you thus praesumptuous. But I would wish yee to remember the League that yee haue made with mee, and to keepe it: If yee doe otherwise, I will make yee vnder∣stand, that the Kingdome, and Name of Macedon is in matter of Warre, no lesse noble than the Roman. So Hee dismissed the Embassadour; and had the Towne immediat∣ly yeelded to his discretion. The people had entertained a resolution, to haue died euery one of them, and set their Towne on fire; binding themselues hereto by a fearefull oath, when Philip denied to accept them vpon reasonable Conditions. But hauing in desperate fight, once repelling him from the Breach, lost the greatest number of their Youth: it was thought meete by the Gouernours and Ancients of the Citie to change this resolution; and take such peace as could be gotten. So they carried out their Gold and Siluer to Philip: about which whilest they were busie, the memorie of their oath wrought so effectually in the yonger sort; that, by exhorta∣tion of their Priests, they fell to murdering their women, children, and themselues. Hereof the King had so little compassion, that He said, he would grant the Abydeni three dayes leisure to die: and to that end forbad his men to enter the Towne; or hazard themselues in interrupting the violence of those mad fooles. §. IX. The Romans decree warre against PHILIP, and send one of their Consuls into , as it were in defence of the Athenians their Confederats. How poore the Athenians were at this time, both in qualitie and estate. THis calamitie of the Abydeni, was likened by the Romanes vnto that of the Saguntines: which indeed it neerely resembled; though Rome was not alike interessed in the quarrell. But to helpe themselues with pre∣tence for the warre, they had found out another Saguntum, the Citie of Athens: which if the Macedonian should winne, then rested there no more to doe, than that he should presently embarke himselfe for Italie, whi∣ther he would come, not as Hannibal from Saguntum in fiue moneths, but in the short space of fiue dayes sayling. Thus P. Sulpicius the Consul tolde the Multitude, when he exhorted them to make warre vpon Philip; which at his first propounding they had denied. The example of Pyrrhus was by him alleadged; to shew, what Philip, with the power of a greater kingdome, might dare to vndertake: as also the for∣tunate Voyage of into Africk; to shew the difference of making warre abroad, and admitting it into the bowels of their owne Countrey. By such arguments was the Commonaltie of Rome induced to beleeue, that this warre with the Macedonian was both just and necessary. So it was decreed: and immediatly the same Consul hasted away towards Macedon, hauing that Prouince allotted vnto him before, and all things in a readinesse, by order from the Senate; who followed other Motiues, than the people must bee acquainted with. Great thankes were giuen to the Athe∣nian Embassadours, of their constancie (as was sayd) in not changing their faith at such time as they stood in danger of being besieged. And indeed great thankes were due to them, though not vpon the same occasion. For the people of Rome had no cause to thinke it a benefit vnto themselues, that any Greeke Towne, refusing to sue vnto the Macedonian for peace, requested their helpe against him. But the Senate intending to take in hand the Conquest of the Easterne parts; had reason to giue thankes vnto those, that ministred the occasion. Since therefore it was an vntrue suggestion, That Philip was making ready for Italy: and since neither Attalus, the Rhodians, nor any other State in those quarters, desired the Romanes to giue them protection: these busi-headed Athenians, who falling out with the Acarnanians, and consequently with Philip, a matter of May-game, (as was shewed before) sent Em∣bassadours into all parts of the World, euen to Ptolemie of Aegypt, and to the Ro∣mans, as well as to Attalus and others their neighbours; must be accepted as cause of the warre, and Authours of the benefit thence redounding. Neuerthelesse as it loues to fall out where the meaning differs from the pretence: the doings of P. the Consul were such, as might haue argued Athens to bee the least part of his care. Hee sailed not about Peloponnesus, but tooke the readie way to Macedon; and landing about the Riuer of Apsus, betweene Dyrrachium and Apollonia, there beganne the warre. Soone vpon his comming the Athenian Embas∣sadours were with him, and craued his helpe: whereof they could make no benefit whilest he was so farre from them. They bemoaned themselues as men besieged, and intreated him to deliuer them. For which cause He sent vnto them C. with twenty Gallies, and a competent number of men: but the maine of his forces Hee retained with him, for the prosequution of a greater designe. The Athenians were not indeed besieged: onely some Rouers from Chalcis, in the Ile of Euboea; and some bands of aduenturers out of Corinth, vsed to take their shippes and spoile their fields, because they had declared themselues against King Philip, that was Lord of these two Townes. The Robberies done by these Pyrats and Free-booters, were by the more cloquent than warlike Athenians, in this declining Age of their Fortune and Vertue, called a Siege. From such detriment the arriuall of Claudius, and shortly af∣ter of three Rhodian Gallies, easily preserued them. As for the Athenians themselues; they that had been wont, in ancient times, to vndertake the Conquests of Aegypt, Cyprus, and Cicil; to make warre vpon the great Persian King; and to hold so much of Greece in subiection, as made them redoubtable vnto all the rest; had now no more than three shippes, and those open ones, not much better then long Boates. Yet thought they not themselues a whit the worse men; but stood as highly vpon the glory and vertue of their Ancestors, as if it had been still their owne. §. X. The Towne of Chalcis in Euboea, taken and sackt by the Romans and their Associates, that lay in Garison at Athens. PHILIP attempteth to take Athens by Surprise: wasteth the Countrey about: and makes a iourney into Peloponnesus. Of NABIS the Tyrant of Lacedaemon, and his wife. PHILIP offers to make Warre against for the Achaeans. He returneth home through Attica, which he spoyleth againe: and prouides against his Enemies. Some exploits of the Romans. Diuers Princes ioyne with them. Great labouring to draw the Aeto∣lians into the warre. PHILIP, returning home from Abydus, heard newes of the Roman Consul his being about Apollonia. But ere he stirred forth to giue him entertainement; or perhaps before hee had well resolued, whether it were best a while to sit still, and trie what might bee done for obtai∣ning of peace, or whether to make opposition, and resist these Inua∣ders with all his forces: Hee receiued aduertisement from Chalcis of a grieuous mishap there befallen him, by procurement of the Athenians. For C. Claudius with his Romans, finding no such worke at Athens as they had expected, or as was answer∣able to the fame that went abroad; purposed to doe somewhat that might quicken the Warre, and make his owne imployment better. Hee grew soone weary of sit∣ting as a Scarre-Crowe, to saue the Athenians grounds from spoyle; and therefore gladly tooke in hand a businesse of more importance. The Towne of Chalcis was negligently guarded by the Macedonian Souldiours therein, for that there was no enemie at hand; and more negligently by the Townsmen, who reposed themselues vpon their Garrison. Hereof Claudius hauing aduertisement, sailed thither by night for feare of being discried; and, arriuing there a little before breake of day, tooke it by Scalado. He vsed no mercie, but slue all that came in his way: and wanting men to keepe it, (vnlesse hee should haue left the heartlesse Athenians to their owne defence) Hee set it on fire; consuming the Kings Magazines of Corne, and all proui∣sions for Warre, which were plenteously filled. Neither were Hee and his Associats contented with the great abundance of spoyle which they carried about their ships, and with inlarging all those, whom Philip, as in a place of most securitie, kept there imprisoned: but to shew their despight and hatred vnto the King, they ouerthrew and brake in pieces the Statuas vnto him there erected. This done, they hasted a∣way towards Athens: where the newes of their exploit were like to bee ioyfully welcomed. The King lay then at Demetrias about some twenty miles thence; whither when these tidings, or part of them, were brought him, though he saw that it was too late to remedie the matter; yet hee made all haste to take reuenge. Hee thought to haue taken the Athenians, with their trustie Friends, busie at worke in ransaking the Towne, and loading themselues with spoyle: but they were gone be∣fore his comming. Fiue thousand light-armed-foote hee had with him, and three hundred horse: whereof leauing at onely a few to burie the dead, Hee marched thence away speedily toward Athens: thinking it not vnpossible to take his enemies, in the ioy of their Victory, as full of negligence, as they had taken Chal∣cis. Neither had he much failed of his expectation, if a Foot-Post that stood Scout for the Citie vpon the borders, had not descried him afarre off, and swiftly carried word of his approch to Athens. was mid-night when this Post came thither: who found all the Towne asleepe, as fearelesse of any danger. But the Magistrates, hea∣ring his report, caused a Trumpet out of their Citadell to sound the Alarme; and with all speed made ready for defence. Within a few houres Philip was there: who seeing the many lights, and other signes of busie preparation vsuall in such a case, vnderstood that they had newes of his comming; and therefore willed his men, to repose themselues till it were day. It is like, that the paucitie of his followers did helpe well to animate the Citizens, which beheld them from the walls. Wherefore though Claudius were not yet returned (who was to fetch a compasse about by Sea, and had no cause of haste) yet hauing in the Towne some mercinarie Souldiers, which they kept, of their owne, besides the great multitude of Citizens; they ad∣uentured to issue forth at a gate, whereto they saw Philip make approch. The King was glad of this; reckoning all those his owne, that were thus hardie. He therfore onely willed his men to follow his example; and presently gaue charge vpon them. In that fight he gaue singular proofe of his valour: and beating downe many of the Enemies with his owne hands, draue them with great slaughter backe into the Ci∣tie. The heat of his courage transported him further, than discretion would haue allowed, euen to the very gate. But he retired without harme taken; that they which were vpon the Towres ouer the gate, could not vse their casting weapons a∣gainst him, without indangering their owne people that were thronging before him into the Citie. There was a Temple of Hercules, a place of exercise, with a Groue, and many goodly Monuments besides, neere adioyning vnto Athens: of which he spared none; but suffered the rage of his anger to extend, euen vnto the sepulchres of the dead. The next day came the Romans, and some Companies of Attalus his men from Aegina; too late in regard of what was already past: but in good time, to preuent him of satisfying his anger to the full, which as yet hee had not done. So he departed thence to Corinth: and hearing that the Achaeans held a Parliament at Argos, He came thither to them vnexpected. The Achaeans were deuising vpon warre: which they intended to make against Nabis the Tyrant of Lacedaemon: who being started vp in the roome of Machanidas, did greater mischiefe then any that went before him. This Tyrant relied wholly vpon his Mercinaries; and of his subjects had no regard. He was a cruell oppressor; a greedy extortioner vpon those that liued vnder him; and one that in his naturall condition smelt rankly of the Hangman. In these qualities, his wife Apega was very fitly matched with him, since his dexteritie was no greater in spoyling the men, than hers in fleecing their wiues; whom she would neuer suffer to be at quiet, till they had presented her with all their iewels and apparell. Her husband was so delighted Liu. 32. with her propertie, that hee caused an Image to bee made liuely representing her; and apparrelled it with such costly garments as shee vsed to weare. But it was in∣deede an Engine, seruing to torment men. Hereof he made vse, when he meant to . e . li. 13. trie the vertue of his Rhetorick. For calling vnto him some rich man, of whose mo∣nie hee was desirous; Hee would bring him into the roome where this Apega stood, and there vse all his Art of perswasion, to get what hee desired, as it were by good will. If he could not so speede, but was answered with excuses: then tooke he the refractorie denier by the hand, and told him, that perhaps his wife A∣pega (who sate by in a Chaire) could perswade more effectually. So hee led him to the Image, that rose vp and opened the armes, as it were for imbracement. Those armes were full of sharpe yron nayles, the like whereof were also sticking in the brests, though hidden with her clothes: and herewith she griped the poore wretch, to the pleasure of the Tyrant, that laughed at his cruell death. Such, and worse (sor it were long to tell all here that is spoken of him) was Nabis in his Gouernment. In his dealings abroad he combined with the Aetolians, as Machanidas and Lycurgus had done before him. By these he grew into acquaintance with the Romanes; and was comprehended in the League which they made with Philip, at the end of their former Warre. Of Philopoemens vertue hee stood in feare; and therefore durst not prouoke the Achaeans, as long as they had such an able Commander. But when Cy∣cliades, a farre worse Captaine, was their Praetor; and all, or the greatest part of their Mercinaries were discharged; Philopoemen being also gone into Crete, to follow his beloued Occupation of Warre: then did Nabis fall vpon their Territory; and wast∣ing all the fields, made them distrust their owne safetie in the Townes. Against this Tyrant the Achaeans were preparing for warre, when Philip came among them; and had set downe, what proportion of Souldiours euery Citie of their Corporation should furnish out. But Philip willed them, not to trouble them∣selues with the care of this businesse; forasmuch as he alone would ease them of this warre, and take the burden vpon himselfe. With exceeding ioy and thankes they accepted of this kinde offer. But then hee told them, That, whilest he made warre vpon Lacedaemon, Hee ought not to leaue his owne Townes vnguarded. In which respect he thought they would be pleased, to send a few men to Corinth, and some Companies into the Ile of Euboea; that so he might securely pursue the warre against Nabis. Immediatly they found out his deuice; which was none other, than to en∣gage their Nation in his warre against the Romans: Wherefore their Cycliades made him answer, That their Lawes them to conclude any other matters in their Parliament, than those for which it was assembled. So passing the Decree, vpon which they had agreed before, for preparing warre against Nabis; hee brake vp the Assemblie, with euery mans good liking; whereas in former times, Hee had been thought no better than one of the Kings Parasites. It grieued the King to haue thus failed in his purpose with the Achaeans. , he gathered vp among them a few Voluntaries; and so returned by Co∣rinth backe into Attica. There he met with Philocles one of his Captaines, that with two thousand men had been doing what harme he might vnto the Countrie. With this addition of strength, he attempted the Castle of , the Hauen of Pyraeus, and euen the Citie of Athens. But the Romans made such after him by Sea, thrusting themselues into euery of these places; that hee could no more then wreak his anger vpon those goodly Temples, with which the Land of Attica was at that singularly beautified. So Hee destroyed all the workes of their notable Artifi∣cers, wrought in excellent Marble; which they had in plenty, of their owne; or, ha∣uing long agoe been masters of the Sea, had brought from other places, where best choice was found. Neither did hee onely pull all downe: but caused his men to breake the very stones, that they might be vnseruiceable to the reparation. His losse at Chalcis being thus vpon Athens, Hee went home into Macedon: and there made prouision, both against the Roman Consul that lay about Apollonia; and against the Dardanians, with other his bad neighbours, which were likely to in∣fest him. Among his other cares he forgot not the Aetolians: to whose Parliament, shortly to be held at Naupactus, he sent an Embassage; requesting them to continue in his friendship. Thus was Philip occupied. Sulpicius the Roman Consul encamped vpon the Riuer of Apsus. Thence he sent forth Apustius, his Lieutenant, with part of the Armie to waste the borders of Mace∣don. Apustius tooke sundrie Castles and Townes; vsing such extremitie of sword and fire at Antipatria, the first good Towne which he wanne by force, that none durst afterwards make resistance, vnlesse they knew themselues able to holde . Returning towards the Consul with his spoile, He was charged in Rere, vpon the passage of a Brooke, by Athenagor as a Macedonian Captaine: but the Romans had the better; and killing many of these enemies, tooke prisoners many more, to the increase of their bootie, with which they arriued in safetie at their Campe. The successe of this Expedition, though it were not great; yet serued to draw into the Roman friendship, those that had formerly no good inclination to the Macedonian. These were Pleuratus, the sonne of Scer dilaidas the Illyrian; Aminander King of the Athamanians; and Bato, the sonne of Longarus, a Prince of the Dardanians. They offered their assistance vnto the Consul, who thanked them: and said, That hee would shortly make vse of Pleuratus and Bato, when hee entred into Macedon: but that the friendship of Aminander, whose Countrie lay betweene the Aetolians and Thessalie, might bee perhaps auaileable with the , to stirre them vp against Philip. So the present care was wholy set vpon the Aetolian Parliament at hand. Thi∣ther came Embassadours from the Macedonian, Romans, and Athenians. Of which, the Macedonian spake first: and saide, That as there was nothing fallen out, which should occasion the breach of peace betweene his Master and the Aetolians: so was it to be hoped, that they would not suffer themselues without good cause, to be ca∣ried away after other mens fancies. Hee prayed them to consider, how the Romans heretofore had made shew, as if their warre in Greece tended onely to defence of the Aetolians: and yet notwithstanding had beene angrie, that the Aetolians, by making peace with Philip, had no longer neede of such their Patronage. What might it be that made them so busie, in obtruding their protection vpon those that needed it not? Surely it was euen the generall hatred, which these Barbarians bore vnto the Greekes. For euen after the same sort had they lent their helpe to the Mamertines: and afterwards deliuered Syracuse, when it was oppressed by Carthaginian Ty∣rants: but now both Syracuse and Messana, were subiect vnto the Rods and Axes of the Romans. To the same effect he alleadged many examples, adding. That in like sort it would happen to the Aetolians: who, if they drew such Masters into Greece, must not looke hereafter to hold, as now, free Parliaments of their owne, wherein to consult about Warre and Peace: the Romans would ease them of this care, and send them such a Moderator, as went euery yeere from Rome to Syracuse. Where∣fore he concluded, That it was best for them, whilest as yet they might, and whilest one of them as yet could helpe the other, to continue in their League with Philip: with whom if at any time, vpon light occasion, they happened to fall , they might as lightly bee reconciled: and with whom they had three yeeres agoe made the peace which stil continued; although the same Romans were then against it, who sought to breake it now. It would haue troubled the Romans, to frame a good answere to these obiections. For the Macedonian had spoken the very truth, in shewing whereto this their Patronage, which they offered with such importuni∣tie, did tend. Wherefore the Athenians were set on by them to speake next: who had store of eloquence, and matter of recrimination enough, to make Philip odious. These affirmed, that it was a great impudence in the Macedonian Embassadour, to call the Romans by the name of Barbarians: knowing in what barbarous manner his owne King had, in few dayes past, made war vpon the gods themselues, by destroy∣ing all their Temples in Attica. Herewithall they made a pitifull rehearsall of their owne calamities: and said, that if Philip might haue his will, Aetolia, and all the rest of Greece, should feele the same that Attica had felt; yea that Athens it selfe, toge∣ther with Minerua, Iupiter, Ceres, and other of the gods, were like to haue felt, if the wals and the Roman armes had not defended them. Then spake the Ro∣mans: who excusing, as well as they could, their owne oppression of all those, in whose defence they had heretofore taken armes, went roundly to the point in hand. They sayd, that they had of late made warre in the Aetolians behalfe, and that the Aetolians had without their consent made peace: whereof since the Aetolians must excuse themselues, by alleaging that the Romans, being busied with Carthage, wan∣ted leisure to giue them aid conuenient: so this excuse being now taken away, and the Romans wholly bent against their common Enemie, it concerned the Aetolians to take part with them in their warre and victorie, vnlesse they had rather perish with Philip. It might easily be perceiued, that they which were so vehement, in offering their helpe ere it was desired, were themselues carried vnto the war by more earnest mo∣tiues, than a simple desire to helpe those friends, with whom they had no great ac∣quaintance. This may haue beene the cause, why Dorymachus the Aetolian Praetor shifted them off awhile with a dilatorie answere: though hee told his Countrymen, That by reseruing themselues, till the matter were inclined one way or other, they might afterwards take part with those that had the better fortune. His answere was, first, in generall termes; That ouer-much was an enemie to good counsell: for which cause they must further deliberate, ere they concluded. But comming neerer to the matter in hand, He passed a Decree, That the Praetor might at any time call an Assemblie of the States, and therein conclude vpon this businesse; any Law to the contrary notwithstanding: whereas otherwise it was vnlawfull to treat of such affaires, except in two of their great Parliaments, that were held at set times. §. XI. The meeting of PHILIP with the Romans, and skirmishing with them on his bor∣ders. The Aetolians inuade dominions, and are beaten home. Some doings of ATTALVS and the Roman Fleet. PHILIP was glad to heare, that the Romans had sped no better in their sollicitation of the Aetolians. He thought them hereby disappointed, in the very beginning, of one great helpe; and meant himselfe to dis∣appoint them of another. His sonne Perseus, a very boy, was sent to keepe the Streights of Pelagonia against the Dardanians; hauing with him some of the Kings Councell, to gouerne both him and his armie. It was iud∣ged, as may seeme, that the presence of the Kings sonne, how young soeuer, would both encourage his followers, and terrifie the enemies; by making them at least be∣leeue, that he was not weakely attended. And this may haue been the reason, why the same Perseus, a few yeeres before this, was in like manner left vpon the borders of Aetolia by his father; whom earnest businesse called thence another way. No danger of enemies being left on either hand: it was thought, that the Macedonian Fleet vnder Heraclides, would serue to keepe Attalus, with the Rhodians and Romans, from doing harme by sea, when the Kings backe was turned; who tooke his journie Westward against Sulpicius the Consul. The Armies met in the countrey of the Dassaretij, a people in the vtmost bor∣ders of Macedon towards Illyria, about the mountaines of Candania; that running along from Haemus in the North vntill they ioyne in the South with Pindus, inclose the Westerne parts of Macedon. Two or three dayes they lay in sight the one of the other, without making offer of battaile. The Consul was the first that issued forth of his Campe into the open field. But Philip was not confident in the strength which he had then about him; and therefore thought it better to send foorth some of his light-armed Mercinaries, and some part of his horse, to entertaine them with skir∣mish. These were easily vanquished by the Romans, and driuen backe into their Campe. Now although it was so, that the King was vnwilling to hazard all at first vpon a Cast, and therefore sent for Perseus with his Companies, to increase his owne forces: yet being no lesse vnwilling to lose too much in reputation; He made shew a day after, as if he would haue fought. He had found the aduantage of a place fit for ambush, wherein he bestowed as many as he thought meet of his Targettiers: and so gaue charge to Athenagoras, one of his Captaines, to prouoke out the Romans to fight; instructing both him and the Targettiers, how to behaue themselues respe∣ctiuely, as opportunitie should fall out. The Romans no mistrust of any am∣bush; hauing fought vpon the same ground a day before. Wherefore perhaps they might haue sustained some notable detriment, if the Kings directions had beene well followed. For when Athenagoras began to fall backe, they charged him so hotly, that they draue him to an hastie flight, and pursued him as hard as they were able. But the Captaines of the Targettiers, not staying to let them runne into the danger, discouered themselues before it was time; and thereby made frustrate the worke, to which they were appointed. The Consul heereby gathered, that the King had some desire to trie the fortune of a battaile: which hee therefore presented the second time; leading forth his , and setting it in order, with Elephants in front: a kind of helpe which the Romans had neuer vsed before, but had taken these of late from the Carthaginians. Such are the alterations wrought by Time. It was scarce aboue fourescore yeeres ere this, that Pyrrhus carried Elephants out of Greece into Italie, to affright the Romans, who had neuer seene any of those beasts before. But now the same Romans (whilest possibly some were yet , which had knowne that Expedition of Pyrrhus ) come into Macedon, bringing Elephants with them: whereof the Macedonians and Greekes haue none. Philip had patience to the Consul braue him at his Trenches: wherein hee did wisely: for the Roman had greater neede to fight, than Hee. Sulpicius was vnwilling to lose time: neither could hee without great danger, lying so neere the Enemie, that was strong in horse, send his men to fetch in corne out of the fields. Wherefore he remoued eight miles off: presuming that Philip would not aduenture to meete him on euen ground; and so the more boldly he suffered his Forragers to ouer-runne the Countrie. The King was nothing sorry of this; but permitted the Romans to take their good pleasure: till their presumption, and his owne supposed feare, should make them care∣lesse. When this was come to passe, hee tooke all his horse, and light-armed-foote, with which hee occupied a place in the midway, betweene the Forragers and their Campe. There he in Couert with part of his forces; to keepe the passages that none should escape. The rest hee sent abroad the Countrie, to fall vpon the straglers: willing them to put all to the sword, and let none run home with newes to the Campe. The slaughter was great: and those which escaped the handes of them that were sent abroad to scowre the fields, lighted all or most of them vpon the King and his companies in their flight: so as they were cut off by the way∣Long it was ere the Campe had newes of this. But in the end there escaped some: who though they could not make any perfect relation how the matter went: yet by telling what had happened to themselues, raised a great tumult. Salpicius hereup∣on sends foorth all his horse, and bids them helpe their fellowes where they saw it needfull: He himselfe with the Legions followed. The companies of Horse diui∣ded themselues, accordingly as they met with aduertisements vpon the way, into many parts: not knowing where was most of the danger. Such of them as lighted vpon Philips Troupes, that were canuassing the field, tooke their taske where they found it. But the maine bulke of them fell vpon the King himselfe. They had the disaduantage: as comming fewer, and vnprepared, to one that was readie for them. So they were beaten away: as their fellowes also might haue beene, if the King had well bethought himselfe, and giuen ouer in time. But while, not contented with such an haruest, he was too about a poore gleaning: the Roman Legions appeared in sight: which emboldened their to make a re-charge. Then the danger apparant, enforced the Macedonians to looke to their owne safety. They ranne which way they could: and (as men that lie in waite for others, are seldome heedfull of that which may befall themselues) to escape the Enemie, they declined the fairest way; so as they were plunged in Marishes and Bogges, wherein many of them were lost. The Kings horse was slaine vnder him: and there had beene cast away, if a louing subiect of his had not alighted; mounted him vpon his owne horse; and deliuered him out of perill, at the expence of his owne life, that running on foote was ouertaken, and killed. In the common opinion Philip was charged with improuident rashnesse; and the Consul, with as much dulnesse, for his dayes seruice. A little longer stay would haue deliuered the King from these enemies without any blowe: since when all the fields about them were wasted, they must needes haue retired backe to the Sea. On the other side it was not thought vnlikely, That if the Romans following the King, had set vpon his Campe, at such time as he fled thither, halfe amazed vvith feare of being either slaine or taken, they might haue vvonne it. But that noble Historian, Liuie, (as is commonly his maner) hath iudiciously obserued, That neither the one, nor the other, were much too blame in this dayes worke. For the maine body of the Kings Armie lay safe in his Campe; and could not bee so astonished with the losse of two or three hundred Horse, that it should therefore haue abandoned the defence of the Trenches. And as for the King himselfe; He was aduertised, that Pleuratus the Illyrian, and the Dardanians, were fallen vpon his Countrey; when they found the passage thereinto open, after Perseus was called away from custodie of the Streights. This was it which made him aduenture to doe somewhat betimes; that he might set the Romans going the sooner, and afterwards looke vnto his trouble∣some neighbours. In consideration of this, Philip was desirous to cleere himselfe of the Romans, as soone as he might. And to that purpose he sent vnto the Consul; re∣questing a day of truce for buriall of the dead. But in stead of so doing, hee marched away by night; and left fires in his Campe to beguile the Enemie, as if hee had not stirred out of the place. Sulpicius, when hee heard of the Kings departure, was not slow to follow him. He ouertooke the Macedonians in a place of strength, which they had fenced (for it was a wood die ground) by cutting downe trees, and laying them athwart the way where it was most open. In making of such places good, the Macedonian Phalanx was of little vse; being a square battaile of pikes, not fit for eue∣rie ground. The Archers of Crete were iudged, and were indeed, more seruiceable in that case. But they were few; and their arrowes were of small force against the Roman shield. The Macedonians therefore helped them by flinging of stones. But to no purpose. For the Romans got within them; and forced them to quit the place. This victory (such as it was) layd open vnto the Consul some poore Townes there∣about; which partly were taken by strong hand, partly yeelded for feare. But the spoyle of these, and of the fields adioyning, was not sufficient to maintaine his Ar∣mie; and therefore returned backe to Apollonia. The Dardanians, hearing that Philip vvas come backe, vvithdrevv themselues apace out of the Countrey. The King sent Athenagoras to vvaite vpon them home; vvhilest he himselfe vvent against the Aetolians. For Damocritus the Praetor of the Aetolians, who had reserued himselfe and his Nation vnto the euent of things, hearing report, that Philip was beaten once and againe: as also that Pleuratus and the Dardanians were fallen vpon Macedon; grew no lesse busie on the sudden, than before hee had beene vvise. He perswaded his Nation to take their time: and so, not staying to pro∣claime warre, ioyned his forces with Aminander the Athamanian; and made inuasi∣on vpon Thessalie. They tooke and cruelly sacked a few Townes: whereby they grew confident; as if, without any danger, they might doe what they listed. But Philip came vpon them ere they looked for him: and killing them as they lay dis∣persed, was like to haue taken their Campe; if Aminander, more warie than the Ae∣tolians, had not helped at need, and made the Retrait through his owne mountay∣nous Countrie. About the same time; the Roman Fleet, assisted by Attalus and the Rhodians, had taken some small Islands in the Aegean Sea. They tooke likewise the Towne of O∣reum in the Ile of Euboea; and some other places thereabout. The Townes were gi∣uen to Attalus, after the same Compact that had formerly beene made with the Aetolians: the goods therein found were giuen to the Romans; and the people, for slaues. Other attempts on that side were hindred; either by weather at Sea; or by want of daring, and of meanes. §. XII. VILLIVS the Roman Consul wastes a yeere to no effect. Warre of the Gaules in Italie. An Embassie of the Romans to Carthage, MASANISSA, and VER∣MINA. The Macedonian prepares for defence of his : and T. QVINTIVS FLAMINIVS is sent against him. THus the time ranne away: and P. Villius, a new Consul, tooke charge of the warre in Macedon. Hee was troubled with a Mutinie of his oldest Souldiors: whereof two thousand, hauing serued long in Si∣cil and Africk, thought themselues much wronged, in that they could not bee suffered to looke vnto their owne estates at home. They were (belike) of the Legions that had serued at Cannae: as may seeme by their complaint, of hauing beene long absent from Italie; whither faine they would haue returned, when by their Colonels they were shipped for Macedon. How Villius dealt with them, it is vncertaine. For the Historie of his yeere is lost: whereof the misse is not great; since hee did nothing memorable. Valerius Antias, as we find in . L. 32. Liuie, hath adorned this Villius with a great exploit against Philip. Yet since Liuie himselfe, an Historian to whom few of the best are matchable, could finde no such thing recorded in any good Authour; we may reasonably beleeue, that Villius his yeere was idle. In the beginning of this Macedonian Warre, the Romans found more trouble than could haue bin expected with the Gaules. Their Colonie of Placentia, a goodly and strong Towne, which neither Hannibal, nor after him , had beene able to force; was taken by these Barbarians, and burnt in a manner to the ground. In like sort Cremona was attempted; but saued her selfe, taking warning by her neighbours calamitie. Amilcar a Carthaginian, that staied behind Asdrubal, or Mago, in those parts; was now become Captaine of the Gaules, in these their enterprises. This when the Romans heard, they sent Embassadours to the Carthaginians: giuing them to vnderstand, That, if they were not wearie of the peace, it behoued them to call home, and deliuer vp, this their Citizen Amilcar, who made warre in Italie. Here∣vnto it was added (perhaps lest the message might seeme otherwise to haue sauou∣red a little of some feare) That of the Fugitiue slaues belonging vnto the Romans, there were some reported to walke vp and down in Carthage: which if it were so, then ought they to bee restored backe to their Masters; as was conditioned in the late Peace. The Embassadours that were sent on this errand; had further charge to treat with Masanissa, as also with Vermina the sonne of Syphax. Vnto Masanissa, be∣sides matter of complement, they were to signifie what pleasure Hee might doe them, by lending them some of his Numidian Horse, to serue in their Warre against the Macedonian. Vermina had entreated the Senate, to vouchsafe vnto him the name of King: and promised thereafter to deserue it, by his readinesse in doing them all good offices. But they were somewhat scrupulous in the matter: and said, That hauing beene, and being still (as they tooke it) their Enemie, He ought first of all to desire peace; for that the name of King, was an honour which they vsed not to conferre vpon any, saue onely vpon such as had royally deserued it at their hands. The authoritie to make peace with him, was wholly committed vnto these Embassadours vpon such termes as they should thinke fit; without further relati∣on to the Senate and People. For they were then busied with greater cares. The Carthaginians made a gentle answere, That they wholly disclaimed Amilcar: bani∣shing him; and confiscating his goods. As for the Fugitiues: they had restored as many as they could finde; and would in that point, as farre as was requisite, giue sa∣tisfaction to the Senate. Herewithall they sent a great proportion of Corne to Rome; and the like vnto the Armie that was in Macedon. King Masanissa would haue lent vnto the Romans two thousand of his Numidian Horse: but they were contented with halfe the number; and would accept no more. Vermina met with the Embassadours, to giue them entertainment, on the borders of his Kingdome; and, without any disputation, agreed with them vpon termes of peace. Thus were the Romans busied in taking order for their Macedonian Warre, that they might pursue it strongly, and without interruption. As for Amilcar and his Gaules: they laid siege vnto Cremona; where L. Furius a Roman Praetor came vpon them, fought a battaile with them, and ouercame them. Amilcar the Carthaginian died in this battaile: and the fruit of the Victorie was such, as both made amends for losses past, and left the worke easie to those, that afterwardes should haue the managing of warre among those Gaules. So was there good leisure to thinke vpon the businesse of Macedon: where Philip was carefully prouiding to giue con∣tentment vnto his subjects, by punishing a bad Counsailour whom they hated; as also to assure vnto himselfe the Achaeans, by rendring vnto them some Townes that he held of theirs; and finally to strengthen his Kingdome, not onely by exercising and trayning his people, but by fortifying the passages that led thereinto out of E∣pirus. This was in doing, when Villius, hauing vnprofitably laboured to find way into Macedon, taking a journie (as Sulpicius had done before him) wherein he could not be supplied with victuals, determined at length to trie a new course. But then came aduertisement, that T. Quintius Flaminius was chosen Consul, and had Mace∣don allotted him for his Prouince; whose comming was expected; and he very short∣ly arriued at the Armie. §. XIII. The Romans beginne to make warre by negotiation. T. QVINTIVS winnes a passage against PHILIP. Thessalie wasted by PHILIP, the Romans, and Aetolians. The Achaeans forsaking the Macedonian, take part with the Romans. A treatie of peace, that was vaine. PHILIP deliuers Argos to the Tyrant, who presently enters into League with the Romans. THe Romans had not beene wont in former times, to make Warre after such a trifling manner. It was their vse, to giue battaile to the Enemie, as soone as they met with him. If hee refused it, they besieged his Townes: and so forced him to trie the fortune of a day, with his dis∣aduantage in reputation, when hee had long forborne it (as it would bee interpreted) vpon knowledge of his owne weaknesse. But in this their Warre with Philip, they beganne to learne of the subtle Greekes, the arte of Negotiation: wherein they were not growne so fine, as within a little while they proued. Their Treasury was poore, and stood indebted, Liu. . 34. many yeeres after this, vnto pri∣uate men, for part of those monies that had been borrowed in the second Punicke Warre. This had made the Commonalty auerse from the Macedonian Warre; and had thereby driuen the Senators greedy of the enterprize, to make vse of their cun∣ning. Yet beeing weary of the slow pace wherewith their businesse went forward; they determined to increase their Armie, that they might haue the lesse neede to re∣lie vpon their Confederats. So they leauied eight thousand foot, and eight hundred Horse (the greater part of them of the Latines ) which they sent with T. Quintius Fla∣minius, the new Consul into Macedon. Their Nauie, and other meanes could well haue serued, for the setting foorth and transportation of a greater Armie: but by straining themselues to the most of their abilitie, they should (besides other , incident vnto the sustenance of those that are too many and too farre from home) haue bred some in their friends of Greece, and thereby haue lost some friends, yea, perhaps haue increased the number of their enemies more than of their owne Souldiours. This present augmentation of the forces was very re∣quisite; for that Attalus, about the same time, excused himselfe vnto them, by his Embassadours; requesting that either they would vndertake the defence of his Kingdome against Antiochus, who inuaded it; or else that they would not take it vncourteously, that he quitted the Warre with Philip, and returned home, to looke vnto that which more concerned him. Their answere was remarkable. They said, That it was not their manner to vse the aid of their friends, longer than their friends had good opportunitie, and could also be well contented to affoord it; That they could not honestly take part with Attalus, their good friend though he were, a∣gainst Antiochus, whom they held in the like account; but, That they would deale with Antiochus by Embassadours, and (as common friends vnto both of the Kings) doe their best to perswade an atonement betweene them. In such louing fashion did they now carrie themselues, towards their good friend the King Antiochus: who reciprocally at their intreaty, withdrew his Armie from the Kingdome of Attalus. But how little they regarded these tearmes of friendship, after that once they had made an end with Philip; it will very soone appeare. T. Quintius hasting away from Rome, came betimes into his Prouince, with the supplie decreed vnto him; which consisted, for the most part, of olde Souldiours, that had serued in Spaine and Africk. He found Villius the old Consul, (whom at his comming he presently discharged) and King Philip of Macedon, encamped one a∣gainst the other, in the Streights of Epirus; by the Riuer of Apsus or Aous. It was manifest, that either the Romans must fetch a compasse about, and their way into Macedon, through the poore Countrey of the Dassaretians; or else winne, by force, that passage, which the King defended. In taking the former way, they had al∣ready two yeeres together mis-spent their time, and beene forced to returne backe without profit, for want of Victuals: whereof they could neither carrie with them store sufficient, nor finde it on the way. But if they could once get ouer these Mountaines, which diuided the South of Epirus from Thessalie: then should they enter into a plentiful Countrey; and which by long dependance on the Macedonian, was become (in a manner) part of his Kingdome, whereof it made the South bor∣der. Neuerthelesse, the desire of winning this passage, was greater than the likely∣hood. For the Riuer of Apsus, running along through that Valley which alone was open betweene the Mountains, made it all a deep Marish and vnpassable : a very narrow way excepted, and a path cut out of the maine Rocke by mans hand. Wherefore Quintius assailed to climbe in the Mountaines: but finding himselfe dis∣appointed of this hope, through the diligence of his Enemie, who neglected not the gard of them that was very easie; Hee was compelled to sit still, without doing any thing for the space of fortie dayes. This long time of rest gaue hope vnto Philip, that the Warre might be ended by composition, vpon some reasonable termes. He therefore so dealt with some of the Epirots, (among whom hee had many friends) that Hee and the Consul had a mee∣ting together. But nothing was effected. The Consul would haue him to set all Townes of Greece at libertie; and to make amends for the injuries, which hee had done to many people in his late Warres. Philip was contented to giue liber∣tie to those whom he had subdued of late: but vnto such, as had been long sub∣iect vnto him and his Ancestors, He thought it against all reason, that he should re∣linquish his claime and dominion ouer them. Hee also said, That as farre foorth as it should appeare that he had done wrong vnto any Towne or people whatsoeuer, He could well be pleased to make such amends, as might seeme conuenient in the iudgement of some free State, that had not been interessed in those quarrels. But herewithall Quintius was not satisfied. There needed (hee sayd) no iudgement or compromise; forasmuch as it was apparant, that Philip had alwaies beene the Inua∣der; and had not made warre, as one prouoked, in his owne defence. After this altercation, when they should come to particulars: and when the Consul was re∣quired to name those Townes, that he would haue to be set at libertie; the first that hee named were the Thessalians. These had been Subiects (though conditionall) vnto the Macedonian Kings, euer since the dayes of Alexander the Great, and of Phi∣lip his Father. Wherefore, as soone as had named the Thessalians; the King in a rage demanded, what sharper Condition Hee would haue layd vpon him, had he been but vanquished. And herewithall abruptly he flang away; refusing to heare any more of such discourse. After this the Consul stroue in vaine two or three dayes together, to haue preuai∣led against the difficulties of that passage which Philip kept. When he had well wea∣ried himselfe, and could not resolue what course to take: there came to him an Heardsman, sent from Charopus a Prince of the Epirots that fauoured the Romans, who hauing long kept beasts in those Mountaines, was throughly acquainted with all by-paths, and therefore vndertooke to guide the Romans, without any danger, to a place where they should haue aduantage of the Enemie. This guide, for feare of treacherous dealing, was fast bound: and, being promised great reward, in case he made good his word; had such Companies as was thought fit, appointed to follow his directions. They trauailed by night (it being then about the full of the Moone) and rested in the day-time, for feare of being discouered. When they had recoue∣red the hill-toppes, and were aboue the Macedonians, (though vndiscouered by them, because at their backs) they raised a great smoke; whereby they gaue notice of their successe vnto the Consul. Some skirmishes, whilest these were on their jour∣nie, T. Quintius had held with the Macedonian; thereby to auert him from thought of that which was intended. But when on the third morning hee saw the smoke arise more and more plainely, and thereby knew that his men had attained vnto the place whither they were sent: He pressed as neere as he could vnto the Enemies Campe; and assailed them in their strength. Hee preuailed as little as in former times; vntill the shoutings of those that ranne downe the Hill, and charged Philip on the backe, astonished so the Macedonians, that they betooke themselues to flight. The King, vpon first apprehension of the danger, made all speed away to saue himself. Yet anon considering, that the difficulty of the passage must needes hinder the Somans from pursuing him: He made a stand at the end of fiue miles; and gathered together his broken troupes, of whom hee found wanting no more than two thousand men. The greatest losse was of his Campe and prouisions: if not rather perhaps of his re∣putation; for that now the Macedonians beganne to stand in feare, lest being driuen from a place of such aduantage, they should hardly make good their partie against the Enemie, vpon equall ground. Neither was Philip himselfe much better perswa∣ded. Wherefore he caused the Thessalians, as many of them as in his hastie retrait he could visit, to forsake their Townes and Countrie; carrying away with them as much as they were able, and spoyling all the . But all of them could not be per∣swaded, thus to abandon (for the pleasure of their King) their ancient habitations, and all the substance which they had . Some there were that forcibly resi∣sted him; which they might the better doe, for that hee could not stay to any great compulsion. He also himselfe tooke it very grieuously, that he was driuen to make such waste of a most pleasant and fruitfull Countrey, which had euer been well affected vnto him: so that a little hinderance did serue, to make him breake off his purpose; and withdraw himselfe home into his Kingdome of Macedon. The Aetolians and Athamanians, when this fell out, were euen in a readinesse to inuade Thessalie; whereinto the wayes lay more open, out of their seuerall Coun∣tries. When therefore they heard for certaintie, that Philip was beaten by the Ro∣manes: they foreslowed not the occasion; but made all speede, each of them to lay hold vpon what they might. T. Quintius followed them within a little while: but they had gotten so much before his comming, that He, in gleaning after their har∣uest, could not finde enough to maintaine his Armie. Thus were the poore , of whose libertie the Romans a few daies since had made shew to bee very de∣sirous, wasted by the same Romans and their Confederates; not knowing which way to turne themselues, or whom to auoide. T. Quintius wan by assault: Metro∣polis and Piera yeelded vnto him. Rhage he besieged: and hauing made a faire breach, yet was vnable to force it; so it was defended both by the Inhabitants, and by a Macedonian Garrison therein. Philip also at the same time, hauing somewhat recollected his spirits, houered about Tempe with his Armie; thrusting men into all places, that were like to be distressed. So the Consul, hauing wel-neere spent his vi∣ctuals, and seeing no hope to preuaile at Rhage; brake vp his siege, and departed out of Thessalie. Hee had appointed his shippes of burden to meete him at Anticyra, an Hauen towne of Phocis, on the Gulfe of Corinth: which Countrie being friend to the Macedonian, he presently inuaded; not so much for hatred vnto the people, as because it lay conueniently seated betweene Thessalie and other Regions, wherein he had businesse, or was shortly like to haue. Many Townes in Phocis he wan by as∣sault: many were yeelded vp vnto him for feare; and within short space he had (in effect) mastered it all. In the meane time L. Quintius the Consuls brother, being then Admirall for the Romans in this warre, ioyned with King Attalus and the Rhodian Fleet. They wan two Cities in Euboea; and afterward layd siege vnto Cenchree, an Hauen and Arcenal of the Corinthians on their Easterne Sea. This enterprise did somewhat helpe for∣ward the Achaeans, in their desire to leaue the part of Philip: since it might come to passe, that Corinth it selfe, ere long time were spent; and that Cenchree, with other places appertaining to Corinth, now very shortly should be rendred vnto their Na∣tion, by fauour of the Romans. But there were other Motiues, inducing the Achaeans to preferre the friendship of the Romans, before the patronage of Philip; whereto they had beene long accusto∣med. For this King had so many wayes offended them in time of peace, that they thought it the best course to rid their hands of him, whilest being intangled in a dan∣gerous warre, he wanted meanes to hinder the execution of counsaile, as they should hold the safest. His tyrannous practices to make himselfe their absolute Lord: His poysoning of Aratus their old Gouernour: His false dealing with the Messenians, Epirots, atd other people their Confederates, and his owne dependants: together with many particular outrages by him committed; had caused them long since to hold him as a necessary euill, euen whilest they were vnable to bee without his assistance. But since by the vertue of Philopoemen, they were growne somewhat confident in their owne strength, so as without the Macedonians helpe they could as well subsist, as hauing him to friend: then did they onely thinke how euill he was; and thereupon reioyce the more, in that he was become no longer necessary. It an∣gred him to perceiue how they stood affected: and therefore he sent murderers, to take away the life of Plut. in vita . . l. 29. Philopoemen. But failing in this enterprise, and being detected, he did thereby onely set fire to the Wood, which was throughly drie before, and prepared to burne. Philopoemen wrought so with the Achaeans, that no discourse was more familiar with them, than what great cause they had to with-draw them∣selues from the Macedonian. , a principall man among them, and lately their Praetor, was expelled by them, for shewing himselfe passionate in the cause of Phi∣lip; and Aristaenus chosen Praetor, who laboured to ioyne them in societie with the Romans. These newes were very welcome to T. Quintius. Embassadours were sent from the Romans, and their Confederates, King Attalus, the Rhodians, and Athenians, to treat with the Achaeans; making promise, that they should haue Corinth restored vnto them, if they would forsake the Macedonian. A Parliament of the Achaeans was held at Sicyon, to deliberate and resolue in this weighty case. Therein the Ro∣mans and their adherents desired the Achaeans, to ioyne with them in making warre vpon Philip. Contrariwise, the Embassadours of Philip, whom he had also sent for this busines, admonishing the Achaeans of their Alliance with the King, and of their faith due vnto him; requested them, that they would be contented to remaine as Neuters. This moderate request of Philips Embassadour, did no way aduance his Masters cause. Rather it gaue the Achaeans to vnderstand, That hee, who could be satisfied with so little at their hands, knew himselfe vnable to gratifie them in a∣ny reciprocall demand. Yet were there many in that great Councel; who remem∣bring the benefits of Philip and Antigonus, laboured earnestly for the preseruation of the ancient League. But in fine, the sence of late iniuries, and expectation of like or worse from him in the future; preuailed against the memorie of those old good turnes, which he, (and Antigonus before him) had partly sold vnto them, and part∣ly had vsed as baites, whereby to allure them into absolute subiection. Neither was it perhaps of the least importance; That the Romans were strong, and likely to pre∣uaile in the end. So after much altercation the Decree passed, That they should thenceforward renounce the Macedonian, and take part with his enemies in this war. With Attalus and the Rhodians, they forthwith entred into society: with the Romans (because no League would be of force, vntill the Senate and People had approued it) they forbore to decree any society at the present, vntill the returne of those Em∣bassadours from Rome, which they determined to send thither of purpose. The Megalopolitans, Dymaeans, and Argiues, hauing done their best for the Macedonian, as by many respects they were bound; rose vp out of the Councell, and departed before the passing of the Decree, which they could not resist, nor yet with honestie thereto giue assent. For this their good will, and greater, which they shortly manifested, the Argiues had so little thanke; that all the rest of the Achaeans may be the better held excused, for escaping how they might, out of the hands of so fell a Prince. Soone after this, vpon a solemne day at Argos, the affection of the Citizens dis∣couered it selfe so plainely, in the behalfe of Philip, that they which were his Parti∣sans within the Towne, made no doubt of putting the Citie into his hands, if they might haue any small assistance. Philocles, a Lieutenant of the Kings, lay then in Co∣rinth, which he had manfully defended against the Romans and Attalus. Him the Conspirators drew to Argos; whither comming on a sudden, and finding the Mul∣titude readie to ioyne with him, Hee easily compelled the Achaean Garrison to quit the place. This getting of Argos, together with the good defence of Corinth and some other Townes, as it helped Philip a little in his reputation, so they gaue him hope to ob∣taine some good end by Treatie, whilest as yet with his honour he might seeke it: and when (the Winter being now come on) a new Consul would shortly bee cho∣sen; who should take the worke out of Titus his hands, if it were not concluded the sooner. Titus had the like respect vnto himselfe; and therefore thought it best, since more could not be done, to praedispose things vnto a Conclusion, for his owne reputation. The meeting was appointed to be held on the Sea-shore, in the Bay then called the Malian, or Lamian Bay, now (as is supposed) the Gulfe of Ziton, in the Aegaean Sea, or Archipelago. Thither came Titus, with Aminander the Athamanian; an Embassadour of Attalus, the Admirall of Rhodes; and some Agents for the Aeto∣lians and Achaeans. Philip had with him some few of his owne Captaines, and Cyclia∣das, lately banished for his sake out of Achaia. He refused to come on shore: though fearing (as he said) none but the immortall Gods: yet misdoubting some treachery in the Aetolians. The demands of Titus in behalfe of the Romans were, That he should set all Cities of Greece at liberty; deliuer vp to the Romans and their Confederates, all prisoners which he had of theirs, and Renegado's; likewise whatsoeuer hee held of theirs in Illyria; and whatsoeuer about Greece or Asia he had gotten from Ptolemie then King of Aegypt, after his fathers death. Attalus demanded restitution to be made entire, of Ships, Townes, and Temples, by him taken and in the late warre betweene them. The Rhodians would haue againe the Countrie of Peraea, ly∣ing ouer against their Iland; as also that he should withdraw his Garrisons, out of diuers Townes about the Hellespont, and other Hauens of their friends. The Achae∣ans desired restitution of Argos and Corinth: about the one of which they might, not vniustly, quarrell with him; the other had beene long his owne by their consent. The Aetolians tooke vpon them angerly, as Patrons of Greece: willing him to de∣part out of it, euen out of the whole Countrie, leauing it free; and withall to deli∣uer vp vnto them, whatsoeuer hee held that had at any time been theirs. Neither were they here-withall content: but insolently declaimed against him, for that which he had lately done in Thessalie; corrupting (as they said) the rewards of the Victors, by destroying, when he was vanquished, those Townes which else they might haue gotten. To answer these malapert Aetolians, Philip commanded his Gallie to row neerer the shore. But they began to him : telling him, that he must obey his betters; vnlesse he were able to defend himselfe by force of Armes. He answered them, (as he was much giuen to gybing) with sundry scoffes; and es∣pecially with one, which made the Roman Consul vnderstand, what manner of com∣panions these Aetolians were. For hee said, That he had often dealt with them; as likewise the best of the Greekes; desiring them to abrogate a vvicked Lavv, vvhich permitted them to take spoile from spoile: yet could he get no better an answere, than Excerpt. Po∣lyb. li. 17. that they would sooner take Aetolia out of Aetolia. Titus wondred what might bee the meaning of this strange Law. So the King told him, That they held it a laudable custome, as often as warre happened betweene their friends, to hold vp the quar∣rell by sending voluntaries to serue on both sides, that should spoyle both the one and the other. As for the libertie of Greece, He said it was strange that the Aetoli∣ans should be so carefull thereof, since diuers Tribes of their owne, which he there named, were indeede no Grecians: werefore hee would faine know, whether the Romanes would giue him leaue to make slaues of those Aetolians, which were no Greekes. Titus hereat smiled, and was no whit offended, to heare the Aetolians well rattled vp; touching whom he began to vnderstand, how odious they were in all the Countrie. As for that generall demand of setting all Greece at libertie, Philip ac∣knowledged, that it might well beseeme the greatnesse of the Romans; though hee would also consider, vvhat might beseeme his ovvne dignitie. But that the Aetoli∣ans, Rhodians, and other pettie Estates, should thus presume, vnder countenance of the Romans, to take vpon them, as if by their great might he should be hereunto compelled: it vvas, he said, a strange and ridiculous insolence. The Achaeans he char∣ged vvith much ingratitude; reciting against them some Decrees of their ovvne; vvherein they had loaden both Antigonus and him, vvith more then humane honors. Neuerthelesse he said, that he vvould render Argos vnto them: but, as touching Co∣rinth, that he would further deliberate vvith Titus himselfe. Thus he addressed him∣selfe vvholly to the Roman Generall; vnto vvhom if he could giue satisfaction, he ca∣red little for all the rest. With Attalus and the Rhodians, his late vvarre, (he said) vvas onely defensiue; they hauing been the offerers: or if he gaue them any occasion, it was onely in helping Prusias, his sonne-in-law; neither did hee see why they should rather seeke amends at hands, than hee at theirs. For whereas they com∣plained, that, spoyling a Temple of Venus, hee had cut downe the , and plca∣sant walkes thereabouts: what could hee doe more, than send Gardiners thither with yong plants; if one King of another would stand to such recompence? Thus he iested the matter out: but offered neuerthclesse, in honour of the Romans, to giue backe the Region of Peraea to the ; as likewise to Attalus, the Ships and Prisoners of his, whereof he had then possession. Thus ended that dayes con∣ference, because it was late: Philip requiring a nights leisure to thinke vpon the Ar∣ticles, which were many, and he ill prouided of Counsaile, wherewith to aduise a∣bout them. For your being so ill prouided of Counsaile, said TITVS, you may euen thanke your selfe; as hauing murdered all your friends, that were wont to aduise you faithfully. The next day Philip came not, vntill it was late at night; excusing his long stay by the waightinesse of the things propounded, whereon he could not suddenly tell how to resolue. But it was beleeued, that he thereby sought to abbridge the Aetolians of lci∣sure raile at him. And this was the more likely, for that hee desired conference in priuate with the Roman Generall. The summe of his discourse, as Titus after∣ward related it, was, That hee would giue the Achaeans both Argos and Corinth; as also that he would render vnto Attalus and the Rhodians, what he had promised the day before; likewise to the Aetolians, that hee would grant some part of their de∣mands; and to the Romans, whatsoeuer they did challenge. This when Titus his associats heard, they exclaimed against it, saying, That if the King were suffered to retaine any thing in Greece, he would shortly get possession of all which hee now rendred vp. The noise that they made came to Philips eare: who thercupon desi∣red a third day of meeting; and protested, that if he could not perswade them, hee would suffer himselfe to be perswaded by them. So the third day they mette early in the morning: at what time the King them all, that they would with sincere affection harken vnto good offers of peace; and immediatly conclude it, if they could like well of those Conditions, which he had already tendred; or other∣wise, that they would make truce with him for the present, and let him send Embassadours to Rome, where hee would referre himselfe to the courtesie of the Senate. This was euen as Quintius would hauc it: who stood in doubt, lest a new Con∣sul might happen to defraud him of the honour, which he expected byending of the warre. So hee easily preuailed with the rest, to assent hereunto: forasmuch as it was Winter, a time vnfit for seruice in the warre; and since, without authoritie of the Senate, he should be vnable to proceed resoluedly either in Warre or . Fur∣ther, he willed them to send their seuerall Embassadours to Rome: which intima∣ting vnto the Senate what each of them required, should easily hinder Philip, from obtaining any thing to their preiudice. Among the rest hee perswaded King Ami∣nander, to make a iourney to Rome in person: knowing wel, that the name of a King, together with the confluence of so many Embassadours, would serue to make his owne actions more glorious in the Citie. All this tended to procure, that his owne Command of the Armie in Greece might be prorogued. And to the same end had he dealt with some of the Tribunes of the people at Rome: who had already (though as yet he knew not so much) obtained it for him, partly by their authoritie, partly by good reasons vvhich they alleaged vnto the Senate. The Embassadours of the Greeks, when they had audience at Rome, bitterly against the King, with good liking of the Senate; vvhich was more desirous of victo∣rie, than of satisfaction. They magnified the honourable purpose of the Romans, in vndertaking to set Greece at libertie. But this (they said) could neuer be effected; vnlesse cspeciall care were taken, that the King should bee dispossessed of Corinth, Chalcis, and Demetrias. In this point they vvere so vehement, producing a Map of the Countrey, and making demonstration how those places held all the rest in ; that the Senate agreed to haue it euen so as they desired. When therefore the Embassadours of Philip were brought in, and began to haue made a long Oration; they were briefly cut off in the middest of their Preface, with this one demand: Whether their Master would yeeld vp Corinth, Chalcis, and Demetrias: Heereto they made answere, That, concerning those places, the King had giuen them no direction or Commission what to say, or doe. This was enough. The Senate would no longer harken to Philips desire of peace; wherein they said hee did no than trifle. Yet might his Embassadours haue truely saide, That neither the Aetolians, Achaeans, nor any of their fellowes, had in the late Treatie required by name, that Chalcis and should be yeelded vp. For which of them indeed could make any Claime to either of these Townes? As for Corinth whereto the Achaeans had some right; (though their right were no better, than that, hauing stolne it from One Macedonian King in a night, they had, after mature deliberation, made it away by bargaine vnto an Other) Philip had alreadie condescended to giue it backe vnto them. And this perhaps would haue beene alleadged, euen against the Greekes in excuse of the King, by some of T. Quintius his friends; that so hee might haue had the honour to conclude the warre, a Successor had beene decreed vnto him. But since Hee was appointed to continue Generall: neither his friends at Rome, nor Hee himselfe, after the returne of the Embassadours into Greece, cared to giue eare vnto any talke of peace. Philip, seeing that his Achaeans had forsaken him, and ioyned with their common enemics; thought euen to deale with them in the like manner, by reconciling him∣selfe vnto Nabis, whom they hated most. There were not many yeeres past, since the Lacedaemonians vnder Cleomenes, with little other helpe than their owne strength, had beene almost strong enough both for the Macedonians and Achaeans together. But now the condition of things was altered. Nabis his force consisted in a manner wholly in his Mercinaries: for he was a Tyrant; though stiling himselfe King. Yet he sorely vexed the Achaeans: and therefore seemed vnto Philip one likely to stand him in great stead, if he could be won. To this purpose it was thought meet, that the Towne of Argos, which could not otherwise be easily defended, should bee con∣signed ouer into his hands; in hope, that such a benefit would serue to tie him fast vnto the Macedonian. Philocles the Kings Lieutenant, who was appointed to deale with Nabis, added further, That it was his Masters purpose to make a streight alli∣ance with the , by giuing some daughters of his owne in marriage vn∣to Nabis his sonnes. This could not but be well taken. Yet Nabis made some scru∣ple in accepting the Towne of Argos; vnlesse by decree of the citizens themselues He might be called into it. Hereabout Philocles dealt with the Argiues: but found them so auerse; that, in open assemblie of the , they detested the verie name of the Tyrant, with many railing words. Nabis hearing of this, thought hee had thereby a good occasion to rob and fleece them. So hee willed Philocles, without more adoe, to make ouer the Towne which he was to receiue. Philocles ac∣cordingly did let him with his Armie into it by night; and gaue him possession of the strongest places therein. Thus dealt Philip with the Argiues: who for very loue had forsaken the Achaeans, to take his part. Early in the morning, the Tyrant made himselfe Master of all the Gates. A of the principall men, vnderstanding how things went, fled out of the Citie at the first tumult. Wherefore they were all banished, and thcir goods confiscated. The rest of the chiefe Citizens that stayed behinde, were commaunded to bring foorth, out of hand, all their Gold and Siluer. Also a great imposition of money was laid vpon all those, that were thought able to pay it. Such as made their contribution readily, were dismissed without more a∣doe. But if any stood long vpon the matter: or played the theeues, in purloyning their owne goods; they were put to the whip, and, besides losse of their wealth, had their torments to boot. This donc, the Tyrant began to make popular Lawes; namely such, as might serue to make him gracious with the rascall multitude: abro∣gating all debts, and diuiding the Lands of the rich among the poore. By such art of oppressing the great ones, it hath beene an olde custome of Tyrants, to assure themselues of the Vulgar for a time. As soone as Nabis had gotten Argos, Hee sent the newes to T. Quintius; and offe∣red to joyne with him against Philip. Titus was glad of it: so as he tooke the paines to crosse ouer the Streights into Peloponnesus, there to meet with Nabis. They had soone agreed (though King Attalus, who was present with the Consul, made some cauill touching Argos ) and the Tyrant lent vnto the Romans sixe hundred of his Mercinaries of Crete: as also hce agreed with the Achaeans, vpon a Truce for foure moneths, reseruing the finall conclusion of peace betweene them vntill the Warre of Philip should be ended; which after this continued not long. §. XIIII. The battcile at Cynoscephalae, wherein PHILIP was vanqui∣shed by T. QVINTIVS. TITVS QVINTIVS, as soone as he vnderstood that he was appointed to haue Command of the Armie, without any other limitation of time, than during the pleasure of the Senate; made all things readie for diligent pursuit of the Warre. The like did Philip: who hauing failed in his negotiation of peace, and no lesse failed in his hopes of getting Nabis to friend in that Warre; meant afterwardes wholly to relie vpon himselfe. Titus had in his Armic about sixe and twentie thousand: and Philip a proportio∣nable Plut. in vita T. Q. . number. But neither of them knew the others strength, or what his Enemie intended to doe. Onely Titus heard that Philip was in Thessalie; and thereupon ad∣dressed himselfe to secke him out. They had like to haue met vnawares, neere vn∣to the Citie of Pherae: where the vant-courriers on both sides discouered each other; and sent word thereof vnto their seuerall Captaines. But neither of them were ouer∣hastie, to commit all to hazard vpon so short warning. The day following each of them sent out three hundred Horse, with as many light armed Foot, to make a bet∣ter discouerie. These met, and fought a long while: returning finally backe into their seuerall Campes, with little aduantage vnto either side. The Countrie about Pherae was thicke set with Trees: and otherwise full of Gardens and mud-walles; which made it vnproper for seruice of the Macedonian Phalanx. Wherefore the King dislodged, intending to back vnto Scotusa in the Frontier of Macedon; where he might be plentifully scrued with all necessaries. Titus conceiued aright his mea∣ning: and therefore purposed also to march thitherwards; were it only to waste the Countrie. There lay betweene them a great ledge of hils, which hindered the one from knowing what course the other tooke. Neuerthelesse they encamped not farre asunder, both the first and the second night; though neither of them vnderstood what was become of the other. The third day was very tempestuous; and forced each of them to take vp his lodging, where he found it, by chance. Then sent they forth discouerers againe, in greater number than before. These meeting together, held a long fight, wherein at first the Macedonians had the worse. But Philip anon sent in such strong supply; that if the resistance of the Aetolians had not beene despe∣rate, the Romans their fellowes had beene driuen backe into their Campe. Yet, all resistance notwithstanding, the Macedonians preuailed: so that Titus himselfe was to bring foorth his Legions, that were not a little discouraged, by the defeat of all their Horse, to animate those which were in flight. It was altogether besides the Kings purpose, to put the fortune of a battaile in trust that day, with so much of his estate as might thereon depend. But the newes came to him thicke and tumultuously, how the enemies fled, and how the day was his own; if he could vse an occasion, the like whereof he should not often find. This caused him to alter his purpose: insomuch as he embattailed his men; and vp those hils, which, for that the knops thereon had some resemblance vnto Dogs heads, were called, by a word signifying as much, . As soone as hee was on the hil-top; it did him good to see that they of his owne light armature were bu∣sie in fight, almost at the verie Campe of the Enemies; whom they had repelled so farre. He had also libertie to choose his ground, as might seruc best his aduantage: forasmuch as the Romans were quite driuen from all parts of the Hill. But of this commoditie he could make no great vse: the roughnesse of the place among those Dogs heads, as they were called, seruing nothing aptly for his Phalanx. Neuerthe∣lesse hee found conuenientroome, wherein to marshall the one part of his Armie: and gaue order vnto his Captaines, to follow with the rest; embattailing them as they might. Whilest hee was doing this: Hee perceiued that his Horsemen and light armature beganne to shrinke; as being falne vpon the Roman Legions, by force whereof they were driuen to recoyle. He sets forward to helpe them: and they no lesse hastily draw vnto him for succour; hauing the Romans not farre behinde them. As the Legions beganne to climbe the Hill; Philip commanded those of his Pha∣lanx to charge their pikes, and entertaine them. Heere Titus found an extreme dif∣ficult piece of worke. For this Phalanx, being a great square battaile of armed pikes, like in all points to those which are now vsed in our moderne Warres: and being in like manner vsed, as are ours; was not to bee resisted by the Roman Targettiers, as long as the Phalanx it selfe held together vndissolued. The Macedonians were embat∣tailed in very close order: so that two of them stood opposite to one of the Romans; as also the pikes of the first ranke, had their points aduanced two or three foot be∣fore their fore-man. Wherefore it is no , if the Romans gaue backe: euery one of them troubled (as it were) with tenne enemies at once; and not able to come neerer vnto the next of them, than the length of a doozen foot or thereabout. Titus finding this, and not knowing how to remedie it; was greatly troubled: for that still the Phalanx bare downe all which came in the way. But in the meane while hee obserued, That they which were appointed by Philip to make his left wing, were not able through the much vneuennesse of the ground, to put themselues in order: so as either they kept their places on the Hil-tops; or else (which was worse) vpon desire either of beholding the pastime, or of seeming to bee partakers in the worke, ranne foolishly along by the side of their fellowes, which were occupied in fight. Of this their disorder Hee made great and present vse. Hee caused the right wing of his Battaile to march vp the hill, against these ill ordered troupes: his Ele∣phants leading the way, to increase the terrour. The Macedonians were readier to dispute what should bee done in such a case, than well aduised what to doe; as hauing no one man appointed, to command that part in chiefe. Indeede if they should haue done their best, it could not haue serued; since the ground whereon they stood, made weapons vnusefull. For let it be supposed, that Philip ha∣uing sixe and twentie thousand in his Armie (as he is said to haue beene equall to the Enemie in number) had foure thousand Horse, foure thousand Targettiers, and foure thousand light-armed: so shall there remaine fourteene thousand Pikes; where∣of hee himselfe had embattailed the one halfe in a Phalanx; the other halfe in the leftwing, are they whom Quintius is readie now to charge. The Phalanx hauing vsually sixeteene in File, must, when it consisted of seuen thousand, haue wel∣neere foure hundred and fortie in ranke: but foure hundred would serue, to make a Front long enough; the other fortie or seuen and thirtie Files might bee cut off, and reckoned in the number of the Targettiers, or light-armed. Allow∣ing Excerpt. è . Lib. 17. therefore, as Polybius doth, to euery man of them three foote of ground: this Front must haue occupied twelue hundred Foote, or two hundred and forty paces; that is, very neere a quarter of a mile in length. Such a space of open Champaine, free from incumbrance of Trees, Ditches, Hillocks, or the like impediments, that must of necessitie disioyne this close battaile of the Phalanx; was not euery where to be found. Here at Cynoscephalae Philip had so much roome, as would onely suffice for the one halfe of his men: the rest were faine to stand still and looke about them; being hindred from putting themselues in order, by the roughnesse of the Dogges heads. But the Romans, to whom all grounds were much alike, were not hindered from comming vp vnto them; nor found any difficultie in mastring those enemies, whose were in a manner bound by the discommoditie of the place. The very first impression of the Elephants, caused them to giue backe; and the comming on of the Legions, to betake themselues vnto flight. A Roman Tribune or Colonell, seeing the victorie on that part assured, left the of it vnto others: and being followed by twenty Ensignes or Maniples, that is, (as they might fall out) by some two thousand men, tooke in hand a notable piece of worke; and mainely helpfull to making of the Victorie complete. Hee considered that Philip, in pursuing the right wing of the Romans, was runne on so farre; as that himselfe with his fel∣lowes, in mounting the Hill to charge the left wing of the Macedonians, was alrea∣dy gotten aboue the Kings head. Wherefore hee turned to the left hand: and ma∣king downe the Hill after the Kings Phalanx, fell vpon it in the Rere. The hind∣most rankes of the Phalanx, all of them indeed saue the first fiue, were accustomed, when the battailes came to joyning, to carrie their Pikes vpright; and with the whole weight of their bodies to thrust on their foremen: and so were they doing at the present. This was another great inconuenience in the Macedonian Phalanx, That it serued neither for offence nor defence, except onely in Front. For though it were so, that Alexander, when he was to fight with Darius in , arran∣ged his Phalanx in such order, that all the foure sides of it were as so many Fronts looking sundry wayes, because hee expected that he should be round: yet it is to bee vnderstood, that herein he altered the vsuall forme; as also at the same time he embattailed his men in loose order, that so with ease they might turne their weapons, which way need should require. Likewise it is to be considered, That Alex∣anders men being thus disposed, were fit onely to keep their owne ground; not being able to follow vpon the Enemie, vnlesse their hindmost rankes could haue marched backwards. But in this present case of Philip, there was no such prouision for resi∣stance. Therefore his men, being otherwise vnable to helpe themselues, threw downe their weapons, and fled. The King himselfe had thought vntill now, that the fortune of the battaile was euery where alike; and the day his owne. But hea∣ring the noyse behind him, and turning a little aside with a troupe of Horse, to see how all went: when he beheld his men casting downe their weapons, and the Ro∣mans at his backe on the higher ground; Hee presently betooke himselfe to flight. Neither staid hee afterwards in any place (except onely a small while about Tempe, there to collect such as were dispersed in this ouerthrow) vntill hee was gotten into his owne Kingdome of Macedon. There died of the Roman Armie in this battaile, about seuen hundred: of the Ma∣cedonians about eight thousand were slaine; and fiue thousand Prisoners. §. XV. T. QVINTIVS falleth out with the Aetolians; and grantes vnto PHILIP, with conditions, vpon which the peace is rati∣fied. Libertie proclaimed vnto the Greeks. The quarrell with ANTIOCHVS. THe Aetolians wonderfully vanted themselues; and desired to haue it noised through all Greece, That the victorie at Cynoscephalae was got∣ten (in a manner) wholly by their valour. They had the most of the bootie; by sacking the Macedonian Campe, whilest the Romans were busied in the chace. Titus therefore being offended both at their vaine glory, and at their rauenous condition; to them better maners, by regarding them as slightly, as they thought highly of them∣selues. He also well perceiued, That by vsing them with any extraordinarie fauor, he should greatly offend the rest of his Confederates in ; who the Aetolians much more vehemently, than euer they had done the Macedonians. But this displeasure brake not foorth yet awhile. After the battaile Titus made haste vnto Larissa, a Citie of Thessalie: which he pre∣sently tooke. Before his comming, Philip had sent thither one of his Courtiers to burne all his letters, and passages whatsoeuer in writing, betwixt him and others: of which many were there kept. It was well done of the King, that among the cares of so much aduersitie, he forgot not to prouide for the safetie of his friends. Yet by his thus doing, they of Larissa might well perceiue, that hee gaue them as alreadie lost. Wherefore wee not that they, or any of their neighbours, did make de∣lay of opening their gates to Titus. At the same time, the Towne of Leucas borde∣ring vpon Acarnania, was taken by the Roman Fleete: and verie soone after, all the Acarnanians, a warlike Nation, and in hatred of the Aetolians euer true to Philip; gaue vp themselues vnto the Romans, hearing of the victorie at . The Rhodians also were then in hand with the conquest of Peraea, a Region of the Con∣tinent ouer against their Iland; whereof they had demanded restitution, in the late Treatie of peace with Philip. They did herein more manly, than any other of the Greekes: forasmuch as they awaited not the good leisure of the ; but with an Armie of their owne, and some helpe which they borrowed of the Achaeans and o∣ther their friends, gaue battaile to Dinocrates the Kings Leiutenant, wherein they had the victorie, and consequently recouered the whole Prouince. It angred Philip worse than all this, that the gathered courage out of his affliction, to in∣uade his Kingdome; wasting and spoyling, as if all had beene abandoned to their discretion. This made him gather an Armie in all haste, of sixe thousand foot and fiue hundred horse: wherewith comming vpon them, he draue them, with little or no losse of his owne, and great slaughter of theirs, out of the Kingdome. Which done, He returned to Thessalonica. In this one enterprise Hee had successe answerable to his desire: but seeing what fortune accompanied his affaires, in all other parts at the same time, he thought it wisedome to yeeld vnto necessitie; and therefore sent in all haste and De∣mosthenes, with the banished Achaean, in whom hee reposed much confi∣dence, Embassadours vnto Titus. These a long while in priuate, with Titus and some of his Roman Colonels: by whom they were gently enter∣tained, and in very friendly wise dismissed. It seemes that they had Commission, to referre all vnto Titus his owne discretion; as Philip himselfe in few dayes after did. There was granted vnto them a Truce for dayes: in which time, the King himselfe might come and speake with the Roman General. In the meane season ma∣nie suspitious rumors went of Titus; as if he had been corrupted with great rewards from the King, to betray the Greekes his Confederates. Of these bruits the Aeto∣lians were chiefe authors: who being wont to regard neither friendship nor honestie, where profit led them a wrong way, iudged alike of all men else. But against the day appointed for the meeting betwixt him and Philip, Titus had sent letters vnto his Asfociates; willing them to haue their Agents readie by a time appointed, at the entrance of Tempe, where the Treatie should be held. There when they were all assembled, they entred into consultation before the Kings arriuall, what should be most expedient for the common benefit of them all, and for euery Estate in particu∣lar. The poore King Aminander be sought them all, and especially the Romans, that they would think vpon him; and considering his weaknes which he confessed, make such prouision, that after the Romanes had turned their backs, and gone home, Philip might not wreake his anger vpon him who was not able to resist. Then spake Alexander one of the Aetolians: who commending Titus for so much as he had thus assembled the Confederates to aduise vpon their owne good, and had willed them to deliuer their mindes freely: added, That in the maine of the purpose which hee had in hand, hee was vtterly deceiued: for that by making peace with Philip, hee could neither assure the Romans of their quiet, nor the Greeks of their libertie. There was, he said, none other end to be made of the warre, which could agree either with the purpose of the Senate and People of Rome, or with the faire promises made by Titus himselfe vnto the Greeks, than the chacing of Philip quite out of his Kingdome. And to this effect he made a long discourse. But Titus answered, That this Aetoli∣an was ill acquainted, either with the good pleasure of the Senate and People of Rome, or with the laudable customes which they generally held: for that it was not the manner of the Romans, to seeke the vtter destruction of any King or Nation, at such time as they first made warre with them; vntill by some rebellion they found it a matter of necessitie, to take such a rigorous course. And heereof he alleaged the Carthaginians as a notable example: adding, That victorie, to generous mindes, was onely an inducement vnto moderation. As concerning the publike benefit of Greece: it was (he said) expedient, that the Kingdome of Macedon should be greatly weake∣ned and brought low; not that it should bee vtterly destroyed: forasmuch as it ser∣ued as a barre, to the Thracians, Gaules, and a multitude of other sauage Nations, which would soone ouer-flow the whole Continent of Greece, if this kingdome were not interposed. Wherefore he concluded, that if Philip would yeeld vnto those de∣mands, wherewith he had pressed him in the former Treatie; then was there no reason to denie him peace. As for the Aetolians: if they thought otherwise, it should bee at their owne pleasure, to take counsaile apart for themselues as they thought good. Then began Phaneas, another of the Aetolians, to say, That all was come to nothing; for that ere long, Philip would trouble all the Greekes, no lesse than hee had done in time before. But Titus interrupted him, and bad him leaue his babling; saying, That himselfe would take such order, as that Philip, were he neuer so desi∣rous, should thencefoorth not haue it in his power to molest the Greekes. The next day King Philip came thither: whom Titus vsed friendly: and suffering him to repose himselfe that night, held a Councell the day following; wherein the King yeelded vnto all that had beene required at his hands; offering yet further to stand to the good pleasure of the Senate, if they would haue more added to the Conditions. the Aetolian, insulting ouer him, said it was to bee hoped, that he would then at length giue vp to the Aetolians a many of townes (which he there named) bidding him speake, whether he would, or not. His answere was, that they might take them all. But Titus interposing himselfe, said it should be otherwise; These were Thessalian Townes, and should all bee free: one of them onely excepted, which not long agoe had refused to commit it selfe to the faith of the Romans, and therefore should now bee giuen to the Aetolians. Heereat Phaneas cried out that it was too great an iniurie, thus to defraud them of the Townes that had sometime belonged vnto their Common-weale. Rather he willed Titus to consider, that by an Couenant betweene them and the Romans, all the Townes taken ought to be their owne, and the Romans to haue nothing saue the pillage and captiues. It is , that there had beene such a Condition in the former warre: but it ceased to be of any validitie, as soone as the Aetolians made peace with Philip. And thus much Titus gaue them to vnderstand; asking them whether they thought it reasonable, that all the Townes in Greece, which had let in the Romans by composition, should be deliuered into subiection of the Aetolians. The rest of the Confederates were verie much delighted, with these angry passages betweene the Roman and the Aetolians: neither had they great reason to feare any hard measure; since Titus was so earnest in behalfe of those Thessalians, to giue them libertie, though they had stood out a∣gainst him, euen till very feare made them open their gates. Wherefore they op∣posed not themselues; but gaue their consent willingly vnto a Truce for foure Moneths. The chiefe cause that mooued Titus to grant peace so readily to the Macedonian, besides that laudable custome by him before alleadged; was, the same of Antio∣chus his comming with an Armie from Syria, and drawing neere toward Europe. Hee had also perhaps yet a greater motiue; euen the consideration that his successor might happen to defraud him of the honour, if the warre should happen to be pro∣tracted. And hee was in the right: For when his letters, together with Embassa∣dours from the Macedonian, and sundry States of Greece, came vnto Rome, new Consuls were chosen: who, (especially the one of them) stood very earnestly a∣gainst the peace; alleadging friuolous matter of their owne suspition, in hope to get the honour of concluding the warre. The Senate began to be doubtfully affected, betweene the Embassadors of Philip, offering to stand to whatsoeuer was demanded, and the letters of Titus pressing them to accept this offer, on the one side; and the importunitie of the Consul on the other; who said, that all these goodly shewes were fraudulent, and that the King would rebell, as soone as the Armie was called out of Greece. But the matter was taken out of the Senatours hands by two of the Tribunes, that referred it to an Assemblie of the People; by whose souereigne au∣thoritie it was concluded, That Peace should be granted vnto the King. So tenne Embassadors were sent from Rome ouer into Greece: in which number were they, that had beene Consuls before Titus; and it was ordained by their aduice, That Titus should goe through with the businesse of Peace. These would very faine haue retained those three important Cities of Corinth, Chalcis, and Demetrias, vntill the state of Greece were somewhat better settled. But finally Titus preuailed so, that Corinth was (though not immediately) rendered vnto the Achaeans; and all the o∣ther Greeke Townes which Philip held, as well in Asia as in Greece, restored vnto libertie. The Conditions of the Peace granted vnto Philip, were, That before the cele∣bration of the next è Polyb. ex∣cerpt. Legat. 9. Isthmian Games, He should withdraw his Garrisons out of all the Greeke Townes which he held, and consigne them oner to the Romans: That hee should deliuer vp vnto them all Captiues that he had of theirs, and all Renegado's: Likewise all his shippes of warre, reseruing to himselfe onely fiue of the lesser sort, and one of extraordinarie greatnesse, wherein sixteene laboured at euery oare: Further, that hee would pay a thousand talents, the one halfe in hand, the other in ten yeeres next following, by euen portions. Hereto . l. 33. Liuie addes, That he was for∣bidden to make warre out of Macedon, without permission of the Senate. But I finde not that he obserued this Article, or was at any time charged with the breach of it. Foure hundred talents hee had alreadie deliuered vnto Titus, together with his yonger sonne Demetrius, to remaine as hostage for his true dealing in this matter of peace, at such time as hee lately sent his Embassadours to Rome: when it was pro∣mised, that the money, and his sonne, should be restored backe vnto him, if the Se∣nate were not pleased with the agreement. Whether this money were reckoned as part of the thousand talents, I cannot finde: and it seemeth otherwise, forasmuch as yong Demetrius, who together with those foure hundred Talents was giuen for ho∣stage, remained still in custodie of the Romans, as a part of the bargaine which Titus formerly had made. Letters also were then sent by Titus vnto Prusias King of Bi∣thynia: giuing him to vnderstand what agreement was made with Philip in behalfe of the Greekes; and how the Senate held it reasonable, that the Ciani, most miserably spoiled and oppressed by Philip to gratifie this Bithynian his sonne-in-law, should be restored to , and permitted to enioy the same benefit of the Romans, which other of their Nation did. What effect these letters wrought it was not greatly ma∣teriall; since the Romans were shortly busied with , in such wise that they had not leisure to examine the conformitie of Prusias to their will. All Greece rejoyced at the good bargaine which Titus had made with Philip. One∣ly the Aetolians found themselues that they were vtterly neglected; which was to the rest no smal part of their contentment. The Boeotians continued to fauour the Macedonian; and thereby much trouble vnto themselues. There were some among them wel-affected to the Romans: who seeing how things were like to goe, made their complaint vnto Titus; saying, that they were no better than lost, for the good will which they had borne vnto him; vnlesse at this time, when he lay close by them with his Armie, their Praetor which was head of the opposite Faction might be made away. Titus refused to haue an hand in the execution, yet neuerthelesse did animate them in their purpose. So they committed the fact, and hoped to haue kept themselues vndiscouered. But when the murder came out, and somewhat was confessed by those that were put to torture: the hatred of the people brake out violently against the Romans; in such wise, that howsoeuer they durst not take armes against them, yet such of them as they found from their Campe, they murdered in all parts of the Countrie. This was detected with∣in a while, and many of the dead bodies found. Herevpon Titus requires of the Boeotians, to haue the murderers into his hands; and for fiue hundred , which he had lost by them, to haue paid vnto him fiue hundred Talents. In stead of making any such amends, they paid him with excuses; which he would not take as good satisfaction. Hee sends Embassadours to the Achaeans and Athenians, in∣forming them what had happened: and requested them not to take it amisse, though he dealt with these their friends as they had deserued. Herewithall he fals to their Countrie; and two such Townes of theirs, as did seeme to bee most culpable of the murders lately done. But the Embassadours of the Achaeans and A∣thenians, (especially of the Achaeans who offered, if he needed them, to helpe him in this warre; yet besought him rather to grant peace vnto the Boeotians ) preuailed so farre with him; that he was pacified with thirtie Talents, and the punishment of such as were knowne offendors. In like sort, though not so violently, were many States of Greece distracted: some among them reioycing that they were free from the Macedonian; others greatly doubting, that the Roman would proue a worse neighbour. The Aetolians would haue beene glad of any Commotion; and therefore published rumors abroad, That it was the purpose of the Romans, to keepe in their owne handes all those places, wherein Philip lately had his Garrisons. Little did they, or the rest of the Greekes, conceiue, that this Macedonian Warre serued as an introduction to the Warre to bee made in Asia against King Antiochus; where grew the , that was to be rea∣ped of this and many other victories. Wherefore to stay the progresse of bad ru∣mors when the Isthmian games were held, which in time of peace vvere neuer with∣out great and concourse: Titus in that great assembly of all Greece, cau∣sed proclamation to be made by sound of Trumpet to this effect, That the Senate and people of Rome, and Titus Quintius Flaminius the Generall, hauing vanquished King Philip and the Macedonians, did wil to be at libertie, free from Impositions, free from Garrisons, and liuing at their owne Lawes, the Corinthians, Phocians, Locrians, Euboeans, Achaeans of Phthiotis, Magnetians, Thessalians, and . The sud∣dennesse of this Proclamation astonished men: so as though they applauded it with a great shout; yet presently they cried out to heare it againe, as if they durst scarce credit their owne eares. The Greeks were Crafts-masters in the Art of giuing thanks; which they rendred now to T. Quintius with so great affection, as that they had wel∣neere smothered him, by thronging officiously about him. This good will of all the Greekes, was like to bee much more auaileable vnto the Romans in their warre against Antio hus, than could haue beene the possession of a few Townes, yea or of all those Prouinces which were named in their Proclamati∣on. Vpon confidence , no sooner were these Isthmian games at an end, than Titus, with the Romans that were of his Councell, gaue audience to Hagesianax and Lysias King Antiochus his Embassadours: whom they willed to vnto their Lord, That he should doe well to abstaine from the free Cities in , and not vexe them with warre: as also to restore whatsoeuer he had occupied, belonging to the Kings, Ptolomie or Philip. they willed him by these his Embassadours, that he should not passe ouer his Armie into Europe; adding, That some of them would visit him in person ere it were long, to talke with him further concerning these points. This done, they fell to accomplishing their promises vnto the Greekes; to the rest they gaue what they had promised. But the Phocians and Locrians they gaue vnto the Aetolians; whom they thought it no wisedome to offend ouer-much, being shortly to take a greater worke in hand. The Achaeans of Phthiotis they an∣nexed vnto the Thessalians; all saue the Towne of in Phthiotis, the same which had beene abandoned by T. Quintius to the Aetolians in the last Treatie with Philip. The Aetolians contended very earnestly about Pharsalus and Leucas. But they were put off with a dilatorie answere, and rejected vnto the Senate: for how soeuer some∣what the Councell might fauour them; was it not meet that they should haue their will, as it were in despight of Titus. So the Achaeans were restored Corinth, Triphylia, and Herea. So the Corinthians were made free indeede (though the Ro∣mans yet a while kept the ) for that all which were partakers of the Achaean Commonwealth, enjoyed their libertie in as absolute manner, as they could desire. To Pleuratus the Illyrian were giuen one or two places, taken by the Ro∣mans from Philip: and vpon Aminander were bestowed those Castles, which hee had gotten from Philip during this Warre; to reigne in them and the grounds which they commanded, as he did among his Athamanians. The Rhodians had been their owne . Attalus was dead a little before the Victorie; and therefore lost his share. Yet many that were with Titus in Councell, would haue giuen the Townes of Ore∣um and Eretria, in the Ile of Euboea, to his sonne and successour King Eumenes. But finally it was concluded, that these as well as the rest of the Euboeans, should be suffe∣red to enjoy their libertie. Oreslis, a little Prouince of the Kingdome of Macedon, bordering on Epirus, and lying towards the Ionian Sea, had yeelded vnto the Romans long ere this, and since continued true to them: for which cause it was also set at li∣bertie, and made a free estate by it selfe. These businesses being dispatcht: it remained, that all care should be vsed, not how to auoid the war with King Antiochus, but how to accomplish it with most ease and prosperity. Wherefore Embassadours were sent both to Antiochus himselfe, to picke matter of quarrell; and about vnto others, to praedispose them vnto the assist∣ing of the Romans therein. What ground and matter of Warre against this King the Romans now had, or shortly after found: as also how their Embassadours and Agents dealt and sped abroad; I referre vnto another place. CHAP. V. The Warres of the Romans with ANTIOCHVS the great, and his adherents. §. I. What Kings, of the races of SELEVCVS and PTOLEMIE, raigned in Asia and Aegypt before Antiochus the great. SELEVCVS NICATOR, the first of his race, King of Asia and Syria, died in the end of the hundred . lib. 2. twentie and fourth Olympiad. Hee was trecherously slaine by Ptolemie Ceraunus, at an Altar called Argos; hauing (as is saide) beene before by an Ora∣cle, to beware of Argos, as the place of his death. But I neuer haue read that any mans life hath beene preserued, or any mischance auoided, by the predictions of such Deuilish Oracles. Rather I be∣leeue, That many such predictions of the Heathen Gods, haue beene ante-dated by their Priests or by others; which deuised them after the euent. Antiochus Soter, the sonne and heire of this Seleucus, was dearely beloued of his Father: who surrendred vp vnto him his owne wife Stratonica, when hee vnder∣stood how much the young Prince was enamoured on her. Wherefore had great cause to feare, that the death of Seleucus would not bee vnreuenged by this his Successor. But Antiochus was contented to be pacified, either with gifts, or perhaps onely with faire words; containing himselfe within Asia, and letting enioy that quietly, which he had purchased in Europe with the bloud of . It is said of this Antiochus, that although he married with the Queen in his Fathers life; yet out of he forbore to embrace her, till his Father was dead. So that perhaps his incestuous loue was partly, if not , the cause of his not prosecuting that reuenge; whereunto Nature should haue vrged him. After∣wards he had warres with Antigonus Gonatas, and with King of Bithynia. Also Lutarius and Lconorius, Kings or Captaines of the Gaules, were set vpon him by the same Nicomedes. With these he fought a great battaile: wherein though other∣wise the Enemies had all aduantage against him; yet by the terror of his Elephants, which affrighted both their Horses and them, he wonne the Victorie. Hee tooke in hand an enterprise against Philadelphus: but finding ill successe in the be∣ginning, he soone gaue it ouer. To this King Antiochus Soter it was, that Berosus the dedicated his of the Kings of Assyria; the same, which hath since . lib. 2 . . in . beene excellently falsified by the Frier Annius. He left behind him one sonne, cal∣led Antiockus Theos; and one daughter, called , that was married vnto the King of Cyrene. So he died about the end of the hundred twentie and ninth Olym∣piad, or the beginning of the following, in the fiftieth or one and yeere of the Kingdome of the Greekes; when he had raigned nineteene yeeres. Antiochus, surnamed Theos or the god, had this vaine and impious title giuen vnto him, by flatterie of the Milesians; whom hee deliuered from Timarchus, a Tyrant that oppressed them. He held long and difficult, but fruitlesse, warre with Ptolemie Philadelphus King of Aegypt; which finally he compounded, by taking to wife Bere∣nice the daughter of Ptolemie. Of these two Kings, and of this Ladie Berenice, Saint Hierome and other Inter∣preters haue vnderstood that Prophecie of DANIEL: The Kings daughter of the Dan. c. 11. v. 6. South, shall come to the King of the North, to make an agreement; and that which fol∣loweth. Ptolemie Philadelphus was a great louer of Peace and Learning; and (setting apart his incestuous marriage with his sister Arsinoe ) a very excellent Prince: how∣soeuer, the of all that race. It was Hee, that built and furnished with Bookes, that famous Librarie in Alexandria: which to adorne, and to honour the more, Hee sent vnto then high Priest of the Iewes, for the Bookes of Moses and other Scriptures. The benefits of this King vnto the Iewes, had formerly bin very great: for He had set at libertie as many of them, as his Father held in slauerie throughout all Aegypt; and hee had sent vnto the Aug. de Ciu. Dei. L. 18. c. 42. Temple of God in Hierusalem very rich Presents. Wherefore Eleazar to the Kings desire, presented him with an Hebrew coppie: which Ptolemie caused to be translated into Greeke, by seuen∣tie two of the most graue and learned persons, that could bee found among all the Tribes. In this number of the seuentie two Interpreters, or (as they are commonly called) the Seuentie; Iesus the sonne of Sirach, is thought by Genebrard to haue beene one: who that he liued in this Age, it seemes to me very sufficiently prooued by Ian∣senius, in his Preface vnto Ecclesiasticus. The whole of this businesse between Philadelphus and the High Priest, was written (as Ios. an. l. 12. c. 2 Concerning that Booke which now goes vnder the name of A∣ristaeus; many learned men, and among the rest Lodouicus , hold that it is counterfeit, and the inuen∣tion of some later Author. Surely if it were to be sus∣pected in the time of ; it may be now much more iustly suspect∣ed: since a new Edition of it is come , purged from (as the Papists terme those bookes, wherein they haue changed what they please) and foorth by Middendorpius at Colen. An. Dom. 1578. Iust. L. 27. affirmes) by Aristaeus that was employed therein. Fortie yeeres Ptolemie Philadelphus was King; reckoning the time wherein hee ioyntly reigned with his Father. Hee was exceedingly beloued of his people; and highly magnified by Poets, and other Writers. Towards his end hee grew more voluptuous, than hee had beene in his former yeeres: in which time he boasted, that alone had found out the way how to liue for euer. If this had beene referred vnto his honourable deeds, it might haue stood with reason: o∣therwise, the Gowt, which hee was often troubled, was enough to teach him his owne errour. He was the first of the Kings, deriued from Alexanders Successors, that entred into League with the Romans: as also his Off-spring was the last among those Royall Families, which by them was rooted vp. Antiochus Theos had another wife, called Laodice, at such time as he married with Berenice the daughter of this . After his second marriage, hee vsed his first wife with no better regard, than if shee had beene his Concubine. Laodice hated him for this: yet aduentured not to seeke reuenge; vntill her own sonne Seleucus Cal∣linicus was of abilitie to bee King. This was two or three yeeres after the death of Ptolemie Philadelphus: at what time shee poysoned her husband Theos; and by permission of Seleucus her sonne, murdered Berenice, together with a sonne that she had borne to Antiochus. Iustine reports, that Berenice saued herselfe, together with the yong Prince her child, awhile in the Sanctuarie at Daphne: and that not only some Cities of Asia prepared to succour her, but her brother Ptolemie Euergetes, King of Aegypt, came to rescue her with an Armie; though too late, for she was slaine be∣fore. With such cruelties Seleucus Callinicus, succeeding vnto his Father that had fif∣teene yeeres beene King, beganne his Reigne. His subjects were highly offended at his wicked nature; which they discouered in his first entrance. Wherefore it was like, that his Estate would haue beene much endangered, if Euergetes, who came against him, had not beene drawne backe into his owne Countrie, by some Commotions there in hand. For there were none that would beare armes against Ptolemie, in defence of their owne King: but rather they sided with the Aegyptian; who tooke Laodice the Kings mother, and rewarded her with death as shee had well deserued. Wherefore Seleucus, being freed from this inuasion, by occasion of those domesticall troubles which recalled Euergetes home into Aegypt; went about a dan∣gerous piece of worke, euen to make Warre vpon his owne subjects, because of their bad affection towards him; when as it had beene much better, by well deser∣uing, to haue changed their hatred into loue. A great Fleet hee prepared: in furni∣shing and manning whereof hee was at such charges, that hee scarce left himselfe any other hope, if that should miscarrie. Heerein hee embarqued himselfe; and, putting to Sea, met with such a tempest, as deuoured all saue himselfe, and a very few of his friends that hardly escaped. This calamity, hauing left him nothing else in a manner than his naked body, turned neuerthelesse to his great good; as anon after it seemed. For when his Subiects vnderstood, in what sort the Gods (as they conceiued it) had punished him for his offences: they had commiseration of his Estate; and, presuming that hee would thencefoorth become a new man, offered him their ser∣uice with great alacritie. This reuined him, and filled him with such spirit; as thin∣king himselfe well enough able to deale with the Aegyptian, he made ready a migh∣tie Armie for that purpose. But his fortune was no better at Land, than it had beene at Sea. He was vanquished by in a great battaile: whence he escaped hard∣ly; no better attended, than after his late shipwracke. Hasting therefore backe to Antioch, and fearing that the Enemie would soone bee at his heeles; He wrote vnto his brother Antiochus Hierax, who lay then in Asia, praying him to bring succour with all speed; and promising, in recompence of his faith and diligence, the Domi∣nion of a great part of Asia. Antiochus was then but fourteene yeeres olde, yet ex∣tremely ambitious; and therefore glad of such an occasion to make himselfe great. He leuied a mighty Armie of the Gaules; where with he set forwards to helpe his bro∣ther; or rather to get what hee could for himselfe. Hereof Ptolemie being aduer∣tised: and hauing no desire to put himselfe in danger more than needed; tooke Truce with Seleucus for tenne yeeres. No sooner was Seleucus freed from this care of the Aegyptian warre, but his brother Antiochus came vpon him; and needs would fight with him, as knowing himselfe to haue the better Armie. So Seleucus was vanqui∣shed againe; and saued himselfe, with so few about him, that he was verily suppo∣sed to haue perisht in the battaile. Thus did Gods justice take reuenge of those murders, by which the Crowne was purchased; and settled (as might haue beene thought) on the head of this bloudie King. Antiochus was glad to heare of his bro∣thers death; as if thereby hee had purchased his hearts desire. But the Gaules, his Mercinaries, were gladder than He. For when he led them against Eumenes King of Pergamus, in hope to get honour by making a Conquest in the beginning of his Reigne: these perfidious Barbarians tooke counsaile against him; and deuised how to strippe him of all that hee had. They thought it very likely, that if there were none of the Royall house to make head against them; it would be in their power, to doe what should best bee pleasing to themselues, in the lower Asia. Wherefore they laide hands on Antiochus; and enforced him to ransome himselfe with money, as if hec had beene their lawfull Prisoner. Neither were they so contented; but made him enter into such Composition with them, as tended little to his honour. In the meane while had gathered a new Armie; and prepared once more to trie his fortune against his brother. Eumenes hearing of this, thought the season fit for himselfe, to make his profit of their discord. Antiochus fought with him, and was beaten: which is no great maruaile; since he had great reason to stand in no lesse feare of the Gaules his owne souldiers, than of the enemie with whom hee had to deale. After this, Eumenes wanne much in Asia; whilest Antiochus went against his brother. In the second battaile, fought betweene the brethren, Seleucus had the vpper hand: and Antiochus Hierax or the Hawke, (which surname was giuen him, be∣cause he sought his prey vpon euery one, without care whether hee were prouoked or not) soared away as farre as he could, both from his brother, and from his owne . Hauing fetcht a great compasse through Mesopotamia and Armenia, He fell at length in Cappadocia; where his father-in-law King Artamenes tooke him vp. Hee was entertained very louingly in outward shew; but with a meaning to betray him. This hee soone perceiued: and therefore betooke him to his wings againe; though he knew not well, which way to bend his flight. At length hee resolued to bestowe himselfe vpon Ptolemie; his owne conscience telling him, what euill hee had meant vnto Seleucus his brother; and therefore what little good he was reciprocally to ex∣pect at his hands. Infidelitie can find no sure harbour. Ptolemie well vnderstood the perfidious and turbulent nature of this Hierax. Wherefore hee layd him vp in close prison: whence, though by meanes of an harlot, he got out; yet flying from his keepers, he fell into the hands of theeues, by whom he was murdered. Neare a∣bout the same time died Seleucus. The Parthians and Bactrians had rebelled against him, during his warres with his brother. He therefore made a iourney against Ar∣saces founder of the Parthian kingdome: wherein his euill fortune, or rather Gods vengeance, adhered so closely to him, that he was taken prisoner. Arsaces dealt friend∣ly with him, and dismissed him, hauing euery way giuen him royall entertainment: but in returning home, he brake his necke by a fall from his horse, and so ended his vnhappie reigne of twenty yeeres. Hee had to wife Laodice, the sister of , one of his most trustie Captaines: which was father vnto that Achaeus, who ma∣king his aduantage of this affinitie, became shortly after (as he himselfe) a king; rather indeed, a great troubler of the world in those parts. By Laodice hee had two sonnes; Seleucus the third, surnamed ; and Antiochus the third, called afterwards the Great. Seleucus Ceraunus reigned onely three yeeres: in which time he made warre vpon Attalus the first, that was King of Pergamus. Being weake of bodie through sick∣nesse, and in want of monie, He could not keepe his men of warre in good order: and finally he was slaine by treason of Nicanor, and Apaturius a . His death was re∣uenged by Achaeus, who slue the Traitors, and tooke charge of the Armie: which he ruled very wisely, and faithfully a while; Antiochus, the brother of Seleucus, be∣ing then a Childe. §. II. The beginning of the Great ANTIOCHVS his reigne. Of PTOLEMIE EVER∣GETES, and PHILOPATOR, Kings of Aegypt. Warre betweene ANTIOCHVS and PHILOPATOR. The rebellion of MOLO: an Expedition of ANTIOCHVS a∣gainst him. The recontinuance of ANTIOCHVS his Aegyptian warre: with the passages betweene the two Kings: the victory of PTOLEMIE, and Peace concluded. Of ACHAEVS, and his rebellion; his greatnesse, and his fall. ANTIOCHVS his Ex∣pedition against the Parthians, Bactrians, and Indians. Somewhat of the Kings reigning in India, after the death of the Great ALEXANDER. ANTIOCHVS was scarcely fifteene yeeres olde, when hee began his reigne, which lasted sixe and thirty yeeres. In his Minoritie, Hee was wholly gouerned by one Hermias, an ambitious man, and one which maligned all vertue, that he found in any of the Kings faithful seruants. This vilde qualitie in a Counsailour of such great place, how harme∣full it was vnto his Lord, and finally vnto himselfe; the successe of things will shortly discouer. Soone after the beginning of Antiochus his reigne, Ptolemie Euergetes King of Aegypt died; and left his heire Ptolemie Philopator, a yong Boy likewise, as hath els∣where beene remembred. This was that Euergetes, who relieued Aratus and the Achaeans: who afterwards tooke part with Cleomenes; and louingly entertained him, when he was chaced out of Greece by Antigonus Gonatas. Hee annexed vnto his Dominion the Kingdome of Cyrene; by taking to wife Berenice, the daughter of King Magas. He was the third of the Ptolemies; and the last good King of the race. The name of , or the doer of good, was giuen him by the Aegyptians; not so much for the great spoiles which hee brought home, after his victories in Syria; as for that he recouered some of those Images or Idols, which Cambyses, when hee conquered Aegypt, had carried into Persia. He was ready to haue made war vpon the Iewes, for that Onias their high Priest, out of meere couetousnesse of mony, refu∣sed to pay vnto him his yeerely tribute of twenty talents: but hee was pacified by the wisedome of Iosephus a Iew, vnto whom afterwards he let in farme the Tributes and Customes that belonged vnto him, in those parts of Syria which hee held. For Coelosyria, with Palaestina and all those parts of the Countrie that lay neerest vnto Aegypt, were held by the Aegyptian; either as hauing fallen to the share of Ptole∣mie the first, at such time as the great Antigonus was vanquished and slaine in the battaile at Ipsus; or as being won by this Euergetes, in the troublesome and vnhap∣pie reigne of Seleucus Callinicas. The victories of this Euergetes in Syria, with the contentions that lasted for many succeeding ages betweene the Ptolemies and the Seleucidae; were all foretold by Daniel in the Prophecie before cited, which is ex∣pounded be S. Hierome. This Ptolemie Euergetes reigned six and twentie yeeres; and died towards the end of the hundred thirtie and ninth Olympiad. It may seeme by that, which we find in the Prologue vnto Iesus the sonne of Sirach his booke, that he should haue reigned a much longer time. For Siracides there saith, that he came into Aegypt in the eight and thirtieth yeere, when Euergetes was King. It may there∣fore be, That either this King reigned long together with his father: or that those eight and thirtie yeeres, were the yeeres of Iesus his owne age; if not perhaps rec∣koned (as the Iewes did otherwhiles reckon) from some notable accident that had befallen them. Not long after the death of Euergetes, Hermias the Counsailer, and in a manner the Protectour of King Antiochus, incited his Lord vnto warre against the Aegypti∣an; for the recouery of Coelosyria and the Countries adioyning. This counsaile was verie vnseasonably giuen; when Molo, the Kings Lieutenant in Media, was broken out into rebellion, and sought to make himselfe absolute Lord of that rich Coun∣trie. Neuerthelesse Hermias, being more froward than wise, maintained stifly, that it was most expedient, and agreeable with the Kings honour, to send forth against a rebellious Captain, other Captaines that were faithful; whilest He in person made warre vpon one, that was like himselfe, a King. No man durst gainsay the resoluti∣on of Hermias; who therfore sent Xenoetas an Achaean, with such forces as he thought expedient, against the Rebell; whilest in the meane season an Armie was preparing for the Kings Expedition into Coelosyria. The King hauing marched from Apamea to Laodicea, and so ouer the Desarts into the Vallie of Marsyas, betweene the Moun∣taines of Libanus and Anti-libanus; found his way there stopped by Theodotus an Ae∣tolian, that serued vnder Ptolemie. So hee consumed the time there awhile to none effect: and then came newes, that Xenoetas, his Captaine, was destroyed with his whole Armie; and Molo thereby become Lord of all the Countrie, as farre as vnto Babylon. Xenoetas, whilest he was yet on his iourney, and drew neere to the Riuer of Tygris; receiued many aduertisements, by such as fledde ouer vnto him from the Enemie, That the followers of Molo were, for the most part, against their wills, drawne by their Commander to beare armes against the King. This report was not altogether false; but Molo himselfe stood in some doubt lest his followers would leaue him in time of necessitie. Xenoetas therefore making shew, as if had prepared to passe the Riuer by Boats in face of his Enemie; left in the night time such as he thought meete to defend his Campe; and with all the floure of his Armie went ouer Tygris, in a place ten miles lower than Molo his Campe. Molo heard of this, and sent forth his horse to giue impediment: but hearing that Xenoetas could not so bee stopped, He himselfe dislodged, and tooke his iourney towards Media; leauing all his baggage behinde him in his Campe. Whether he did this, as distrusting the faith of his owne souldiours: or whether thereby to deceiue his Enemie; the great folly of Xenoetas made his stratageme prosperous. For Xenoetas, hauing borne himselfe proudly be∣fore, vpon the countenance of Hermias by whom he was aduanced vnto this charge; did now presume, that all should giue way to his authoritie, without putting him to much trouble of vsing the sword. Wherefore he suffered his men to feast, with the prouisions which they found ready in the forsaken Campe: or rather hee com∣manded them so doe, by making Proclamation, That they should cherish vp themselues against the iourney, which hee intended to take next day, in pursuit of the Rebels that fled. And to the same purpose he busied himselfe, in transporting the remainder of his Armie, which he had left on the other side of Tygris. But Mo∣lo went no further that day, than he could easily returne the same night. Where∣fore vnderstanding what good rule the Kings men kept: hee made such haste backe vnto them, that he came vpon them early in the morning; whilest they were yet heauie with the wine and other good cheare, that they had spent at supper. So Xe∣noetas and a very few about him, died fighting in defence of the Campe: the rest were slaughtered, without making resistance; and many of them, ere they were per∣fectly awake. Likewise the Campe on the other side of Tygris, was easily taken by Molo: the Captaines flying thence, to saue their owne liues. In the heat of this vi∣ctorie, the Rebell marched vnto , which he presently tooke: and, maste∣ring within a little while the Prouince of Babylonia, and all the Countrie downe to the Red-Sea, or Bay of Persia, He hasted vnto Susa; where at his first comming hee wan the Citie: but failing to take the Castle that was exceeding strong, returned backe to , there to giue order concerning this businesse. The report of these things comming to Antiochus, whilest he lay (as is said be∣fore) in the Vale of Marsyas; filled him with great sorrow, and his Campe with trouble. He tooke counsaile what to doe in this needfull case; and was well aduised by Epigenes the best man of warre hee had about him, to let alone this Enterprise of Coelosyria; and bend his forces thither, where more neede required them. This counsaile was put in execution with all conuenient haste. Yet was Epigenes dismissed by the way, and soone after slaine, by the practice of Hermias; who could not en∣dure to heare good counsaile giuen, contrary to his owne good liking and allow∣ance. In the iourney against Molo, the name and presence of the King was more , than any oddes which hee had of the Rebel in strength. Molo distrusted his owne followers: and thought, that neither his late good successe, nor any other consideration, would serue to hold them from returning to the Kings obedience; if once they beheld his person. Wherefore he thought it safest for him, to the Kings Campe in the night time. But going in hand with this, He was discoue∣red by some that fled ouer from him to the King. This caused him to returne backe to his Campe: which, by some errour, tooke alarme at his returne; and was hardly quieted, when Antiochus appeared in sight. The King was thus forward in giuing battaile to Molo, vpon confidence which hee had that many would reuolt vnto him. Neither was he deceiued in this his beliefe. For not a few men, or Ensignes: but all the left wing of the Enemie, which was opposite vnto the King, changed side forthwith as soone as euer they had sight of the Kings person; and were ready to doe him ser∣uice against Molo. This was enough to haue wonne the Victorie: but Molo short∣ned the worke, by killing himselfe; as did also diuers of his friends, who for feare of torments preuented the Hang-man with their owne swords. After this Victorie came ioyfull newes, that the Queene Laodice, daughter of Mithridates King of Pontus, which was married vnto Antiochus a while before, had brought foorth a sonne. Fortune seemed bountifull vnto the King: and therefore he purposed to make what vse hee could, of her friendly disposition while it lasted: Being now in the Easterne parts of his kingdome, Hee iudged it conuenient to visit his Frontiers, were it onely to terrifie the Barbarians, that bordered vpon him. Here∣unto his Counsailer Hermias gaue assent: not so much respecting the Kings honour; as considering what good might thereby happen to himselfe, For if it should come to passe, that the King were taken out of the world by any casualtie: then made hee no doubt of becomming Protector to the yong Prince; and thereby of lengthening his owne Gouernment. Antiochus therefore went against Artabazanes, who reigned among the Atropatians; hauing the greatest part of his kingdome, situate betweene the Caspian and the Euxine Sea. This barbarous King was very old and fearefull; and therefore yeelded vnto whatsoeuer Conditions it pleased Antiochus to lay vpon him. So in this iourney Antiochus got honour, such as well contented him; and then re∣turned homewards. Vpon the way, a Physician of his brake with him as concerning Hermias; informing him truely, how odious hee was vnto the people; and how dangerous he would be shortly vnto the Kings owne life. Antiochus belecued this, hauing long suspected the same Hermias; but not daring, for feare of him, to vtter his suspitions. It was therefore agreed, that he should be made away on the sudden: which was done, he being trained forth by a sleight a good way out of the Campe, and there killed without warning or disputation. The King needed not to haue vsed so much Art, in ridding his hands of a man so much detested. For how soeuer hee seemed gracious whilest hee was aliue: yet they that for feare had been most obse∣quious to him, whilest hee was in case to doe them hurt, were as ready as the fore∣most, to speake of him as hee had deserued, when once they were secure of him: Yea, his wife and children lying then at Apamea, were stoned to death by the wiues and children of the Citizens; whose indignation brake forth the more outragiously, the longer that it had been concealed. About these times, Achaeus (of whom we spake before) thinking that Antiochus might happen to perish in some of those Expeditions which hee tooke in hand; was bold to set a Diademe vpon his owne head, and take vpon him as a King. His pur∣pose was to haue inuaded Syria: but the fame of Antiochus his returning thirther∣wards, made him quit the enterprise; and sludie to set some handsome colour on his former presumption. It is very strange; that Antiochus neither went against A∣chaeus; nor yet dissembled the notice which he had taken, of these his traiterous purposes: but wrote vnto him, signifying that he knew all; and vpbraiding him with such infidelitie, as any offender might know to be vnpardonable. By these meanes he emboldened the Traitor: who being already detected, might better hope to maintaine his former actions by strong hand, than to excuse them, or get pardon by submission. Antiochus had at that time a desire to recouer Coelosyria, or what else he could, of the Dominions of Ptolemie Philopater in those parts. He be∣gan with Seleucia, a very strong Citie neere vnto the mouth of the Riuer Orontes; which ere long he won, partly by force, partly by corrupting with brybes the Cap∣taines that lay therein. This was that Seleucia, whereto Antigonus the great who founded it, gaue the name of Antigonia: but Seleucus getting it shortly after, called it Seleucia; and Ptolemie Euergetes hauing lately won it, might, if it had so pleased him, haue changed the name into Ptolemais. Such is the vanity of men, that hope to pur∣chase an endlesse memoriall vnto their names, by workes proceeding rather from their greatnesse, than from their vertue; which therefore no longer are their owne, that the same greatnesse hath continuance. Theodotus the Aetolian, he that before had opposed himselfe to Antiochus, and defended Coelosyria in the behalfe of Ptole∣mie; was now growne sorrie, that he had vsed so much faith and diligence, in ser∣uice of an vnthankfull and luxurious Prince. Wherefore, as a Mercinarie, began to haue regard vnto his owne profit: which thinking to finde greater, by applying himselfe vnto him that was (questionlesse) the more worthie of these two Kings; He offered to deliuer vp vnto Antiochus, the Cities of Tyrus and Ptolemais. Whilest he was deuising about this treason, and had already sent messengers to King Antio∣chus: his practice was detected, and he besieged in Ptolemais by one of Ptolemies Cap∣taines, that was more faithfull then himselfe. But Antiochus hasting to his rescue, vanquished this Captaine who met him on the way: and afterwards got possession, not onely of Tyrus and Ptolemais, with a good fleete of the Aegyptian Kings that was in those Hauens: but of so many other Townes in that Countrie, as embold∣ned him to thinke vpon making a iourney into Aegypt it selfe. Agathocles and Sosibius bore all the sway in Egypt at that time: Ptolemie himselfe being loth to haue his pleasures interrupted, with businesse of so small importance, as the safetie of his Kingdome. Wherefore these two agreed together, to make prouision as hastily, and yet as secretly as might be, for the warre: and neuerthelesse, at the same time, to presse Antiochus with daily Embassadors to some good agreement. There came in the beate of this businesse, Embassadours from Rhodes, Byzantium, and Cyzicus, as likewise from the Aetolians; according to the vsuall courtesie of the Greekes, desiring to take vp the quarrell. These were all entertained in Memphis, by and : who intreated them to deale effectually with Antiochus. But whilest this Treatie lasted, great preparations were made at Alexandria for the warre: wherein these two Counsailours perswaded themselues reasonably, that the victory would bee their owne; if they could get, for monie, a sufficient number of the Greekes to take their parts. Antiochus heard onely what was done at Memphis, and how desirous the Gouernours of Aegypt were to be at quiet: whereunto he gaue the readier beliefe, not onely for that he knew the disposition of Ptolemie, but because the Rhodians, and other Embassadours, comming from Memphis, discoursed vnto him all after one manner; as being all deceiued, by the cunning of Agathocles and his fellow. Antiochus therefore hauing wearied himselfe, at the long siege of a Towne called Dura, which he could not winne: and being desi∣rous to refresh himselfe and his Armie in Seleucia, during the Winter which then came on; granted vnto the Egyptian a Truce for foure moneths, with promise that he would be ready to hearken vnto equall Conditions, when they should bee offered. It was not his meaning to bee so courteous, as he would faine haue seemed, but onely to his enemies asleepe, he tooke time to refresh himselfe; and to bring Achaeus to some good order, whose treason dayly grew more open and vio∣lent. The same negligence which he thought the Aegyptian would haue vsed, Hee vsed himselfe; as presuming, that when time of the yeere better serued, little force would be needfull; for that the Townes would voluntarily yeelde vnto him, since Ptolemie prouided not for their defence. Neuerthelesse, he gaue audience to the Em∣bassadours, and had often conference with those that were sent out of Aegypt: plea∣sing himselfe well, to dispute about the iustice of his quarrell; which he purposed shortly to make good by the sword, whether it were iust or no. He said, that it was agreed betweene his Ancestor, and Ptolemie the sonne of Lagi, That all Syria, if they could win it from Antigonus, should be giuen in possession to Seleucus: and that this bargaine was afterwards ratified, by generall consent of all the Confede∣rates, after the battaile at Ipsus. But Ptolemies men would acknowledge no such bargaine. They said, that Piolemie the sonne of Lagi, had wonne Coelosyria, and the Prouinces adioyning for himselfe: as also that he had sufficiently gratified Seleucus, by lending him forces to recouer his Prouince of Babylon, and the Countries about the Riuer of Euphrates. Thus whilest neither of them greatly cared for peace; they were, in the end of their disputation, as farre from concluding as at the beginning. Ptolemie demanded restitution; Antiochus thought, that he had not as yet gotten all that was his owne: Also Ptolemie would needes haue Achaeus comprehended in the League betweene them, as one of their Confederates; But Antiochus would not en∣dure to heare of this, exclaiming against it as a shamefull thing, that one King should offer to deale so with another, as to take his Rebell into protection, and seeke to ioyne him in Confederacie with his owne Souereigne Lord. When the Truce was expired, and Antiochus prepared to take the field againe: contrary to his expectati∣on hee was informed. That Ptolemie, with a very puissant Armie, was comming vp against him out of Aegypt. Setting forward therefore to meet with the Enemie, he was encountred on the way by those Captaines of Ptolemie, that had resisted him the yeere before. They held against him the passages of Libanus, whence neuer∣thelesse draue them: and, proceeding onward in his iournie, wan so many places, that he greatly increased his reputation; and thereby drew the Arabians, with diuers of the bordering people, to become his followers. As the two Kings drew neare together: many Captaines of Ptolemie forsooke his pay, and fled ouer to Antiochus. This notwithstanding, the Aegyptian had the courage to meere his Enemie in the field. The battaile was fought at Raphia: where it was not to be decided, whether the Aegyptians or Asiatiques were the better Souldiers (for that the strength of both Armies consisted in Mercinaries, chiefly of the Greekes, Thracians, and Gaules ) but whether of the Kings was the more fortunate. Ptolemie, with Arsinoe his sister and Wife, rode vp and downe encouraging his men; the like did Antiochus on the other side: each of them rehearsing the braue deedes of their Ancestors; as not ha∣uing of their owne, wherby to valew themselues. Antiochus had the more Elephants: as also his, being of Asia, had they beene fewer would haue beaten those of Africke. Wherefore by the aduantage of these beasts, Hee draue the enemies before him, in that part of the battaile wherein hee fought himselfe. But Ptolemie had the better men: by whose valour he brake the Grosse of his Enemies battaile, and wan the vi∣ctorie; whilest Antiochus was heedlesly following vpon those, whom hee had com∣pelled to retire. Antiochus had brought into the field aboue seuentie thousand foot, and six thousand Horse: whereof though he lost scarce ten thousand foote, and not foure hundred horse; yet the fame of his ouerthrow tooke from him all those pla∣ces which he had lately wonne. When therefore he was returned home to Antioch: Hee began to stand in feare, lest Ptolemie and Achaeus, setting vpon him both at once, should put him in danger of his whole Estate. This caused him to send Embassa∣dors vnto the Aegyptian to treat of peace: which was readily graunted; it being much against the nature of Ptolemie, to vexe himselfe thus with the tedious busines of warre. So Ptolemie, hauing staied moneths in Syria, returned home into Aegypt clad with the reputation of a Conqueror; to the great admiration of his subiects, and of all those that were acquainted with his voluptuous and slothfull condition. Achaeus was not comprised in the League betweene these two Kings: or if hee had beene included therein; yet would not the Aegyptian haue taken the paines, of making a second Expedition for his sake. The best was, that he thought himselfe strong enough, if fortune were not too much against him, to deale with Antiochus. Neither was hee confident without great reason: For besides his many victories, whereby hee had gotten all that belonged vnto Antiochus on this side of Taurus, Hee had also good successe against Attalus King of Pergamus; that was an able man of warre, and commanded a strong Armie. Neither was hee, as Molo the Rebell had beene, one of meane regard otherwise, and carryed beyond himselfe by apprehen∣ding the vantage of some opportunitie: but Cousin german to the King, as hath beene shewed before; and now lately the Kings brother-in-law, by taking to wife a yonger daughter of the same Mithridates King of Pontus, which was also called Lao∣dice, as was her sister the Queene, Antiochus his wife. These things had added vnto him; and had made his followers greatly to respect him, euen as one to whome a Kingdome was belonging. Neither made it a little for him, That King Ptolemie of Aegypt held him in the nature of a friend: and that King Antiochus was now lately vanquished in the battaile at Raphia; and had thereby lost all his gettings in Syria. But all these hopes and likelihoods came to nothing: For the King of Pontus, if he would meddle in that quarrel betweene his sonnes-in-law, had no rea∣son to take part against the more honourable. As for the Aegyptian: Hee was not onely slothfull; but hindred by a rebellion of his owne subiects, from helping his friends abroad. For the people of Aegypt, of whom , contrarie to the man∣ner of his Progenitors, had armed a great number to serue in the late Expedition; began to entertaine a good opinion of their owne valour, thinking it not inferiour to the Macedonian. Hereupon they refused to suffer as much as formerly they had done: since they lesse esteemed, than they had done, the force of the Kings Merci∣narie Greekes; which had hitherto kept them in streight . Thus brake out a warre betweene the King and his subiects: wherein though the ill-guided force of the Multitude was finally broken; yet King Ptolemie thereby wasted much of his strength, and much of his time, that might haue beene spent, as hee thought, much better in reuelling; or, as others thought, in succouring Achaeus. As for An∣tiochus, He had no sooner made his peace with the Aegyptian, than hee turned all his care to the preparation of warre against Achaeus. To this purpose he entred into League with Attalus; that so hee might distract the forces of his Rebell, and finde him worke on all sides. Finally, his diligence and fortune were such, that within a∣while he had pent vp Achaeus into the Citie of Sardes; where he held him about two yeeres besieged. The Citie was very strong, and well victualled: so as there appea∣red not, when the second yeere came, any greater likelihood of taking it, than in the first yeeres siege. In the end, one Lagor as a Cretan found meanes how to enter the Towne. The Castle it selfe was vpon a very high Rocke, and in a manner im∣pregnable, as also the Towne-wall adioyning to the Castle, in that part which was called the Sawe, was in like manner situated vpon steepe Rocks, and hardly accessi∣ble; that hung ouer a deepe bottome, whereinto the dead carkases of Horses, and other beasts, yea, and sometimes of men, vsed to be throwne. Now it was obserued by Lagoras, that the Rauens and other birds of prey, which hanted that place by reason of their food which was there neuer wanting, vsed to flie vp vnto the top of the Rockes, and to pitch vpon the walls; where they rested without any distur∣bance. Obseruing this often, he reasoned with himselfe, and concluded, that those parts of the Wall were left vnguarded, as beeing thought vnapproachable. Heereof hee informed the King: who approoued his iudgement, and gaue vnto him the leading of such men, as hee desired for the accomplishing of the en∣terprize. The successe was agreeable to that which Lagoras had afore conceiued: and, though with much labour, yet without resistance, he scaled those Rockes, and (whilest a generall assault was made) entred the Towne in that part; which was, at other times vngarded, then vnthought vpon. In the same place had the Persians, vnder Cyrus, gotten into Sardes; when Croesus thought himselfe lecure on that side. But the Citizens tooke not warning, by the example of a losse many ages past; and therefore out of memorie. Achaeus held still the Castle: which not onely seemed by nature impregnable, but was very well stored with all necessaries; and manned with a sufficient number, of such as were to him well assured. Antiochus therefore was constrained to waste much time about it; hauing none other hope to preuaile, than by famishing the inclosed. Besides the vsuall tediousnesse of expectation; his busi∣nesse called him thence away into the higher Asia, where the Bactrians, and Parthi∣ans with the Hyrcanians, had Kingdomes taken out of his Dominions, vpon which they still incroched. But hee thought it not safe, to let Achaeus breake loose a∣gaine. On the other side there were some Agents of Ptolemie the Aegyptian, and good friends vnto Achaeus; that made it their whole studie, how to deliuer this be∣sieged Prince. If they could rescue his person, they cared for no more: but presu∣med, that when he should appeare in the Countries vnder Taurus, he would soone haue an Armie at commaund, and be strong enough to hold Antiochus as hardly to worke as at any time before. Wherefore they dealt with one Bolis a Cretan, that was acquainted well with all the wayes in the Countrie, and particularly with the by-paths and exceeding difficult passages among those Rockes, whereon the Castle of Sardes stood. Him they tempted with great rewards, which he should receiue at the hands of Ptolemie, as well as of Achaeus; to doe his best for performance of their desire. He vndertooke the businesse: and gaue such likely reasons of bringing all to good effect, that they wrote vnto Achaeus, by one Arianus, a trustie messenger, whom Bolis found meanes to conueigh into the Castle. The faith of these Nego∣tiators Achaeus held most assured. They also wrote vnto him in priuie characters, or Ciphers, wherewith none saue he and they were acquainted: whereby hee knew, that it was no fained deuice of his Enemies, in the name of his friends. As for the messenger; he was a trustic fellow, and one whom Achaeus found, by examination, heartily affected vnto the side. But the Contents of the Epistle, which were, That hee should bee confident in the faith of Bolis, and of one Cambylus whom Bolis had wonne vnto the businesse, did somewhat trouble him. They were men to him vn∣knowne: and Cambylus was a follower of Antiochus; vnder whom he had the com∣maund of those , which held one of the Forts that blocked vp the Castle of Sardes. Neuerthelesse other way to escape hee saw none, than by putting himselfe to some aduenture. When the messenger had therefore passed often to and fro: it was at length concluded, That Bolis himselfe should come speake with , and conduct him forth. There was none other than good faith meant by any of the rest, saue onely by Bolis and Cambylus; which were Cretans, and (as all their Countrimen, Among these few I doe not except one, calling him∣selfe Eudaemon Andrew, a : who in one of his late shamelesse li∣bels, wherein he traduceth our King, Re∣ligion, and Countrey, with all the good & worthy men of whom he could learne the names, hath, by inserting my name, twice belied me; in calling me a Puritan, & one that haue been dangerous vn∣to my . It is an honour to bee ill spoken of by so diligeata supporter of Treasons, and Architect of Lies: in regard whereof I may not denie him the commen∣dation of Cre∣ticisme no lesse voluminous, than he in of name is be∣yond any the Cretians in el∣der times, that were alwayes Lyers, euill beasts, and flow bellies. . bist. lib. 8. some few excepted, haue beene, and still are) false knaues. These two held a con∣sultation together, that was, as Polybius obserues it, rightly Cretical: neither con∣cerning the safetie of him whose deliuerance they vndertooke, nor touching the discharge of their owne faith; but onely how to get most with least adoe and dan∣ger to themselues. Briefly they concluded, That first of all they would equally share betweene them ten Talents, which they had already receiued in hand: and then, That they would reueale the matter to Antiochus; offering to deliuer Achaeus vnto him, if they might be well rewarded both with present monie, and with pro∣mise of consideration answerable to the greatnesse of such a seruice, when it should be dispatched. Antiochus hearing this promise of Cambylus, was no lesse glad; than were the friends of Achaeus well pleased with the comfortable promises of Bolis. At length when all things were in readinesse on both sides, and that Bolis with Arianus was to get vp into the Castle, and conueigh Achaeus thence: Hee first went with Cambylus to speake with the King, who gaue him very priuate audience; and con∣firmed vnto him by word of mouth the assurance of his liberall promises. And after that, putting on the countenance of an honest man, and of one that was faith∣full vnto Ptolemie whom he had long serued; He accompanied Arianus vp into the Castle. At his comming thither, Hee was louingly entertained; yet questioned at large by Achaeus, touching all the weight of the businesse in hand. But he discoursed so well, and with such grauitie; that there appeared no reason of distrusting either his faith or judgement. Hee was an old Souldiour, had long been a Captaine vnder Ptolemie, and did not thrust himselfe into this businesse; but was inuited by honou∣rable and faithfull men. He had also taken a safe course, in winning (as it seemed) that other Countriman of his, who kept a Fort that stood in their way; and there∣by had already sundry times giuen safe passage and repassage vnto Arianus. But a∣gainst all these comfortable hopes, the importance of so great an aduenture stirred vp some diffidence. Achaeus therefore dealt wisely, and said, That hee would yet stay in the Castle a little longer: but that he meant to send away with Bolis three or foure of his friends; from whom when hee receiued better aduertisement, concer∣ning the likelihood of the enterprise, then would hee issue forth himselfe. Hereby he tooke order, not to commit himselfe wholly vnto the faith of a man vnknowne. But, as Polybius well notes, he did not consider that he playd the Cretian with a man of Crete: which is to say, That hee had to doe with one, whose knauery could not be auoided by circumspection. Bolis and Cambylus had layd their plots thus, That if Achaeus came forth alone, then should he easily be taken by the ambush prepared for him: if he were accompanied with many of his friends, then should Arianus be ap∣pointed to leade the way, as one that of late had troden it oft; and Bolis following behinde, should haue an eye vpon Achaeus, to preuent him not onely from escaping in the tumult, but from breaking his owne neeke, or otherwise killing himselfe: to the end that beeing taken aliue, Hee might bee to Antiochus the more welcome Pre∣sent. And in such order came they now forth: Arianus going before as Guide; the rest following, as the way serued, and Bolis in the Rere. Achaeus made none ac∣quainted with his purpose, till the very instant of his departure. Then signified hee the matter to his wife Laodice; and comforting her with hope as well as hee could, appointed foure of his especiall friends to beare him companie. They were all disguised: and one of them alone tooke vpon him to haue knowledge of the Greeke tongue; speaking and answering, as neede should require, for all, as if the rest had been Barbarians. Bolis followed them, craftily deuising vpon his businesse, and much perplexed. For (saith Polybius ) Though he were of Crete, and prone to surmise any thing to the mischiefe of another: yet could hee not see in the darke, nor know which of them was Achaeus, or whether Achaeus himselfe were there. The way was very vneasie, and in some places dangerous; especially to those that knew it not. Wherefore they were faine to stay in diuers places, and helpe one another vp or downe. But vpon euery occasion, they were all of them very officious toward A∣chaeus; lending him their hands, and taking such care of him, as easily gaue Bolis to vnderstand, that hee was the man: and so by their vnseasonable dutie, they vndid their Lord. When they came to the place where Cambylus lay in waite; Bolis whist∣led, and presently clasped Achaeus about the middle, holding him fast that hee should not stirre. So they were all taken by the Ambush, and carried forth with to Antiochus: who sate vp watching in his Pauilion, expecting the euent. The sight of Achaeus, brought in bound vnto him, did so astonish the King, that he was vnable to speake a word, and anon brake out into weeping. Yet was hee before informed of the plot, which might haue kept him from admiration: as also the next morning betimes assembling his friends together, Hee condemned Achaeus to a cruell death; which argues, that hee was not mooued with pittie towards this vnhappie man. Wherefore it was the generall regard of calamities, incident vnto great fortunes, that wrung from him these teares: as also the raritie of the accident, that made both him and his friends to wonder: though it bee so, that such a course as this of his, in employing two mischieuous knaues against one Traitour, doth not rarely succeed well; according to that Spanish Prouerbe, A vn traydor dos alleuosos. The death of Achaeus brought such astonishment vpon those which held the Castle, that after a∣while they gaue vp the place and themselues vnto the King; whereby he got entire possession of all to him belonging in the lesser Asia. Some yeeres passed after this, ere Antiochus was ready for his Expedition against the Parthians, and Hyrcanians. The Parthians were a little Nation of obscure begin∣nings, and commonly subiect vnto those that ruled in Media. In the great for Prouinces, after the death of Alexander, the Gouernment ouer them was committed by Antipater to one Philip, a man of small regard; shortly they fell to Eumenes; then to Antigonus; and from him, together with the Medes, to Seleucus: vnder whose po∣steritie they continued vntil the Reigne of Seleucus Callinicus, being ruled by Lieute∣nants of the Syrian Kings. The lustfull insolencie of one of these Lieutenants, to∣gether with the misfortune of Callinicus, that was vanquished and thought to bee slaine by the Gaules; did stirre vp Arsaces, a Noble man of the Countrie to seeke re∣uenge of iniuries done, and animate him to rebell. So he slue the Kings ; made himselfe King of the Parthians, and Lord of Hyrcania; fought prosperously with those that disturbed him in his beginnings; and tooke Seleucus Callinicus priso∣ner in battaile, whom he royally entertained, and dismissed. Hereby he wanne repu∣tation as a lawfull King: and by good gouernment of his Countrie, procured vnto himselfe such loue of his subiects, that his name was continued vnto his Successors; like as that of the Ptolemies in Aegypt, and that of the Caesars afterwards in Rome. Much about the same time the Bactrians rebelled: though these at length, and all belonging vnto the Seleucidae beyond Euphrates, increased the Parthians Dominion. Now Antiochus went against them with so strong an Armie, that they durst not meet him in plaine field; but kept themselues in Woods, or places of strength, and de∣fended the Streights and passages of Mountaines. The resistances they made auai∣led them not. For Antiochus had with him so great a multitude, and so well sorted, as hee needed not to turne out of the way, from those that lay fortified against him, in Woods and Streights betweene their Mountaines; it being easie to spare out of so great a number, as many as fetching a compasse about, might either get aboue the Enemies heads; or come behinde, and charge them on the backe. Thus did he often imploy against them his light armature: wherewith hee caused them to dis∣lodge, and giue way vnto his Phalanx; vpon which they durst not aduenture them∣selues in open ground. Arsaces, the second of the name, (for his Father was dead before this) was then King of Parthia: who though hee was confident in the fideli∣tie of his owne subiects; yet feared to encounter with so mighty an inuader. His hope was, that the bad wayes, and Desarts, would haue caused Antiochus, when he was at Ecbatane in Media, to giue ouer the journey, without proceeding much fur∣ther. This not so falling out; He caused the Wels and Springs in the Wildernesse, through which his Enemie must passe, to bee dammed vp and spoyled. By which meanes, and theresistance before spoken of, when he could no preuaile, Hee with∣drew himselfe out of the way; suffering the Enemie to take his pleasure for a time, in wasting the Countrie: wherein, without some victory obtained, hee could make no long abode. Antiochus hereby found, That Arsaces was nothing strongly prouided for the warre. Wherefore hee marched through the heart of Parthia: and then forward into Hyreania; where hee wanne Tambrace, the chiefe Citie of that Pro∣uince. This indignitie, and many other losses, caused Arsaces at length, when he had gathered an Armie that seemed strong enough, to aduenture a battaile. The issue thereof was such, as gaue to neither of the Kings hope of accomplishing his desires, without exceeding difficultie. Wherefore Arsaces craued Peace, and at length obtained it: Antiochus thinking it not amisse, to make him a friend, whom he could not make a subiect. The next Expedition of Antiochus, was against Euthydemus King of the Bactri∣ans; one that indeed had not rebelled against him or his Ancestors: but hauing got∣ten the Kingdome from those that had rebelled, kept it to himselfe. With Euthy∣demus he fought a battaile by the Riuer Arius, where he had the victory. But the victorie was not so greatly to his honour; as was the testimonie which he gaue of his owne priuate valour, in obtaining it. He was thought that day to haue demea∣ned him more couragiously, than did any one man in all his Armie. His Horse was slaine vnder him; and he himselfe receiued a wound in his mouth, whereby hee lost some of his teeth. As for Euthydemus, He withdrew himselfe backe into the fur∣ther parts of his Kingdome, and afterwards protracted the Warre, seeking how to end it by composition. So Embassadours passed betweene the Kings: Antiochus complaining, That a Countrie of his was vniustly vsurped from him: Euthydemus answering, That he had wonne it from the children of the Vsurpers: and further, That the Bactrians, a wilde Nation, could hardly be retained in order, saue by a King of their owne; for that they bordered vpon the Scythians, with whom if they should joyne, it would be greatly to the danger of all the Prouinces that lay behind them. These allegations, together with his owne wearinesse, pacified Antiochus, and made him willing to grant Peace, vpon reasonable Conditions. Demetrius, the sonne of Eu∣thydemns, being a goodly Gentleman, and employed by his Father as Embassadour in this Treatie of Peace, was not a little auaileable vnto a good Conclusion: For An∣tiochus liked him so well, that he promised to giue him in marriage one of his owne daughters: and therewithall permitted Euthydemus to retaine the Kingdome; cau∣sing him neuerthelesse to deliuer vp all his Elephants; as also to binde himselfe by oath, to such Couenants as he thought requisite. So Antiochus leauing the Bactrian in quiet, made a ouer , and came to the borders of , where he renewed with Sophagasenus, King of the In∣dians, the societie that had been betweene their Ancestors. The Indians had re∣mained subject vnto the Macedonians, for a little while, after Alexanders death. Eu∣menes in his Warre against Antigonus, raysed part of his forces out of their Coun∣trie. But when Antigonus after his victorie turned Westward, and was ouer-bu∣sied in a great ciuill Warre: then did one Sandrocottus, an Indian, stirre vp his Coun∣trimen to Rebellion; making himselfe their Captaine, and taking vpon him as Pro∣tector of their libertie. This Office and Title he soone changed, though not with∣out some contention, into the Name and Maiestie of a King. Finally hee got vnto himselfe, (hauing an Armie of sixe hundred thousand men) if not all India, yet as much of it as had beene Alexanders. In this Estate he had well confirmed himselfe, ere Seleucus Nicator could find leisure to call him to account. Neither did He faint, or humble himselfe, at the comming of Seleucus: but met him in field, as readie to defend his owne; so strongly and well appointed, that the Macedonian was conten∣ted, to make both peace and affinitie with him, taking only a reward of fiftie Ele∣phants. This League, made by the Founders of the Indian and Syrian kingdomes, was continued by some Offices of loue betweene their children, and now renewed by Antiochus: whose number of Elephants were increased thereupon, by the In∣dian King, to an hundred and fiftie: as also he was promised, to haue some treasure sent after him; which hee left one to receiue. Thus parted these two great Kings. Neither had the Indians, from this time forwards, in many generations, any busi∣nesse worthie of remembrance with the Westerne Countries. The posteritie of Sandrocottus, is thought to haue retained that kingdome vnto the dayes of Augustus Caesar: to whom Porus, then reigning in India, sent Embassadours with Presents, and an Epistle written in Greeke: wherein, among other things, Hee saide, That He had command ouer sixe hundred Kings. There is also found, in sundrie Authors, the mention of some which held that kingdome, in diuers Ages, euen vnto the time of Constantine the great: being all peraduenture of the same . But Antio∣chus, who in this Treatie with Sophagasenus carried himselfe as the worthier , receiuing Presents; and after marched home through Drangiana and Carmania, with such reputation, that all the Potentates not onely in the higher Asia, but on the hi∣ther side of Taurus, humbled themselues vnto him, and called him The Great: saw an end of his owne Greatnesse within few yeeres ensuing, by presuming to stand vpon points with the Romans; whose Greatnesse was the same in deed, that his was onely in seeming. §. III. The lewd Reigne of PTOLEMIE PHILOPATOR in Aegypt: with the tragicall ende of his fauourites, when hee was dead. ANTIOCHVS prepares to warre on the young child PTOLEMIE EPIPHANES, the sonne of PHILOPATOR. His irresolution in preparing for diuers warres at once. His Voyage toward the Hellespont. Hee seekes to hold amitie with the Romans, who make friendly shew to him; intending neuerthelesse to haue warre with him. His doings about the Hellespont; which the Romans make the first ground of their quarrell to him. THis Expedition being finished; Antiochus had leisure to repose him∣selfe a while, and studie which way to conuert the terror of his puis∣sance, for the enlargement of his Empire. Within two or three yeeres Ptolemie Philopator died: leauing his sonne Ptolemie Epiphanes, a young Boy, his successor in the kingdome; vnlikely by him to bee well defended, against a neighbour so mightie and ambitious. This Ptolemie surna∣med Philopator, that is to say, a louer of his Father, is thought to haue had that sur∣name giuen him in meere derision; as hauing made away both his Father and Mo∣ther. Iustin. l. 30. His yong yeeres, being newly past his childhood when he beganne to reigne, may seeme to discharge him of so horrible a crime, as his Fathers death: yet the of all his following life, makes him not vnlike to haue done any mis∣chiefe, whereof he could be accused. Haung wonne the battail at Raphia, He gaue himselfe ouer to sensuality; & was wholy gouerned by a Strumpet called . At her instigation Hee murdered his owne wife and sister; which had aduentured herselfe with him, in that onely dangerous Action by him vndertaken and perfor∣med with honor. The Lieutenant-ships of his Prouinces, with all Commands in his Armie, and Offices whatsoeuer; were wholly referred vnto the disposition of this Agathoclea, and her brother Agathocles, and of a filthie Bawd that was mo∣ther vnto them both. So these three gouerned the Realme at their pleasure, to the great griese of all the Countrie, till Philopator died: who hauing reigned seuen∣teene yeeres, left none other sonne than Ptolemie Epiphanes a childe of fiue yeeres old, begotten on Arsinoe that was his sister and wife. After the Kings death; beganne to take vpon him, as Protector of young Epiphanes, and Gouernour of the Land. He assembled the Macedons (which were the Kings ordinarie forces in pay, not all borne in Macedonia, but the race of those that abode in Aegypt with Pto∣lemie the first, and would not bee accounted Aegyptians; as neither would the Kings themselues) and bringing foorth vnto them his sister Agathoclea, with the yong King in her armes; beganne a solemne Oration. He told them, That the deceased father of this their King, had committed the child into the armes of his sister, but vnto the faith of them: on whose valiant right hands, the whole state of the Kingdome did now relie. He besought them therefore that they would bee faithfull, and, as great need was, defend their King against the treason of one Tlepolemus, an ambitious man, who went about to set the Diademe vpon his owne head, being a stranger to the Royall bloud. Herewithall hee produced before them a witnesse, that should justifie his accusation against Tlepolemus. Now though it were so, that he deliuered all this with a fained passion of sorrow, and counterfeiting of teares: yet the Macedons that heard him, regarded not any word that he spake; but stood laughing, and talking one to another, what a shamelesse dissembler he was, to take so much vpon him, as if he knew not how greatly hee was hated. And so brake vp the Assembly: Hee that had called it, being scarce aware how. Agathocles therefore, whom the old Kings fauour had made mighty, but neither wise nor well qualified; thought to goe to worke, as had formerly beene his manner, by vsing his authoritie, to the suppression of those that he distrusted. Hee haled out of a Temple the mo∣ther-in-law of Tlepolemus; & cast her into prison. This filled Alexandria with rumors, and made the people (though accustomed to suffer greater things, whilest they were committed in the old Kings name) to meet in knots together, and vtter one to ano∣ther their mindes; wherein they had conceiued extreme hate, against these three misgouernours of the old King. Besides their consideration of the pre∣sent injurie done to Tlepolemus, they were somewhat also mooued with feare of harme; which, in way of requitall, Tlepolemus was likely to doe vnto the Citie. For He was, though a man most vnapt for Gouernment, as afterwards hee proued; yet no bad Souldier, and well beloued of the Armie. It was also then in his power, to stop the prouision of victuals which was to come into Alexandria. As these wrought with the people: so by the remedie which Agathocles vsed, were the more hastily, and more violently stirred vnto vprore. He secretly appre∣hended of their number, whom he suspected of conspiracie against him; and deliuered him vnto a follower of his owne, to be examined by torture. This poore souldior was carried into an inner roome of the Palace, and there stripped out of all his apparrell to be tormented. But whilest the whippes were brought foorth, and all things in a readinesse for that purpose, there was brought vnto the Minister of Agathocles, a sad report of Tlepolemus his being at hand. Hereupon the Examiner, and his Torturers, one after another, went out of the roome; leauing Moeragenos the Souldior alone by himselfe, and the dores open. Hee perceiuing this, naked as he was, conueigh himselfe out of the Palace, and got vnto the Macedonians; of whom hee found some in a Temple thereby at dinner. The Macedonians were as fierce in maintenance of their Priuiledges, as are the Turkes . Being assured therefore that one of their fellowes had thus been vsed; they fell to Armes in a great rage, and began to force the Palace: crying out, That they see the King, and not leaue him in possession of such a dangerous man. The whole multi∣tude in the Citie, with lowd clamours, made no lesse than the Souldiours, though to lesse effect. So the old Bawd Oenanthe fled into a Temple: her Sonne and Daughter staid in the Court, vntill the King was taken from them; and they, by his permission which hee easily gaue, and by appointment of those that now had him in their hands, deliuered vp to the furie of the people. himselfe was stabbed to death, by some which therein did the office of friends; though in man∣ner of enemies. His sister was dragged naked vp and downe the strectes; as was also his mother, with all to them belonging: the enraged multitude vpon them a barbarous execution of justice; biting them, pulling out their eyes, and tea∣ring them in pieces. These troubles in Aegypt, serued well to stirre vp King Antiochus; who had very good leisure, though he wanted all pretence, to make warre vpon young Ptole∣mie. Philip of Macedon had the same desire, to get what part he could of the childes estate. But it happened well, that Ptolemie Philopator in the Punick Warre, which was now newly ended, had done many good offices vnto the Romans. Vnto them therefore the Aegyptians addressed themselues, and craued helpe against these two Kings: who though they secretly maligned one the other, yet had entred into co∣uenant to diuide betweene them, all that belonged vnto this Orphan; whose Father had beene Confederate with them both. So . l. 30. M. was sent from Rome, to protect from all violence the King of Aegypt; especially against Antiochus. As for the Macedonian; Hee was very soone found , with warre at his owne doores. Also Scopas the Aetolian, being a Pensioner to the Aegyptian, was sent into Greece to rayse an Armie of Mercinaries. What Lepidus did in Aegypt, I doe not find: and therefore thinke it not improbable, that Hee was sent thither onely one of the three Embassadours, . 31. in the beginning of the Warre with Philip, as hath beene shewed before. As for Scopas; He shortly after went vp into Syria with his Armie: where winning many places, among the rest of his Acts, He subdued the Iewes; who seeme to haue yeelded themselues a little before vnto , at such time as they saw him prepare for his Warre, and despaired of receiuing helpe from Egypt. But Vid. Ioseph. . it was not long, ere all these Victories of Scopas came to nothing. For the very next . l. 12. c. 3. yeere following, which was (according to Eusebius ) the same yeere that Philip was beaten at Cynoscephalae; Antiochus vanquished Scopas in battaile, and recouered all that had beene lost. Among the rest, the Iewes with great willingnesse returned vn∣der his obedience; and were therefore by him very gently entreated. The Land of Aegypt this great King did forbeare to inuade; and gaue it out, that he meant to bestow a daughter of his owne in marriage vpon Ptolemie: either hoping, as may seeme, that the Countrie would willingly submit it selfe vnto him, if this yong child should happen to miscarrie; or else that greater purchase might be made in the Westerne parts of Asia, whilest Philip was held ouer-laboured by the Romans. It appeares that he was very much distracted; hunting (as we say) two Hares at once with one Hound. The quarrels betweene Attalus, Philip, and the Greekes, promised to affoord him great aduantage, if he should bring his Armie to the Hellespont. On the other side, the state of Aegypt being such as hath beene de∣clared, seemed easie to be swallowed vp at once. One while therefore hee tooke what hee could get in Syria: where all were willing (and the Iewes among the rest, though hitherto they had kept faith with the Aegyptian ) to yeeld him obedience. Another while, letting Aegypt alone, He was about to make inuasion vpon Attalus his Kingdome; yet suffered himselfe easily to be perswaded by the Roman Embas∣sadors, and desisted from that enterprise. Hauing thus farre gratified the Romans; He sends Embassadours to the Senate, to conclude a perfect amitie betweene him and them. It is not lightly to be ouerpassed, That these his Embassadours were lo∣uingly entertained at Rome; and dismissed, with a Decree and answere of the Senate, altogether to the honour of King Antiochus. But this answere of the Romans was not sincere; being rather framed according to regard of the Kings good liking, than of their owne intent. They had not as yet made an end with Philip: neither would they gladly be troubled with two great warres at once. Wherefore, not standing much vpon the nice examination of what belonged vnto their honour, they were content to giue good words for the present. In the meane time Antiochus fights with Scopas in Syria, and shortly prepares to winne some Townes elsewhere, belong∣ing vnto Ptolemie; yet withall hee sends an Armie Westward, intending to make what profit hee can of the distractions in Greece. Likewise it is considerable, as an argument of his much irresolution, How notwithstanding his attempts vpon both of their Kingdomes, he offered one of his daughters to Ptolemie, and another to Eu∣menes the sonne of Attalus, newly King of Pergamus: seeking each of their friend∣ships, at one and the same time, when he sought to make each of them a spoile. Thus was he acting and deliberating at once; being carried with inexplicable desire of repugnancies; which is a disease of great, and ouer-swelling . How∣soeuer it was, He sent an Armie to Sardes by Land, vnder two of his sonnes: willing them there to stay for him; whilest he himselfe with a Fleete an hundred Gallies, and two hundred other vessels, intended to passe along by the Coasts of Cilicia and Caria, taking in such places as held for the Aegyptian. It was a notable Act the Rhodians, that, whilest the war of Philip lay yet vpon their hands, they ad∣uentured vpon this great Antiochus. They sent vnto him a proud Embassage: wher∣by they gaue him to vnderstand, That if he passed forward beyond a certaine Pro∣montorie in Cilicia, they would meete him and fight with him; not for any quar∣rell of theirs vnto him; but because hee should not ioyne with Philip their enemie, and helpe him against the Romans. It was insolently done of them, neither seemed it otherwise, to prescribe such limits vnto the King: yet he tempered himselfe, and without any shew of indignation gaue a gentle answere; partly himselfe to their Em∣bassadours; partly vnto their whole Citie, by Embassadours which he thither sent. He his desire, to renew the ancient Confederacies betweene his Ancestors and them: and willed them not to be afraid, lest his comming should tend vnto any hurt, either of them, or of their Confederates. As touching the Romans whom they thought that he would molest: they were (he said) his verie good friends; where∣of, he thought there needed no better proofe, than the entertainement and answer by them newly giuen to his Embassadours. The Rhodians appeare to haue been a cunning people, and such as could foresee what weather was like to happen. This answer of the King, and the relation of what had passed betweene his Embassadours and the Senate, mooued them not a whit; when they were informed shortly after, that the Macedonian warre was ended at the battaile of Cynoscephalae. They knew that Antiochus his turne would be next; and prepared to be forward on the stronger side. Wherefore they would not bee con∣tented to sit still; vnlesse the Townes on the South Coast of Asia, belonging to Pto∣lemie their friend and Confederate, were suffered to bee at quiet. Herein also they did well; for that they had euer been greatly beholding to all the race of the Pto∣lemies. They therefore, in this time of necessitie, gaue what aid they could vnto all the subiects of the Aegyptian in those parts. In like manner did King Eumenes, the sonne of Attalus, as concerning the warre that followed, between An∣tiochus and the Romans. when King Antiochus made a friendly offer, to bestow of his daughters vpon him in marriage: Hee excused himselfe, and would not haue her. Attalus and , his brethren, wondered at this. But he told them, that the Romans would surely make warre vpon Antiochus; and therein finally pre∣uaile. Wherefore he said, That by abstayning from this affinitie, it should be in his power to ioyne with the Romans, and strengthen himselfe greatly with their friend∣ship. Contrariwise, if hee leaned to Antiochus: as he must be partaker in his ouer∣throw; so was he sure to be oppressed by him, as by an ouer-mightie neighbour, if he happened to win the victorie. Antiochus himselfe wintered about Ephesus: where hee tooke such order as hee thought conuenient, for the reducing of Smyrna and Lampsacus to obedience; that had vsurped their libertie, and obstinately stroue to maintaine it, in hope that the Romans would protect them. In the beginning of the Spring hee sailed vnto the Hellespont: where hauing won some Townes that Philip had gotten not long before this, hee passed ouer into Europe side; and in short space the Chersonesus. Thence went hee to Lysimachia: which the Thracians had gotten and destroyed, when Philip withdrew his Garrison thence, to employ it in the Roman warre. The Aetolians obiected as a crime vnto Philip, in the Conference before T. Quintius, that hee had oppressed Lysimachia, by thrusting thereinto a Garrison. Hereunto Philip made answere, that his Garrison did not oppresse the Towne, but saue it from the Barbarians: who tooke and sackt it, as soone as the Macedonians were gone. That this answere was good and substanciall, though it were not accepted as such; might appeare by the miserable case, in which Antiochus found Lysimachia at his comming thither. For the Towne was vtterly razed by the Barbarians; and the people, carri∣ed away into slauerie. Wherefore the King tooke order to haue it reedified: as also to redeeme those that were in bondage; and to recollect as many of the Citi∣zens, as were dispersed in the Countrie thereabout. Likewise hee was carefull to al∣lure thither, by hopefull promises, new inhabitants; and to replenish the Citie with the wonted frequencie. Now to the end that men should not be terrified from comming thither to dwell, by any feare of the neighbour Thracians: he tooke a iour∣nie in hand against those barbarous people, with the one halfe of his Armie; leauing the other to repaire the Citie. These paines he tooke; partly in regard of the conuenient situation, and former glory of Lysimachia; partly for that he thought it highly redounding vnto his owne honour, to recouer and establish the dominion in those parts, which his fore-father Seleucus Nicator had won from Lysimachus, and thereby made his Kingdome of greater extent, than it occupied in any following time. But for this ambition hee shall dearely pay: and as after that victorie against Lysimachus, the death of King Seleucus followed shortly; so shall a deadlie wound of the Kingdome founded by Seleucus ensue very speedily, after the reconquest of the same Countrie, which was the last of Seleucus his purchases. §. IIII. The Romans hold friendly correspondence with ANTIOCHVS, during their warre with PHILIP: after which they quarrell with him. The doings of HANNIBAL at Car∣thage: whence hee is chased by his enemies, and by the Romans: His flight vnto the King ANTIOCHVS. The Aetolians murmure against the Romans in Greece. The warre of the Romans and Achaeans, with NABIS the Tyrant of Lacedaemon. The departure of the Romans out of Greece. T. QVINTIVS his Triumph. Peace denied to ANTIO∣CHVS by the Romans. FOr the Romans, though they were vnable to smother their desire of war with Antiochus, whereof notice was alreadie taken both by their friends and by their enemies: yet was it much against their will to keepe the rumour on foot, which they meant shortly to make good, of this intended warre, so long as they wanted matter of quarrell; whereof they were furnished, by this enterprise of the Kings about Lysimachia. It was not long, since King Attalus, a friend and helper of the Romans in their war with Philip, could obtain of them none other help against Antiochus, than Embassadors to speake for him; because the one of these Kings was held no lesse a friend than the o∣ther. Neither did there afterwards passe between them any other offices, than very friendly. Antiochus, at the request of their Embassadors, withdrew his Inuasion from the Kingdome of Pergamus: also verie shortly after he sent Embassadours to them, to make a perfect League of amitie betweene them. This was whilest as yet they were busied with Philip; and therfore had reason to answere his good will with good acceptation: as they did in outward shew. But when the Macedonian war was at an end, and all, or most of all the States in Greece, were become little better than Cli∣ents vnto the Romans: then was all this good correspondence changed, into termes of worse, but more plaine, meaning. For T. Quintius, with his ten Counsailors sent from Rome, requited (as hath beene Ch. 4. §. . shewed before) with a commination of warre, this kings gratulation of their victorie; as also his long-professed amitie, and desire to continue in the same. These ten Counsailors were able to informe T. Quintius, and acquaint him with the purpose of the Senate: whereof yet it seemes that he was not ignorant before; since, in regard of Antiochus, hee was the more inclinable vnto peace with Philip. It was therefore agreed, when they diuided themselues to make progresse through di∣ners quarters of Greece for the execution of their late Decree, That two of them should visit King Antiochus; and the rest, where occasion serued, vse diligence to make a partie strong against him. Neither was the at Rome vnmindfull of the busines: wherein lest T. Quintius, with his ten Assistants, should happen to forget any thing to their parts belonging; L. Cornelius was sent from Rome of purpose, to deale with the King about those controuersies, that were betweene him and Ptole∣mie. What other priuate instructions Cornelius had; wee may coniecture by the mannaging of this his Embassage. For comming to Selymbria: and there vnder∣standing that P. Villius and L. Terentius, hauing beene sent by Titus, were at Lysima∣ehia, He hastned thither; whither also came P. (another of the ten Coun∣sailours) from Bargillae, to be present at the Conference. Hegesianax and Lysias were also there; the same, who had lately brought from Titus those peremptorie Condi∣tions, which the Embassadours present shall expound vnto their Master. After a few dayes Antiochus returned from his Thracian Expedition. The meeting and en∣tertainment betweene Him and these Romans, was in appearance full of loue. But when they came to treat of the businesse in hand; this good mood was quite altered. L. , in two or three words, briefly deliuered his errand from Rome: which was, That Antiochus had reason to deliuer backe vnto Ptolemie those Townes of his, whereof he had lately gotten possession. Hereunto he added, and that very earnestly, That hee must also giue vp the Townes of late belonging Philip; and by him newly occupied. For what could bee more absurd, than such folly in the Romans; as to let Antiochus enioy the profit of that warre, wherein they had labou∣red so much, and He done nothing? Further He warned the King, that hee should not molest those Cities that were free: and finally Hee demaunded of him, vpon what reason hee was come ouer with so great an Armie into Europe; for that other cause of his iournie there was none probable, than a purpose to make war vpon the Romans. To this the King made answere, That hee wondered why the Romans should so trouble themselues, with thinking vpon the matters of Asia: where with He praied them to let him alone; euen as He, without such curiositie, suffered them to doe in Italie what they thought good. As for his comming ouer into Europe: they saw well enough what busines had drawne him thither; namely, the warre a∣gainst the barbarous Thracians: the rebuilding of Lysimachia, and the recouerie of Townes to him belonging, in Thrace and Chersonesus. Now concerning his title vn∣to that Countrie, He deriued it from Seleucus: who made conquest thereof, by his victorie against Lysimachus. Neither was it so, that any of the places in controuersie betweene him and the other Kings, had beene still of old belonging to the or Aegyptians; but had beene seized on by them, or by others from whom they receiued them, at such time as his Ancestors, being Lords of those Countries, were hindred by multiplicitie of busines, from looking vnto all that was their owne. Finally he willed them, neither to stand in feare of him, as if hee intended ought a∣gainst them from Lysimachia; since it was his purpose to bestow this Citie vpon one of his sonnes, that should reigne therein: nor yet to be grieued with his proceedings in Asia; either against the free Cities, or against the King of Aegypt; since it was his meaning to make the free Cities beholding vnto himselfe, and to ioyne ere long with , not onely in friendship, but in a bond of neere affinitie. Cornelius ha∣uing heard this, and being perhaps vnable to refute it; would needes heare further, what the Embassadours of Smyrna and of Lampsacus, whom he had there with him, could say for themselues. The Embassadors of , being called in, began a tale; wherein they seemed to accuse the King before the Romans, as it were before competent Iudges. Antiochus therefore interrupted them, and bade them holde their peace; forasmuch as he had not chosen the Romans, but would rather take the Citizens of Rhodes, to be Arbitrators betweene Him and them. Thus the Treatie held some few dayes, without any likelihood of effect. The Romans, hauing not laide their complaints in such sort, as they might be a conueni∣ent foundation of the war by them intended: nor yet hauing purpose to depart wel satisfied, and thereby to corroborate the present peace; were doubtfull how to or∣der the matter, in such wise as they might neither too rudely, like boisterous Gallo∣Greekes, pretend only the goodnesse of their swordes; nor yet ouer-modestly, to re∣taine among the Greekes an opinion of their iustice, for beare the occasion of making themselues great. The King on the other side was wearie of these redious ghests; that would take none answere, and yet scarce knew what to say. At length came newes, without any certaine author, That Ptolemie was dead. Hereof neither the King, nor the Romans, would take notice, though each of them were desirous to ha∣sten into Aegypt: Antiochus, to take possession of the Kingdome; and L. Corne∣lius, to preuent him thereof, and set the Countrie in good order. Cornelius was sent from Rome Embassadour, both to Antiochus and to Ptolemie: which gaue him oc∣casion to take leaue, and prepare for his Aegyptian voyage. Both He, and his fellow Embassadors, had good leaue to depart all together: and the King made readie, to be in Aegypt with the first. To his sonne Seleucus hee committed his Ar∣mie; and left him to ouer-see the building of Lysimachia: but all his Sea-forces tooke along with him, and sailed vnto Ephesus. Thence hee sent Embassadours to T. Quintius: whom he requested to deale with him in this matter of Peace, after such sort, as might stand with honestie and good faith. But as he was further proceeding on his voyage; He was perfectly informed that Ptolemie was aliue. This made him beare another way from Aegypt: and afterwards a tempest, with a grieuous ship∣wracke, made him, without any further attempt on the way, glad to haue safely re∣couered his Port of Seleucia. Thence went he to Antiochia, where he wintered: se∣cure, as might appeare, of the Roman warre. But the Romans had not so done with him. During the Treatie at Lysimachia, (at leastwise not long before or after it) one of their that had beene sent vnto the Macedonian gaue him counsaile, as in a point highly tending to his good; Not to rest contented with the Peace which was vnto him by the Romans, but to desire societie with them, whereby they should bee bound to haue the same friends and enemies. And this he aduised him to doe quickly, before the Warre brake out with Antiochus; lest otherwise he might seeme, to haue awaited some fit occasion of taking Armes againe. They who dealt thus plainely, did not meane to be satisfied with weake excuses. In like manner some of the Greekes were sollicited; and particularly the Aetolians, That constantly and faithfully they should abide in the friendship of the People of Rome. It was needlesse to say plain∣ly whereto this entreatie tended: the froward answere made by the , de∣clares them to haue well vnderstood the purpose. They complained, that they were not alike honoured by the Romans after the Victorie, as they had beene du∣ring the Warre. They that so complained were the most moderate of them. O∣thers cryed out, that they had beene wronged, and defrauded of what was promi∣sed vnto them: vpbrayding withall the Romans, as men to them beholding; not onely for their Victorie ouer Philip; but euen for helping them to set foot in Greece, which else they neuer could haue done. Hereto the Roman gaue gentle answeres: telling them that there was no more to doe, than to send Embassadors to the Se∣nate, and vtter their griefes; and then should all be well. Such care tooke the Romans in Greece, for their Warre intended against Antio∣chus. The fame hereof arriuing at Carthage, gaue matter vnto the enemies of Han∣nibal, wherewith both to picke a thanke of the Roman Senate; and to chace out of their Citie this honourable man, whom they so greatly hated. Hee had of late ex∣ercised his vertue against them in the Ciuill administration; and giuen them an o∣uerthrow, or two, in the long Robe. The Iudges at that time bore all the sway in Carthage: holding their places during life; and hauing subiect vnto them, the liues, goods, and fame of all the rest. Neither did they vse this their power with mode∣ration: but conspired in such wise together, that whoso offended any one of them, should haue them all to be his enemies; which being once knowne, He was sure to be soone accused and condemned. In this their impotent rule of the Citie, Hanni∣bal was chosen Praetor. By vertue of which Office, though hee was superiour vn∣to them during that yeere: yet had it not beene their manner to beare much regard vnto such an annual Magistrate, as at the yeeres end must be accomptable to them, if ought were laid vnto his charge. Hannibal therefore sending sor one of the Quae∣stors, or officers of the Treasurie, to come and speake with him: the proud Quae∣stor set lightly thereby, and would not come. For he was of the aduerse Faction to Hannibal; and men of his place were to bee chosen into the Order of Iudges: in contemplation whereof, hee was filled alreadie with the spirit of his future Great∣nesse. But he had not to doe with such a tame Praetor, as were they that had occu∣pied the place before. Hannibal sent for him by a Pursiuant; and hauing thus ap∣prehended him, brought him into judgement before a publique assemblie of the people. There he not onely shewed, what the vndutiful stubbornnesse of this Quae∣stor had beene; but how vnsufferable the insolencie of all the Iudges at the pre∣sent was: whose vnbridled power made them to regard neither Lawes nor Magi∣strates. To this Oration when hee perceiued that all the Citizens were attentiue and fauourable; He foorthwith propounded a Law, which passed with the generall good liking; That the Iudges should be chosen from yeere to yeere, and no one man be continued in that Office two yeeres together. If this Law had beene passed, be∣fore he passed ouer Iberus: it would not perhaps haue beene in the power of Hanno, to haue brought him vnto necessitie of reforming another grieuance, concerning the Roman Tribute. This Tribute the Carthaginians were faine to leuie by Taxa∣tion layed vpon the whole Commonaltie; as wanting money in their publique Treasurie, wherewith to defray eyther that, or diuers other needefull charges. Hannibal considering this, beganne to examine the publique Reuenues; and to take a perfect note, both how much came into the Treasurie, by wayes and meanes whatsoeuer; and in what sort it was thence laid out. So he found, That the ordina∣rie charges of the Common-wealth did not exhaust the Treasurie: but that wicked Magistrates, and corrupt Officers, turning the greatest part of the monies to their owne vse, were thereby faine to load the people with needlesse burdens. -Hereof he made such plaine demonstration, that these Robbers of the common Treasure were compelled to restore, with shame, what they had gotten by knauerie: and so the Carthaginians were freed from the necessitie of making such poore shifts, as for∣merly they had vsed, when they knew not the valew of their owne Estate. But as the vertue of Hannibal, was highly commended by all that were good Citizens: so they of the Roman Faction, which had, since the making of the peace vntill now, little regarded him, beganne to rage extremely; as being by him stript of their goods, and ill-employed authoritie, both at once, euen when they thought themselues to haue been in full possession of the vanquished Carthage. Where∣fore they sent letters to their friends at Rome: wherein they complained, as if the Barchine Faction grew strong againe, and Hannibal would shortly be in armes. Que∣stionlesse, if oppressing the Citie by iniustice, and robbing the Treasurie, were the onely way to hold Carthage in peace with Rome: these enemies to the Barchines might well crie out, That hauing done their best alreadie to keepe all in quiet, they saw none other likelihood than of Warre. But hauing none other matter to al∣leadge, than their owne inuentions: they said, That Hannibal was like vnto a wilde beast, which would neuer be tamed: That secret messages past betweene him, and King Antiochus: and that hee was wont to complaine of idlenesse, as if were harmefull to ; with what else to like effect they could imagine. These ac∣cusations they directed not vnto the Senate: but addressing their letters craftily, euery one to the best of his owne friends at Rome, and such as were Senators; they wrought so well, that neither publike notice of their Conspiracie was taken at Car∣thage; nor the authoritie of the Roman Senate, wanting to the fortherance of their malicious purpose. Onely P. Scipio is said to haue admonished the Fathers, that they should not thus dishonourably subscribe, and become Seconds to the accu∣sers of Hannibal: as if they would oppresse, by suborning or countenancing false witnesses against him, the Man, against whom in warre they had not of long time preuailed, nor vsed their Victorie in such base manner, when they obtained it. But the Romans were not all so great-minded as Scipio: they wished for some such ad∣uantage against Hannibal; and were glad to haue found it. Three Embassadours they sent ouer to Carthage, C. Seruilius, Q. Terentius, and M. Claudius Marcellus; whose very names import sufficient cause of bad affection to Hannibal. These ha∣uing past the Sea, were entertained by those that had procured their ; and, being by them instructed how to carrie themselues, gaue out, That they were sent to end some controuersies, betweene the Carthaginians and Masanissa. But Hannibal had kept such good espiall vpon the Romans, that hee knew their mea∣ning well enough: against which he was neuer vnprepared. It were enough to say, That hee escaped them by flight: but in the actions of so famous a man, I hold it not impertinent to rehearse the particularities. Hauing openly shewed himselfe, as was his manner, in the place of Assembly, Hee went foorth of the Towne when it beganne to wexe darke, accompanied with two which were ignorant of his de∣termination; though such as he might well trust. Hee had appointed Horses to be in a readinesse at a certaine place: whence riding all night, Hee came to a Towre of his owne by the Sea-side. There had a Ship furnished with all things need∣full; as hauing long expected the necessitie of some such journey. So He bade A∣frick farewell; lamenting the misfortune of his Countrie, more than his owne. Pas∣sing ouer to the Ile of Cercina; he found there in the Hauen some Merchants ships of Carthage. They saluted him respectiuely: and the chiefe among them beganne to enquire, whither hee was bound. He , Hee went Embassadour to Tyre: and that he intended there in the Iland to make a sacrifice; whereto Hee all the Merchants, and Masters of the Shippes. It was hote weather: and therefore Hee would needs hold his Feast vpon the shore; where, because there wanted couert, He made them bring thither all their sailes and yards to be vsed in stead of Tents. They did so; and feasted with him till it was late at night: at which time hee left them there asleepe; and putting to Sea, held on his course to Tyre. All that night, and the day following, Hee was sure not to bee pursued. For the Merchants did neither make haste to send any newes of him to Carthage, as thinking him to be gone Embassadour: neither could they, without some losse of time, such of them as made most speed homeward, get away from Cercina; being busied a while in sitting their tackle. At Carthage, the misse of so great a person was diuersly construed. Some ghessed aright, That he was fled. But the more common opinion was, That the Romans had made him away. At length came newes where he had been seene: and then the Roman Embassadours, hauing none other thither, accused him (with an euill grace) as a troubler of the Peace; whereby they onely discouered the mischiefe by them intended against him, and the malice of their Senate; missing the while their purpose, and causing men to vnderstand, that Hee fled not thus with∣out great reason. Hannibal, comming to Tyre, the Mother-Citie of Carthage, was there entertained Royally: as one, in whose great worth and honour the Tyrians, by reason of affini∣tie betweene their Cities, thought themselues to haue interest. Thence went hee to Antioch; and, finding the King departed, visited his sonne in Daphne: who friend∣ly welcommed him, and sent him vnto his Father at Ephesus, that exceedingly reioy∣ced at his comming. As Antiochus had cause to be glad, in that he had gotten Hannibal: so had the Ro∣mans no great cause to bee therefore sorrie; otherwise than as they had much dis∣graced themselues, by discouery of their impotent malice, in chacing him thus out of his Countrie. For it would not prooue alike easie vnto this great Commander, to make stout Souldiours of base Asiatiques; as it had been by his trayning and disci∣pline, to make very and skilfull men of Warre of the Spaniards, Africans, Gaules, and other Natious, that were hardie though vnexperienced. Or were it supposed, that one mans worth, especially being so extraordinary, could alter the nature of a cowardly people: yet was it there with all considerable, that the vani∣ties of Antiochus, the pride of his Court, the basenesse of his Flatterers, and a thou∣sand other such vexations, would bee farre more powerfull in making vnprofitable the vertue of Hannibal; now a desolate and banished man, than had been the villa∣nie of Hanno and his Complices, hindering him in those Actions wherein hee had the high Command, and was seconded by his warlike brethren. Wherefore the name of this Great Carthaginian, would onely helpe to the Roman Victo∣rie: or if it further serued to hearten Antiochus, and make him lesse carefull to auoid the warre; then should it further serue, to justifie the Romans in their quarrell. And it seemes indeed, that it was no little part of their care, to get a faire pretence of ma∣king warre. For Antiochus, as is said before, hauing newly sent Embassadours to T. Quintius, requiring that the Peace might faithfully be kept: it was not probable, that he had any meaning to take Armes; vnlesse by meere violence hee were there∣to enforced. Onely the Aetolians were greatly suspected, as a turbulent people, de∣sirous of innouation, and therefore practising with this Great King; whom they wished to see among them in Greece. In this regard, and to appease them; they had of late been answered with gentle words by one of the ten Counsailours, That the Senate would grant them whatsoeuer with reason they should aske. But this pro∣mise was too large, and vnaduised. For when their Embassadours came to Rome, the Senate would grant them nothing; but wholly referred them to T. Quintius, who sauoured them least. Hereat they murmured, but knew not how to right them∣selues: otherwise than by speaking such words, as might hasten the Romans out of Greece for very shame; who had no desire to be thence gone. The dayly talke at Rome was of warre with Antiochus; but in Greece, when the Romans would leaue the Countrey. For the Aetolians were wont to vpbraid the rest of the Greekes, with the vaine libertie which the Romans had proclaimed, saying, That these their Deliuerers had layd heauier fetters vpon them, than formerly they did weare; but yet brighter and fairer, than those of the Macedonian: likewise, That it was a gracious act of Titus, to take from the legs of the Greeks their chaine, & tie it about their necks. There was indeed no cause of tarrying longer in Greece, if the Romans had no other meaning than what they pretended. For Philip had made no de∣laie, in accomplishment of that which was laid vpon him: all the Townes of Greece were at libertie, and the whole Countrey at peace, both with the Romans, and with∣in it selfe. As for Antiochus; He made it his dayly suit, That the Peace him and Rome, such as it was, might be confirmed, and strengthened by a League of more assurance. Neuerthelesse T. Quintius would needs feare that meant forth with to seize vpon Greece, as soone as hee and his Armie were thence departed. And in this regard, He retained still in his owne hands Chalcis, Demetrias, and the A∣crocorinthus: by benefit of which Townes, he might the better withstand the dan∣gerous Inuasion like to be made by Antiochus. Suteable vnto the doings of Quin∣tius were the reports of the tenne Embassadours, that had been sent ouer to assist him; when they returned backe into the Citie. Antiochus, they said, would fall vpon Greece: wherein he should finde not onely the Aetolians, but Nabis the Tyrant of Lacedaemon, readie to giue him entertainment. Wherefore there was none other way, than to doe somewhat against these their suspected enemies: especially against Nabis, who could worst make resistance; whilest Antiochus was farre away in Syria, and not intentiue to his businesse. These went not onely current through the Citie, among the Vulgar; but found such credit with the chiefe of the Senate, that in the following yeere, against which time it was expected that Antiochus should be ready to take his great enterprise in hand; P. Cornelius Scipio the desired, and obtained, a second Consulship, with in∣tention to be Generall in the Warre, against the King and his Hannibal. For the pre∣sent, the businesse with Nabis was referred vnto Titus; to deale with him as hee thought good. This would bee a faire colour of his longer tarriance in Greece. Therefore he was glad of the employment: whereof also hee knew that many of the Greekes would not be sorry; though for his owne part, wanted all good pre∣tence of taking it in hand. For Nabis had entred into friendship with him, two or three yeeres before this, as is alreadie shewed, whilest hee had Warre with Philip: and had further beene contented for the Romans sake to bee at peace with the A∣chaeans; neither since that time had hee done any thing, whereby hee should draw vpon himselfe this . Hee was indeed a detestable Tyrant, and hated of the Achaeans; as one, that besides his owne wicked Conditions, had formerly done to them great mischiefe. Titus therefore had a plausible Theme, whereon to dis∣course before the Embassages of all the Confederate Cities; Which hee caused to meete for that purpose at Corinth. He told them, That in the warre with Philip, not onely the Greekes, but the Romans themselues, had each their apart (which hee there briefly rehearsed) that should stirre them vp, and cause them to be . But in this which hee now propounded to them concerning Nabis, the Romans had none other interest, than onely the making perfect of their honour, in setting all Greece at liberty: which noble Action was in some sort maimed, or incompleat, whilest the noble Citie of Argos was left in subjection to a Tyrant, that had lately occupied it. It therefore belonged vnto them, the Greekes, duly to consider, whether they thought the deliuerance of Argos a matter worthy to be vndertaken; or whe∣ther otherwise to auoid all further trouble, they could bee well contented to leaue it as it was. This concerned them, and not the Romans: who in taking this worke in hand, or letting it alone, would wholly be ruled by the Greekes themselues. The Athenian Embassadour made answere hereunto very eloquently, and as pleasing as he could deuise. He gaue thankes to the Romans for what was past; extolled their vertues at large; and magnified them highly in regard of this their Proposition: wherein vnrequested they freely made offer to continue that bounty, which at the vehement request of their poore Associates, they had already of late extended vn∣to the Greekes. To this Hee added, That great pittie it was to heare, such notable vertue and high deserts ill spoken of by some: which tooke vpon them, out of their owne imaginations to foretell, what harme these their Benefactors meant to doe hereafter: when as Thankfulnes rather would haue required an acknowledge∣ment, of the benefits and pleasures already receiued. Euery one found the mea∣ning of this last clause, which was directly against the Aetolians. the Aetolian rose vp, and told the Athenians their owne: putting them in minde of their ancient glorie, in those times when their Citie had beene the Lea∣der of all Greece, for defence and recoucrie of the libertie generall: from which honour they were now so farre fallen, that they became Parasites vnto those whom they thought most mighty; and by their base assentation, would lead all the rest into seruitude. Then spake Hee against the Achaeans, Clients that had been a long time vnto the Macedonian; and souldiors of Philip, vntill they ranne away from his aduersitie. These, Hee said, had gotten Corinth, and must now haue warre be made for their sakes, to the end that they might also bee Lords of Argos: whereas the Aetolians, that had first made warre with Philip, and alwayes been friends vnto the Romans, were now defrauded of some places, anciently to them belonging. Nei∣ther did hee thus containe himselfe, but obiected vnto the Romans fraudulent dea∣ling: forasmuch as they kept their Garrisons in Demetrias, Chalcis, and the Acroco∣rinth; hauing been alwayes wont to professe, That Greece could neuer bee at liber∣tie, whilest those places were not free. Also now at last, what else did they seeke by this discourse of warre with Nabis, than businesses wherewith to finde them∣selues occupied, that so they might haue some seeming cause of abiding longer in the Countrie? But they should doe well, if they meant as they spake, to carrie their Legions home out of Greece: which could not indeed bee free, till their depar∣ture. As for Nabis; the Aetolians themselues did promise, and would vndertake, That they would either cause him to yeeld to reason, and relinquish Argos freely, withdrawing thence his Garrison; or else compell him by force of Armes, to sub∣mit himselfe to the good pleasure of all Greece, that was now at vnitie. These words had been reasonable, if they had proceeded from better men. But it was appa∣rent, that no regard of the common libertie wrought so much with these Actoli∣ans; as did their owne rauenous desire of oppressing others, and getting vnto them∣selues, that worse would vse it, the whole Dominion in Greece, which Philip had lost. Neither could they well dissemble this; making it no small part of their gricuance, That the old League was forgotten: wherein it had been couenanted, That the Romans should enioy the spoile of all, but leaue the Townes and Lands in posses∣sion of the Aetolians. This, and the remembrance of a thousand mischiefes by them done in former times, made the whole Assembly, especially the Achaeans, crie out vpon them: entreating the Romans to take such order before they went, that not onely Nabis might be compelled to doe right; but the Aetolian theeues be enforced to keepe home, and leaue their neighbours in quiet. All this was highly to the plea∣sure of Titus: who saw, that by discountenancing the Aetolians, He was become the more gracious with all the rest. But whether it pleased him so well, that Antiochus his Embassadours did presently after lie hard vpon him, to drawe the peace to some good conclusion, it may bee greatly doubted. Hee cast them off with a flight an∣swere: telling them, That the ten Embassadors or Counsailours which had beene sent vnto him from Rome, to be his assistants in these matters of weight, were now returned home; and that, without them, it was not in his power to conclude vpon any thing. Now concerning the Lacedaemonian warre; it was very soone ended. For Titus vsed the helpe of all his Confederates; and made as great preparation against , both by Land and Sea, as if he should haue had to with Philip. Besides the Ro∣man forces, King Eumenes with a Nauie, and the Rhodian Fleet, were inuited to the seruice: as also Philip of Macedon sent aid by Land; doing therein poorely, whether it were to get fauour of the Romans, or whether to make one among the number, in seeking vpon Nabis, that had done him iniuric. But the most forward in this Expedition were the Achaeans, who set out ten thousand Foote, and a thousand Horse. As for the Aetolians: rather to hold good fashion, and sound their dispo∣sitions, than in hope to speed, their helpe was required; whereof they excused them∣selues as well as they thought best. Thus are the Achaeans now become the prime friends of the Romans in Greece; hauing remooued the Aetolians from that degree of fauour: like as they themselues hereafter (though not in all haste) shall be supplan∣ted of the same Lacedaemonians, against whom they are now marching. Some of the Argiues more bold then wise, began a conspiracie against the Lace∣daemonians that held their Towne; meaning to open their gates vnto the Roman. But ere Titus drew neare, they were all detected and : excepting a very few, that escaped out of the Towne. The fame of this Commotion, caused the Armie to march apace toward Argos; with hope to be there, before things were at quiet. But there was no stirre within the Walles: the execution done vpon the first mo∣uers, hauing terrified all the rest of the Citizens. Titus then thought it better, to as∣saile Nabis in the head of his strength at Lacedaemon, than to consume time about o∣ther places; especially at Argos: for the freedom whereof since the Warre was made, pittie it were, that the calamities of the warre should thereon fall most heauily. Nabis had in readinesse an Armie of fifteene thousand, where with to defend him∣selfe against these Inuaders. Fiue thousand of them were Mercinaries: the rest, of his owne Countrie; but such as were of all others the worst, as manumised slaues, malefactors and base peasants, vnto whom his Tyrannie was beneficiall. Of the good and worthy Citizens hee stood in doubt and since he could not hope to win their loue, his meaning was to hold them quiet by feare. He called them all to an Assemblie: and compassing them round in with his Armie, told them of the dan∣ger that was toward him and them. If they could agree within ; they might, he said, hope the better to withstand the common Enemie. But forasmuch as turbulent heads were inuited by light occasions, to raise tumults, and worke dan∣gerous treason: it seemed vnto him the safest, and (withall) the mildest course, to arrest beforehand, and put in ward, all those whom he found most reason to suspect. So should he keepe them innocent perforce; and thereby preserue not onely the Citie and his owne person from danger, but them also from the punishment, which else they might haue incurred. Hereupon hee cites and apprehends about foure∣score of them; whom hee leads away to prison, and the next night puts them all to death. Thus was he sure that they neither should offend, nor yet breake loose. As for the death of them, if it should happen to be noised abroad: what could it else doe than terrifie the people; who must thereby vnderstand, that it was a mortall crime to be suspected? And to the same purpose his cruelty extended it selfe vnto some poore wretches: whom he accused of a meaning to flie to the Enemie. These were openly whipt through all the streetes, and slaine. Hauing thus affrighted the Citizens; He turned the more freely all his thoughts toward the Enemie, that came on apace. Hee welcommed them with a sallie: wherein, as commonly hap∣pens, the Souldiours of the Towne had the better at first; but were at length repel∣led with losse. Titus abode not many dayes before Sparta: but ouer-ran the Coun∣trey; hoping belike to prouoke the Tyrant forth to battaile. The Roman Fleet at the same time with King Eumenes and the Rhodians, layd siege vnto Gyttheum, the onely or principall Hauen-towne that Nabis had. Likely they were to haue taken it by force, when there appeared hope of getting it by treason. There were two Gouernours within the Towne equall in authoritie: whereof the one, either for feare, or desire of reward, had a purpose to let in the Romans. But the other find∣ing what was in hand, and being somewhat more faithfull, slue the Traitor; after whose death, he himselfe alone made the better defence. Yet when T. Quintius with part of his Armie came thither to Gyttheum: this Captaine of the Towne had not the heart to abide the vttermost, and awaite what either Time or his Master might doe for him, but was to giue vp the place; yet vpon Condition, to depart in safety to Sparta with his Garrison. Pythagoras, the sonne-in-law of Nabis, and brother vnto his wife, was come from Argos, whereof he had the Gouernment with a thousand Souldiours Mercenaries, and two thousand Argiues: it beeing (as may seeme) the Tyrants purpose, to relieue Gyttheum: which he thought would haue held longer out. But when they heard that it was lost, then began they to thinke vpon finishing the warre, by some reasonable Composition. Pythagoras there∣fore was sent his Embassador to Titus: requesting only that he would appoint a time and place for Nabis to meet and speake with him. This was granted. In that Parlee the Tyrant spake very reasonably for himselfe: proouing, that hee suffered wrong, and had done none, and that by many good arguments; whereof the summe was, That whatsoeuer they now did, or could obiect vnto him, was of elder date than the League which they had made with him. Whereupon he inferred, That nei∣ther for his keeping the Towne of Argos, nor for any other cause by them allead∣ged, they ought to make warre vpon him; since Argos, and all other their allega∣tions whatsoeuer, had not hindered them, in time of their more of him, entring into that League with him; which was neuer broken on his part, nor ought to be on theirs. But Quintius was not herewith satisfied. Hee charged him with Tyrannie; and gaue instance, as easily he might, of diuers barbarous by him committed. In all which points, forasmuch as they knew this Nabis to be guil∣tie, before they made Peace and Confederacie with him; it was expedient, that some other cause of this Inuasion should be alleadged. Wherefore he said further, That this Tyrant had occupied Messene, a Towne Confederate with the Romans: That he had bargained to ioyne with Philip; when he was their enemie, not onely in League, but also in affinitie: and that his Fleete had robbed many of their ships, about the Cape of Malea. Now touching this Piracie, since in the Articles by Ti∣tus propounded vnto Nabis, there was no restitution mentioned, other than of ships, by him taken from the Greekes his neighbours, with whom he had long held warre: it may seeme to haue beene obiected, onely by way of Complement, and to enlarge the volume of those complaints, that were otherwise very friuolous. As for Mes∣sene, and the bargaine of Alliance made with Philip: they were matters foregoing the League, that was made betweene the Romans and this Tyrant; and therefore not to haue beene mentioned. All this it seemes that Aristaenus, the Praetor of the , verie well perceiued: who therefore doubting lest the Romans, (that were wont to talke so much of their owne iustice, honour, and faithfull dealing) should now relent, and forbeare to molest him, who, though a wicked man, was yet their Confederate; and had neuer done them wrong; framed his discourse to another end. He entreated Nabis to consider well of his owne estate; and to settle his for∣tunes, whilest he might doe it without hazzard: alleadging the examples of many Tyrants that had ruled in the neighbour-cities, and therein committed great outra∣ges; yet were afterwards contented to surrender their Estates, and liued in great , honour, and happines, as priuate men. Thus they discoursed vntill night. The next day Nabis was contented to relinquish Argos; and requested them, to de∣liuer vnto him in writing their other demands, that hee might take counsaile with his friends. The issue of all was, That, in regard of the charges, whereat the Con∣federates must bee, for maintenance of an Armie to lie in Leaguer all that Winter (as there was no hope of making short worke) before the Citie of Sparta: they were contented to make peace with the Tyrant, vpon such Conditions as should thinke meete. Besides the restitution of Argos, and all the places thereon depen∣ding; Titus propounded many other Conditions to Nabis, and some of them very grieuous. Hee would not suffer the Lacedaemonian to haue ought to doe in the Ile of Crete; no, nor to make any Confederacies; nor war, either in that Iland or els-where; not to build any Towne or Castle vpon his owne Lands; not to keepe any other shipping, than two small Barkes; besides many other trouble some iniunctions; with imposition of an hundred talents in siluer to be payd out of hand, and fistie ta∣lents yeerely, for eight yeeres next ensuing. For obseruance of these Couenants he demanded fiue hostages, such as he himselfe should name; and one of them to be the Tyrants owne sonne. If it had beene the meaning of Titus, to withdraw the war from Nabis, because it was not grounded vpon iustice: then had it been enough, if not more than enough, to take Argos from him; which hee himselfe did offer, though it were for feare, to deliuer vp. But if it were thought reasonable, to dis∣pense a little with the Roman faith, in regard of the great benefit which thereby might redound vnto the state of their best friends in Greece, by the extirpation of this Tyrannie: then should this enterprise, when once it was taken in hand, haue beene prosecuted vnto the very vtmost. As for this middle course which the Ro∣mans held: as it was not honourable vnto them, to themselues by the spoile of one that had not offended them: nor pleasing to the Achaeans, who iudged it euer after a great blemish to the noble acts of Titus: so did it minister vnto the Aetolians, and to such as curiously pried into the faults of those which tooke vpon them to bee Patrons of Greece, no barren Subiect of malicious discourse. For since Philip, a King, and descended of many famous Kings, might not bee suffered by these Masterly Romans, to hold any one of those Countries or Townes in Greece, that had belong∣ed vnto his Ancestors: it was thought very strange, that Lacedaemon, once the most famous Citie among all the Greekes, was by the same Romans left in possession of a Tyrant, that had vsurped it but yesterday: and Hee therein rooted by their autho∣ritie, as their friend and Confederate. Nabis on the other side thought himselfe vn∣mercifully dealt withall, by the selfe-same Romans, whose amitie he had preferred in time of a doubtfull warre, before the loue and affinitie of the Macedonian King, that had committed the Citie of Argos into his hands. But falsly had he dealt with the Macedonian: and falsly was he dealt with by those, to whom he did betake him∣selfe. Among these Articles propounded, there was nothing that pleased him; saue onely that for the banished Lacedaemonians, (of whom a great number were in the Roman Campe; hauing among them Agesipolis the naturall King of Sparta, that be∣ing a yong childe was driuen out by Lycurgus, the first of the Tyrants) there was made no prouision, to haue them restored vnto their Citie and Estates; but onely leaue required for as many of their wiues, as would be so contented, to liue abroad with them in banishment. Wherefore hee forbore to giue consent vnto de∣mands: and sustained an assault or two; hoping belike that the enemies would soone be wearie. But his fearefull nature shortly ouercame the resolution, which the sense of these iniuries had put into him. So yeelding vnto all that had beene propoun∣ded, Hee deliuered the hostages; and thereupon obtained peace, that was confir∣med afterwards at Rome by the Senate and People. From this time forward, Hee thought the Romans more wicked than himselfe; and was readie vpon the first ad∣uantage, to doe them all mischiefe that he could. The Argiues had heard newes that Lacedaemon was euen at point of being taken: This erected them, and gaue them heart to thinke vpon their owne good. So they aduentured to set vpon the Garrison; which was much weakened, by the remooue of the three thousand carried thence by Pythagoras, to helpe the Tyrant at Sparta. There needed vnto their libertie no more, than that all of them ioyntly should set their handes to the getting of it; which no sooner they did than they obtained it. Presently after this came T. Quintius to Argos, where hee was joyfully welcommed. Hee was deseruedly acknowledged as author of that benefit, whereon the Citizens had laied hold without staying for him: and that hee might the better entitle him∣selfe thereto, he caused the libertie of the Argiues to be proclaimed at the Nemaean games; as ratifying it by his authoritie. The Citie was annexed againe to the Coun∣cell of Achaia; whereby the Achaeans were not more strengthened, than the Argiues themselues were secured from danger of relapse, into the same extremities out of which they had newly escaped. After this, Titus found little busines or none where with to set on worke his Ar∣mie in Greece. Antiochus was about to send another Embassage to Rome, desiring peace and friendship of the Senate. Things being therefore in appearance who∣ly disposed vnto quiet; Scipio the African, that was chosen Consul at Rome, could not haue his desire, of being sent Commander into Greece. The vnsincere meaning of , and the tumultuous disposition of the Aetolians, were held as considera∣tions worthie of regard: yet not sufficient causes of making Warre. Neither appea∣red there any more honest way, of confuting the Aetolians, and of throughly per∣swading all the Greekes (which was not to be neglected, by those that meant to assure vnto themselues the Patronage of ) that the good of the Countrie, was their sole intent: than by withdrawing thence their Legions, and leauing the Nation vn∣to it selfe, til occasion should be ripe, and call them ouer againe. Wherfore after Titus had spent a Winter there, without any matter of employment, either found, or at any neere distance appearing; he called an Assembly of Delegates, from all parts of Greece to Corinth: where hee meant to bid them farewell. There he recounted vn∣to them all that had passed since his comming into those parts; and willed them to value the Roman friendship, according to the difference of estate, wherein the Ro∣mans found and left them. Hereto he added some wholesome counsaile; touching the moderate vse of their libertie, and the care which they ought to haue of liuing peaceably, and without faction. Lastly hee gaue vp Acrocorinthus to the Achaeans; withdrawing thence the Roman Garrison, and promising to doe the like (which ve∣rie soone hee did) at Chalcis and Demetrias; that so it might be knowne, what liers the Aetolians were, who had accused the Romans, of a purpose to retaine those pla∣ces. With joyfull acclamations did the Greekes testifie their good liking of that which Titus had said and done: as also (at his request) they agreed, to and enlarge all Romans, that had bin sold into their Countrie by Hannibal. Thus Titus crowned his actions in Greece with an happie end: and by leauing the Countrie before his departure was vrged, left therein behind him the memorie of his vertue and benefits, vntainted by jelousie and suspition of any euill meaning. At his comming to the Citie, Hee had the honour of a Triumph; which was the goodliest of all that Rome had vntill that day beheld. Three dayes together the shew of his pompe continued: as being set out with the spoiles of a Countrie, more aboundant in things worthie of such a spectacle, than any wherein the Romans had before made Warre. All sorts of Armes, with Statues and curious pieces of Brasse or Marble, taken from the Enemie, were carried in the first dayes Pageant. The second day, was brought in, all the treasure of Gold and Siluer: some in the rude Masse vnwrought; some, in diuers sorts of Coine; and some, in Vessels of sundrie kindes, that were the more highly prized by the workemanship. Among these were tenne shieldes, all of Siluer; and one of pure Gold. The third day Titus himselfe entred the Citie in his Triumphant Chariot. Before him were carried an hundred and foureteene Crownes of Gold, bestowed vpon him by diuers Cities. There were also led the beasts for Sacrifice; the Prisoners, and the hostages: among which, Demetrius the sonne of King Philip, and Armenes the sonne of Nabis, were principall. After him followed his Armie; and (which added much grace, and good liking, to the Shew) the Roman Captiues, by his procurement redeemed from slauerie in Greece. Not long after his Triumph; He procured audience of the Senate for many Em∣bassages, that were come out of Greece and Asia. They had all very fauourable answeres, excepting those of King Antiochus: whom the Senate would not heare, but referred ouer to T. Quintius, and the tenne that had beene his Counsailors; be∣cause their businesse was said to bee somewhat intricate. Here at the Kings wondred. They said vnto Titus and his Associates, That they could not discerne wherein consisted any perplexitie of their message. For all Treaties of peace and friendship, were either betweene the Victor and the vanquished; be∣tweene those, that hauing warred together, were vpon equall termes of aduantage; or betweene those that had liued alwayes in good agreement, without any quarrell. Vnto the Victor, they said, that the vanquished must yeeld; and patiently endure the imposition of some Couenants, that else might seeme vnreasonable. Where Warre had been made, and no aduantage gotten: there was it vsuall to demaund and make restitution of things and places claimed, , or lost; accordingly as both parts could agree. But betweene those which had neuer failen out, there ought no Conditions of establishing friendship to bee proposed: since it was reasonable, that each part should hold their owne; and neyther carrie it selfe as superiour vnto the other, in prescribing ought that might bee troublesome. Now of this last kind, was the League and friendship that had beene so long in conclusion, betwixt An∣tiochus and the Romans. Which being so: they held it strange, that the Romans should thus insist on points no way concerning them, and take vpon them to pre∣scribe vnto the King, what Cities of Asia he should set at libertie; from what Ci∣ties they would giue him leaue to exact his wonted Tributes; eyther putting, or not putting, his Garrisons into them, as the Senate should thinke fit. Hereto Quin∣tius answered, That since they went so distinctly to worke, Hee would also doe the like. Wherefore he propounded vnto them two Conditions, and gaue them their choice whether to accept: Eyther that it should bee lawfull for the Romans, to take part in Asia with any that would seeke their friendship; Or, if King Antiochus mis∣liked this, and would haue them forbeare to meddle in Asia, that then Hee should abandon whatsoeuer hee had gotten in . This was plaine dealing; but no reasonable nor pertinent answere, to that which the Kings Embassadours had pro∣pounded. For the Romans might be hired to abstaine from Asia, by the of all that Antiochus had lately wonne in Europe: then did not the affaires of Smyrna, Lampsacus, or any other Asiatiques, whom they were pleased to reckon as their Confederates, bind them in honour to make warre with a King that sought their loue, and had neuer done them injurie. But they knew very well, that Antiochus could not without great shame be so base, as to deliuer vp vnto them the Citie of Lysimachia, whereon of late he had bin at so much cost; in building it vp euen from the foundations, and repeopling it with inhabitants, that had all beene dispersed, or captiue to the Barbarians. And so much the Embassadours with great indignation alleadged: saying, that Antiochus desired friendship of the Romans; but so, as it might stand with his honour. Now in point of honour, the Romans tooke vpon them as if their cause were farre the superiour. For it was, they said, their purpose, to set at libertie those Townes, which the King would oppresse and hold in subie∣ction: especially since those Townes were of Greekish bloud and language; and fell in that regard vnder the patronage, which Rome had affoorded vnto all Greece be∣sides. By this colour they might soone haue left Antiochus King of not many subiects on the hither side of Euphrates. Neyther did they forbeare to say, That, vnlesse he would quit what hee held in Europe, it was their meaning not onely to protect those which relied vpon them in Asia, but therein to make new Alliances: namely (as might bee vnderstood) with such as were his subiects. Wherefore they vrged his Embassadours to come to a point, and tel them plainly which of these two Conditions their King would accept. For lacke of a pleasing answere, which the Embassadours could not hereto make; little wanted of giuing presently defiance to the King. But they suffered themselues to bee entreated, and were contented once againe to send ouer P. Villius, and others that had beene alreadie with the King at Lysimachia; by whom they might receiue a finall answere, whether these demands made by Quintius and his Associates would bee accepted, yea, or no. By this res∣pite of time, and the fruitlesse Treaties ensuing, Antiochus got the leisure of two yeeres, or thereabouts, to prepare for warre; finding in the Romans, all that while, no disposition to let him liue in peace. §. V. Of the long Warres which the Romans had with the Gaules, Ligurians, and Spa∣niards. Of M. PORCIVS CATO. Iniuries done by MASA∣NISSA to the Carthaginians, that sue to the Romans for iustice in vaine. THe Insubrians, , and other of the Cisalpine Gaules, together with the Ligurians; made often, and (in a manner) continuall warre vpon the Romans in Italie, euen from such time as Hannibal and his brother Mago departed thence, vntill such time as they themselues were vtterly subdued: which was not, before the Romans were al∣most at the height of their Empire. These Nations, hauing serued vnder Mago for wages, and afterwards hauing gotten Amilcar a Carthaginian, to be Leader vnto them all, as hath beene alreadie shewed; by this their fellowship in Armes, grew to be such willing partakers each of others fortune, that seldome afterwards either the Gaules or Ligurians did stirre alone, but that their companions, hearing it, were rea∣die to second them. How the Romans first preuailed, and got large possessions in Gallia Cisalpina now called Lumbardie; it hath beene long since rehearsed, betweene . 2. §. 8. of this Booke. the first and second Punick Warres. As also it hath since appeared, how they lost the greatest part of their hold in that Countrie, by meanes of Hannibal his passage there-through. Neither is it likely that the reconquest would haue beene more difficult or tedious vnto the Romans, than was the first purchase: if, besides the grea∣ter employments which they had of their Armies abroad, their forces appointed vnto this warre had not beene distracted by the Ligurians; that alwayes made them to proceed , hauing an eye to the danger at their backes. The Ligurians were a stout Nation, light and swift of bodie; well practised in laying ambushes, and not discouraged with any ouerthrow, but foorthwith readie to fight againe. Their Countrie was mountainous, rough, wooddie, and full of streight and dange∣rous passages. Few good Townes they had; but many Castles, exceedingly well fortified by nature: so as without much labour, they could neither bee taken nor besieged. They were also very poore; and had little or nothing that might giue con∣tentment, vnto a victorious Armie that should spoile their Land. In these respects they serued excellently well, to traine vp the Roman to hardnesse and mi∣litarie patience: teaching them (besides other exercises of warre) to endure much, and liue contented with a little. Their quarrell to Rome, grew partly from their loue vnto the Gaules, their neighbours and companions; partly from their delight in robbing and spoiling the Territorie of their borderers, that were sub∣iect vnto Rome. But their obstinate continuance in the Warre which they had be∣gunne, seemes to haue beene grounded vpon the Condition of all Saluages; To be friends or foes, by custome, rather than by Iudgement: and to acknowledge no such vertue in Leagues, or formall conclusions of Peace, as ought to hinder them from vsing their aduantage, or taking reuenge of injuries when they returne to minde. This qualitie is found in all, or most of the West-Indians: who, if they be demanded a reason of the Warres betweene them and any of their neighbours, vse commonly this answere, It hath still beene the custome for vs and them, to fight one against the other. Diuers ouerthrowes, though none that were great, these Ligurians gaue vnto the Romans: but many more, and greater, they receiued. Often they sought peace, when they found themselues in distresse; and brake it againe as often, when they thought it profitable so to doe. The best was, that as their Countrie was a good place of exercise vnto the Romans, so out of their own Countrie they did little : not sending any great Armies farre from home; perhaps, because they knew not how to make warre, saue on their owne ground. The Countrie of Spaine, as it was the first part of the Continent out of Italie that became subiect vnto the Romans: so was it the last of all their Prouinces, which was wholly and throughly by them subdued. It is likened in figure by some Geogra∣phers vnto an Oxe-hide: and the Romans found in it the propertie of that Oxe-hide, which the Indian shewed vnto the Great Alexander, as an Embleme of his large Dominions. For, treading vpon any side of it, the further parts would rise from the ground. And thus was it with Spaine. Seldome did it happen, that those parts from which the Roman Armies lay furthest, were not vp in rebellion. The were a very hardie Nation, and easily stirred vp to armes; but had not much knowledge in the Art of warre, nor any good Captaines. They wanted also (which was their principall hinderance) good intelligence among themselues: and beeing diuided into many small Signories, that had little other communion than of language, they seldome or neuer prouided in generall for the common good of their Countrie; but made it their chiefe care, each of them to looke vnto their owne Territorie. Such priuate respects made them often to fall asunder; when many had vnited themselues together, for chacing out of the Romans. And were the causes of their often ouerthrowes: as desire of libertie, rather than com∣plaint of any wrong done to them, was the cause of their often taking armes. The Carthaginians had beene accustomed, to make euacuation of this Cholle∣rick Spanish humour; by employing, as Mercinaries in their warres abroad, those that were most likely to bee vnquiet at home. They had also taken Souldiers from one part of the Countrie, and vsed them in another: finding meanes to pay them all, out of the profits which they raysed vpon the whole Countrie; as being farre better husbands, and of more dexterititie than were the Romans, in that kind. But contrariwise the Romans, vsing the seruice of their owne Legions, and of their sure friends the Latines, had little businesse for the Spaniards; and therefore were faine to haue much businesse with them. Spaine was too farre distant, and withall too great, for them to send ouer Colonies thither, whereby to hold it in good order, according to the course that they tooke in Italie. Wherefore it remained, that they should alwayes maintaine such Armies in the Countrie, as might serue to hold it in obedience perforce; and such heedfull Captaines, as might bee still readie to op∣pose the Barbarians in their first Commotion. This they did: and thereby held the Countrie; though seldome in peace. Very soone after the departure of Scipio, there was raised warre in Spaine a∣gainst the Romans, euen vpon the same generall ground, that was the foundation of all the Spanish warres following. It was thought vnreasonable, that the Spaniards should one while helpe the Carthaginians against the Romans, and another while the Romans against the Carthaginians; basely forgetting to helpe themselues against those that were strangers, yet vsurped the Dominion ouer them. But the forces which Scipio had left behind him in that Countrie, being well acquainted with the manner of warre in those parts, suppressed this Rebellion by many victories: and, together with subiection, brought peace vpon the Countrie; which lasted fiue yeeres. This Victorie of the Romans, though it happily ended the warre: yet left it still remaining the cause of the warre; which after fiue yeeres brake out againe. The Spaniards fought a battaile with the Roman Proconsul, whom they slew; and had a great Victorie, that filled them with greater hopes. Yet the happie successe of their Warres in Greece, made the Romans thinke it enough to send thither two Praetors, and with each of them some two . These did somewhat: yet not so much, but that M. Porcius Cato, who was Consul the yeere following, and sent into that Prouince; found at his comming little lesse to doe, than the recon∣quering of all Spaine. But it fell out happily, that all the Spaniards were not of one minde: some were to Rome; and some were idle beholders of the paines that others tooke. Yet when Cato had wonne a great Victorie vpon the chiefe of them; they rose against him in many parts of the Countrie, and put him to much new trouble. hee was about to make a journie against those that were as yet vnsubdued: some of the lately vanquished, were euen readie to rebell. Hee therefore disarmed them: which they tooke so heauily, that many of them slew themselues for very griefe. Hearing of this, and well vnderstanding, that such despe∣ration might worke dangerous effects; Hee called vnto him the principall among them: and commending vnto them peace and quietnesse, which they neuer had di∣sturbed but vnto their owne great losse, He praied them to deuise what course might be taken, for holding them assured vnto Rome, without further trouble. None of them could, or would giue counsaile in a matter of this nature. Hauing therefore tal∣ked with them once or twice, and finding their inuention barren in this kind of Sub∣iect; He gaue expresse charge, That vpon a day appointed they should throw downe the wals of all their Townes. Afterwards he carried the Warre about from place to place; and with singular industrie finished it in short time. Neither thought he it a∣ny disgrace to him or to Rome, in this time of danger, to imitate the Carthaginians, and hire an Armie of the Celtiberians, against other of their Countrimen: excusing the in∣dignitie, such as it seemed, with a iest, That if he were vanquished and slaine, then should he need to pay them nothing; whereas if he had the Victorie, hee could pay them with the Enemies monie. Finally Hee brought the Warre to so good end, that in long time after, though Spaine were often troublesome, yet was it in no dan∣ger of being lost. He increased also the publike Reuenues in that Prouince, by cau∣sing some Mynes of Iron and Siluer to be wrought, that had before laine vnregarded. Herein he did benefit the Common-wealth, by a vertue much agreeable to his owne peculiar disposition. For this M. Cato was not onely very notable in the Art of War, which might well bee then termed The Occupation of the Romans; but so well furnished with all o∣ther vseful qualities, that very little was wanting in him, which might seeme requisite to the accomplishment of a perfect man. Hee was very skilful in the Roman Lawes, a man of great Eloquence, and not vnprofitable in any businesse either priuate or publike. Many Bookes he wrote: wherof the principal were, of the Roman antiquities, and of husbandrie. In matter of husbandrie he was notable, and thereby most in∣creased his substance; being of meane birth, and the first of his House. Strong of bodie hee was, and exceeding temperate: so as he liued in perfect health to very old age. But that which most commended him vnto the better sort of the Romans, was his great sinceritie of life, abstinence from bribes, and fashioning himselfe to the ancient laudable Customes of the Citie. Herein hee had merited singular com∣mendations, if the vehemencie of his nature had not caused him to maligne the vertue of that Noble Scipio the African, and some other worthie men; that were no lesse than himselfe, though farre lesse rigid, and more gallant in behaui∣our. Otherwise, Hee was a very good Citizen, and one of such temper, that hee could himselfe to all occasions; as if he neuer were out of his Element. He businesse so well, or rather hated vice so earnestly; that euen vnto the end of his life, He was exercised in defending himselfe, or accusing others. For at the age of fourescore and sixe yeeres, He pleaded in his own defence: and foure yeeres after, he accused Sergius Galba vnto the People. So beganne the Nobilitie of Cato his fa∣mily; which ended in his great grandchild M. Cato the Vtican: one, that being of like vertue and feruencie had all his good purposes dasht, and was finally wearied out of his life, by men of such Nobilitie and greatnesse as this his Ancestor had con∣tinuallv vexed. The Spanish Warres, after Cato his departure out of the Countrie, though they were not very dangerous, yet were they many; and the Countrie seldome free from insurrection, in one part or other. The Roman Praetors therefore, of which two euery yeere were sent ouer Commaunders into Spaine (that was diuided into two euery yeere were sent ouer Commanders into Spaine (that was diuided into two Gouernments) did rarely faile of such worke, as might affoord the honour of Triumph. One slew thirteene thousand Spaniards in a battaile: another tooke fis∣tie , and a third enforced many States of the Countrey to sue for Peace. Thus euery one of them, or most of them, did some laudable seruice; yet so, that commonly there were of men, townes, and people, new that rebelled, in of the old that were slaine, taken, or reclaimed. At the causes hereof I haue alreadie pointed; and therefore thinke it enough to say, That the businesse in Spaine required not the imployment of a Roman Consul, from such time as Cato thence departed, vntil the Numantian Warre brake out; which was verie long after. In all other Countries to the West of the Ionian Seas, the Romans had peace; but so had not the Carthaginians. For when Hannibal was gone from them, and that the e∣nemies of the Barchine House promised all felicitie which Rome could grant, vnto themselues and their obedient Citie: Masanissa fell to disputing with the sword, a∣bout the title to the best part of their Lands. He began with Emporia, a fruitfull Re∣gion about the lesser Syrtis: wherein among other Cities was that of Leptis, which daily paid a Talent vnto Carthage Tribute. This countrie the chal∣lenged, and by winning part of it, seemed to better his claime vnto the whole. He had a great aduantage: for that the Carthaginians might not make any Warre, without leaue obtained from their Masters the Romans. They had none other way of redresse, than by sending to Rome their Complaint of his doings. And surely they wanted not good matter to alleadge, if the Iudges had been vnpartiall. For besides that Scipio, in limiting out vnto them their bounds, had left them the possession of this Countrie: Masanissa himselfe, now very lately, pursuing a Rebell that fled out of his Kingdome, desired leaue of the Carthaginians, for to passe through it in his way to Cyrene: thereby acknowledging (had it otherwise beene questionable) that the Countrie was theirs. This not withstanding, Masanissa had wherewith to justifie his proceedings, especially vnto the Roman Senate. Hee gaue the Fathers to vnderstand by his Embassadors, what faithlesse people the Carthaginians were, and how il-affected to the State of Rome. There had lately been sent vnto them from Hannibal, one that should perswade them to take part with Antiochus. This man they had examined vpon some suspition of his errand; yet neither arresting him nor his ship, had thereby affoorded him meanes to escape. Hence the Numidian conclu∣ded, That certainly it was their purpose to rebell; and therefore good policie to keepe them downe. As for the Countrie of Emporia: it had alwayes, he said, beene theirs, that were able to hold it by strong hand: and so belonged sometimes vn∣to the Numidian Kings; though now of late it was in possession of the Carthaginians. But if trueth were knowne, the Citizens of Carthage had no very warrantable title vnto any more ground, than that whereon their Citie stood; or scarcely to so much. For they were no better than strangers in Africk, that had gotten leaue there to build vpon so much ground, as they could encompasse with an Oxe-hide cut into small thongs. Whatsoeuer they held without such a compasse, was purchased by fraud, and wrongfull encrochments. This considered, requested of the Senate, That they would not adiudge vnto such vsurpers, the Countrie sometimes appertaining to the Ancestors of him their assured friend. The Romans hauing heard these allegations on both sides, found the matter so doubtfull, that they could not on the sudden tell what to determine. because they would doe nothing rashly; they sent ouer three Embassadours, of whom P. Scipio the A∣frican was one and the chiefe, to decide the controuersie: yet secretly giuing them instructions, to leaue all as they found it, without making any end one way or o∣ther. The Embassadours followed their directions, and left all doubtfull. So was it likely, that Masanissa with a strong Armie should quickly preuaile, against those that could no more than talke of their right, and exclaime against the wrong. By such Arts were the Carthaginians held, not onelv from stirring in fauour of King Antiochus, if they had thereto any disposition; but were prepared by little and little vnto their finall destruction: that came vpon them, when the Romans had lei∣sure to expresse the vtmost of their hatred. §. VI. The Aetolians labour to prouoke ANTIOCHVS, PHILIP, and NABIS, to warre vpon the Romans; by whom they hold themselues wronged and disgraced. NABIS besiegeth Gyttheum, and wasteth some part of Achaea. The exact skill of PHILOPOE∣MEN, in aduantage of ground: whereby he vtterly vanquisheth NABIS. ANTI∣OCHVS being denied Peace by the Romans, ioynes with the Aetolians. The Aetolians surprize DEMETRIAS; and by killing NABIS, their Confederate seize vpon Sparta. But they are driuen out by the Citizens: who at PHILOPOEMEN his perswasions annex themselues to the Achaeans. ALL Greece being at peace, and the Roman Armies thence departed: it grieued much the Aetolians to thinke, that they who had promised vnto themselues the whole spoile of Philip, and the highest reputati∣on among the Greekes; were not onely disappointed of their couetous hopes, but quite forsaken by their ancient dependants; and of all o∣ther the most vnregarded. Yet was there made a great accesse to their Estate; by adding much vnto them, of that which had beene taken from the Macedonian. This might haue well sufficed them, if their desires had not beene immoderate; and their indignation, more vehement, than their desire. But they were not so pleased with that which they had, since they thought it no more than part of their due; as they were vexed with the deniall of that which they claimed, and with fin∣ding themselues to be wholly disesteemed, wherein they thought that they had vnsufferable wrong. Wherefore they deuised, in a Parliament which they shortly held, by what meanes they best might right themselues; and giue the Romans a sor∣rowfull knowledge of the difference, betweene their enmitie and friendship. To this purpose they soone agreed, as concurring all in one affection, That they would not onely perswade Antiochus to make warre vpon the Romans, as one to whom the Romans had long refused Peace; but that they would deale with the King of Macedon their ancient Enemie, and with Nabis the Tyrant of Lacedaemon, to ioyne all together in a new Confederacie: whose ioynt forces could not in all likelihood but farre surmount those of the Romans, Achaeans, , and King Eumenes, with all that were of their Faction. This was a great enterprise, which the Aetolians tooke in hand; and well beseeming them, for they were great darers. They sent Embas∣sadours to all these Kings, with perswasions as they thought most forcible. But Phi∣lip was irresolute; and Antiochus willing to trie first all other courses. Nabis the La∣cedaemonian, who neither (as Philip ) had lost much, nor (as Antiochus ) was in feare of any warre; yet shewed himselfe of all other the most forward: and not staying so much as to seeke any good pretence, beganne immediatly to lay siege to Gyttheum, that had beene lately taken from him by the Romans. The Achaeans, to whose care chiefly Titus at his departure had commended the affaires of Peloponnesus, were not to admonish Nabis of his duetie: neither would they staied long from repressing his violence by open warre; had not some of them thought it wisedome to aske counsaile of the Romans, and particularly of T. Quintius, before they engaged themselues in a businesse of such importance. Whilest thus they spent the time in sending Embassadours, and were aduised by Quintius to let all alone, and to waite for the comming of the Roman forces that would shortly be amongst them: Nabis was bold to giue them iuster cause of complaint, by wasting their owne Territorie. Philopoemen was then Praetor of the Achaeans, who had long been absent in Crete; making war there for his mindes sake and recreation. Vnto him the Achaeans themselues, giuing him leaue to order the warre at his pleasure; either staying vntill the Romans came; or doing otherwise, as hee should thinke best. He made all haste to relieue Gyttheum, by Sea; fearing lest the Towne, and the Achaean Garrison within it, should bee lost, if hee vsed any delay. But was so bad a Sea∣man, that he knew not a strong Ship from a rotten. He made a Quadrireme Gallie his Admirall, that had fourescore yeeres agoe been counted a gallant vessell, in the Nauie of Antigonus Gonatas. Neither was the rest of his Fleete so good, as might encounter with that of the Lacedaemonian. Onely it fell out well, that he committed himselfe to a light Pinnace or Brigandine, that fought better with her wings, than with her tallons. For his Admirall Gallie was stemmed at the first; and being rot∣ten with age, sprang so many leakes, and tooke in water so fast, that she was faine to yeeld without further resistance. When the rest of the Fleet saw what was become of their Admirall, all were presently discouraged, and saued themselues with what speede they could. But was not herewith danted. If hee had in Sea-seruice, which was none of his Occupation, Hee said, that he would make a∣mends by Land. The Tyrant withdrew part of his Armie from the siege of Gyt∣theum, to stop the Achaeans if they should inuade his Countrie. But vpon these which were placed in guard of Laconia, Philopoemen came inexpected; fired their Campe; and put all, saue a very few of them, to the sword. Then marched he all his Armie towards Lacedaemon: within ten mile whereof he was, when the Tyrant met him that had already taken Gyttheum. It was not expected that Nabis would haue been ready for them so soone. Or if hee should come from Gyttheum, with any part of his forces: yet was it thought that hee must ouertake them, and charge them in Rere. They marched therefore almost securely, in a long Troupe reaching some fiue miles; hauing their Horse, & the greatest part of their Auxiliaries at their backs, to beare off any sudden impression. But Nabis, who formerly vnderstood, or at least suspected, what course they would take, appeared in the front of them with all his Armie; encamped there where they meant to haue lodged. It was the custome of Philopoemen, when he walked or trauelled abroad with his friends, to marke the situation of the Countrie about him; and to discourse, what might befall an Armie marching the same way. Hee would suppose, That hauing with him there such a number of Souldiours, ordered and sorted in such manner, and marching towards such a place; he were vpon that ground encountered by a greater Armie, or better prepared to the fight. Then would he put the question, whether it were fit for him to hold on his way, retire, or make a stand? what piece of ground it were meete for him to seize vpon? and in what manner he might best doe it? in what sort he should order his men? where bestow his Carriages, and vnder what Gard? in what sort encampe himselfe? and which way march the day following? By such continuali meditation Hee was growne so perfect, that hee neuer mette with any difficultie, whence he could not explicate himselfe and his followers. At this time hee made a stand: and hauing drawne vp his Rere, Hee encamped neare vnto the place where he was; within halfe a mile of the Enemie. His baggage, with all thereto belong∣ing, he bestowed on a Rocke; encompassing them round with his Souldiours. The ground was rough, the wayes bad, and the day almoft quite spent; so as Nabis could not at the present greatly molest him. Both Armies were to water at one Brooke; whereto the Achaeans lay the nearer. This watering therefore was like to minister the first occasion of skirmish. Philopoemen vnderstood this; and layd an ambush in place conuenient; whereinto the Mercenaries of Nabis fell, and were slaughtered in great numbers. Presently after this, he caused one of his owne Auxiliaries to goe to the Tyrant, as a fugitiue, and tell him, that the Achaeans had a purpose to get be∣tweene him and Lacedaemon; wherby they would both debarre his returne into the Citie, and withall encourage the people, to take armes for the recouery of their freedome. The Tyrant hearing this, marched hastily away; and left his Campe, which hardly otherwise would haue been forced. Some Companies hee made to stay behinde, and shew themselues vpon the Rampart, thereby to conceale his de∣parture. But Philopoemen was not so to be beguiled. He easily won the Campe; and gaue chace to Nabis: whose followers being ouertaken, had no courage to turne a∣bout and make head. The enemies being thus dispersed, and fled into Woods, where they lay in couert all that day; Philopoemen conceiued aright, that their feare and necessitie would teach them to creepe homewards, and saue themselues, when it grew darke. Wherefore in the Euening, when he had gathered together all those of his Light-armature, which had followed the chace whilest it was day, Hee led forth the rest that had well refreshed themselues, and occupied the two most ordi∣narie passages vnto Lacedaemon. So Nabis his men, when it was darke night, percei∣uing in Philopoemens Campe great store of lights; thought that all had been at rest: and therefore aduentured to make an escape home. But they were so way-laid, that hardly one quarter of them got into Sparta. Thirtie dayes together after this, did Philopoemen waste the Countrey round about, whlest Nabis durst not issue foorth of his Towne; and then returned home, leauing the Tyrant in a manner without forces. The Roman Embassaddours were then in Greece, and T. Quintius among them; labouring to make their partie strong against Antiochus and Nabis, whom they knew to be sollicited by the Aetolians. Verie faire countenance they also made vnto Phi∣lip; and with comfortable promises drew him to make shew, whatsoeuer hee thought, of good correspondence. They promised to restore vnto him his sonne: and were contented to let him hope, that hee should receiue other fauours at their hands; and regaine possession of many places, by them taken from him. Thus did the Romans prepare for warre against Antiochus in Greece, whilest their Embassadours that were with him in Asia, denied otherwise to grant him Peace, than if he would yeeld vnto one of the Conditions, by them so often propounded. The long ab∣sence of this King in Syria, where he had accomplished the marriage betweene Pto∣lemie and his daughter; together with the death of yong Antiochus the Kings sonne, which happened during the Treatie, and hindered, or seemed to hinder the King, from giuing audience in person to the Embassadours; caused them to returne home to Rome; as vncertaine of their answere as at their setting forth. One thing that might haue beene, and partly was, beneficiall vnto them, they brought to passe du∣ring their abode at Ephesus; either by cunning, or (as Liuie rather thinkes) by chance. Finding Hannibal there, they discoursed often with him, and blamed him for ha∣uing thus fied vnto Antiochus, vpon a causelesse suspition wherein hee held the Ro∣mans: that honoured his vertue, and intended him no harme. Many haue affirmed that P. Scipio was one of these Embassadours; and that hee, among other discourses with Hannibal, demanded once, Which of all the famous Captaines that had liued, HAN∣NIBAL iudged the most worthy? So Hannibal gaue to Alexander of Macedon the first place: to the second: and the third he challenged vnto himselfe. But Scipio who thought his owne title better, than that it ought to be so forgotten: asked yet further, What wouldest thou haue said then, Hannibal, if thou hadst vanquished mee? To whom the Carthaginian replied, Then would not I haue giuen the first place to Alexander, but haue claimed it as due vnto my selfe. Now whether this were so, or otherwise: the often and friendly conference of Hannibal with the Ro∣man Embassadours, made him suspected of Antiochus: who therefore did forbeare awhile to vse his counsell. Yet afterwards, when Hannibal perceiued this change in the King: and plainely desiring him to tell the cause thereof, heard what it was; He easily recouered his former grace, and credit. For he told how his Father had caused him to sweare at the Altars, when hee was a little boy, That hee neuer should bee friend vnto the Romans. Wherefore he willed the King not to regard any vaine sur∣mises: but to know thus much, That as long as he thought vpon warre with Rome, so long would Hannibal doe him all good seruice: whereas contrariwise if he inten∣ded to make peace, then should it behooue him to vse the counsaile of some other man. The Aetolians, and their friends, were no lesse busie all this while, in making their partie strong against the Romans, than were the Romans, in mustering vp their friends in Greece. They had so often dealt with Antiochus, vanting much of their owne forces, and arrogating to themselues the honour of the victorie against Philip; that finally they preuailed with him: especially when the Roman Embassadors had left him without hope of peace, vnlesse hee would buy it at too deare a rate. They dealt in like sort with the Macedonian. But in vaine. Hee vnderstood the Romans, and himselfe, too well. Wherefore it concerned them to improue their owne for∣ces to the vtmost: as knowing, that all the burthen must lie vpon Antiochus and themselues, without helpe from any; saue onely from some few that were discon∣tented in Greece. Whilest they were about this, and had with them an Embassa∣dor of the King Antiochus that animated them to resolution: the Athenian Embas∣sadors, whom Titus had requested to be at their meeting, stayed their vehemencie a little; by exhorting them, not to conclude rashly, without first hearing the Ro∣mans, that lay neere at hand. For want of a ready answer hereto, they were conten∣ted to approue the motion. Titus hearing this, thought the busines worthy of his presence. For since had now declared himselfe against the Romans: it would bee no small piece of seruice, to withdraw from his friendship, by whose encouragement he had made the aduenture. Wherefore hee came to their Panaetolium, or great Assemblie of the Nation; where he forgot nothing that might serue to appease them. Hee willed them to consider the weight of the enterprise which they tooke in hand; whereby Greece was like to become a Champaigne-field, on which, to the ruine of the Countrie, the Romans, and King Antiochus, that com∣manded no small part of the World, should fight for the Masterie: the Aetolians, as Masters in that kinde of Fence, setting them on, and becomming Liu. l. 35. , fortè, . the Sticklers. As for those grieuances which did thus exasperate them, and vrge them to such violent courses, Hee willed them to consider how slight they were, and how much better they might doe to send Embassadours to Rome, that should either pleade their right in the Senate, or (if their right vnto the places which they claimed, were not good) make request to haue what they desired: than thus to set the world in an vprore, and be afterwards the first that should repent it. But what he sayd, or could say, it skilled not much. They had already done ill, to make the Embassador of the King, whose helpe they had sought, waite so long for an answer, and stay doubting what good end they should make with the Romans. Neither was it newes vnto them to heare those comfortable words, That, by sending to Rome, they might happen to obtaine what they desired; either as their right, or else by way of fauour. For with such Termes had they beene feasted once already: and were by the Senate reie∣cted vnto Titus: who, hauing it in his owne power, gaue them no satisfaction; yet would now againe referre them to the Senate. This were onely losse of time, and might abate their credit with Antiochus. Wherefore without more adoe they made a Decree, That King Antiochus the Great should be entreated to come ouer in∣to Greece, as well to set the Countrie at libertie, as also to decide the controuersies depending betweene the Romans and Aetolians. Such a Decree they would not haue made, had they not vnderstood the Kings minde before. Hauing made it; they forgot no point of brauerie, vvher by to vaunt themselues to the Kings Embas∣sadours, and against the Romans. Titus desired of their Praetor, to let him see a Co∣pie of this nevv Decree. The Praetor ansvvered, That then hee had other things to do: but that this Decree, & their further ansvver, they vvould shortly let him knovv, if he came to their camp in Italy vpon the riuer of Tibris. Gentler words would haue done better, as the Aetolians are like to vnderstand hereafter. But hauing thus begun, they meant henceforth to goe roundly to worke. The care of the warre they refer∣red vnto the more priuate Councel of their Nation; that no occasion might slip, in waiting for the Authoritie of a generall Assembly. The Apoclcti (so were the Pri∣uie Councell of Aetolia called) went as hotly to worke as any of the yongest heads could haue done. They layd a plotte, how to get into their hands at one time the Townes of Chalcis, Demetrias, and Sparta: to each of which they sent men for the purpose. Demetrias they tooke vpon the sudden; entring, some of them as friends to conduct home a principall man of the Citie: who for speaking words against T. Quintius, had been driuen to flee thence, but was, by intercession of those that lo∣ued him, againe recalled. His Aetolian companions, that were not many, seized vp∣on a Gate; whereat they let in a Troupe which they had left not far behind them; and so fell to murdering the chiefe of the Roman Faction. At Chalcis they sped not so well. Thither also they had a banished man to bring home: but they came so , that their purpose was discouered, and the Towne prepared to defend it selfe against them. Being therefore demanded the cause of this hostilitie, they gaue a gentle answer, saying, That they came not thither as enemies, but onely to deli∣uer the Towne from the Romans; who more insolently dominered ouer it, than e∣uer the Macedonians had done. By which Rhethoricke they preuailed no more, than they could doe by plaine force. For the Townes-men replied, That they neither found any abridgement of their libertie, nor needed any Garrison to keepe them from the Romans; from whom they neither feared any danger, nor receiued iniu∣rie. So this busines was dasht. The attempt vpon Sparta was more strange and de∣sperate. Nabis their good friend, was Lord of the Towne; styling himselfe King: but, more truely by all men called Tyrant. He had wel-neare lost all, by meanes of the ouerthrow which Philopoemen had lately giuen him: since, he durst not stirre abroad; and dayly expected the mischiefe, that on all sides threatned him. Wher∣fore he sent messengers, one after another, to the Aetolians; requesting them, That as He had not been slow to stirre in their behalfe, but aduentured himselfe vpon the vtmost of danger, when all others were backward; so They would be pleased to send him what helpe they might, since his bad fortune had caused him presently to need it. It hath been often sayd, That the raucnous Aetolians were onely true to themselues, and regarded neither faith nor friendship otherwise than as it might conduce to their owne ends. And so dealt they now. For since Nabis his mercinarie forces, which vpheld his Tyrannie, were in a manner consumed: they thought it expedient for their Estate, to put him out of the way; and, by so doing, to assure vnto themselues. To this purpose, they sent thither Alexamenus, one whom they thought a man fit for such a worke. To him they gaue a thousand Foot, and thirtie Horse, chosen for the purpose. These thirtie were by Damocritus the Praetor brought into the Councell of the Apocleti, where they were comman∣ded to be no wiser than they should bee, nor to thinke that they were sent to make warre with the Achaeans, or to doe ought else, saue onely what Alexamenus should command them; which, were it neuer so desperate, and in seeming against all rea∣son; yet must they vnderstand, that vnlesse they performed it, they should haue no good welcome home. So Alexamenus came to the Tyrant, whom hee encou∣raged with braue words: telling him that Antiochus was already in Europe, and would be anon in Greece, meaning to couer all the Land and Sea with his mighty Armies; and that the Romans were like to finde other manner of worke, than of late with Philip: since the Elephants of this great King, without other helpe, would suffice to tread them downe. As for the Aetolians, Hee said, that if need should so re∣quire, they would presently away to Lacedaemon all the forces that they could raise: But that they were very desirous at the present, to make as goodly a muster as they could before the great King; which caused them to send him thither afore with no greater companie. Hereupon he willed Nabis to take heart; bring forth his men, that had beene long pent vp in the Citie; and traine them without the wals: as if shortly he should employ them in worke of conquest, rather than defence. Na∣bis was glad of this: and daily exercised his men in the field; riding vp and downe with his Alexamenus, and no more than three or foure horse about him, from one point to another, to order and behold them. During this time of exercise, Alexa∣menus made it his fashion to step aside alone to his Aetolians, and say somewhat as he thought fit: which done, he still returned againe to Nabis. But when he saw time for the great worke that he had in hand: Hee then went aside to his thirtie Horse∣men, and bade them remember the taske enioyned them at their setting foorth; tel∣ling them that they were all in case of banished men, vnlesse they would anon come vp to him, and helpe him to finish that which they should see him take in hand. Herewithall the Tyrant beganne to draw neere them: and Alexamenus making towards him, charged him on the sudden, and him downe. The thirtie Aetolians neuer stood to deliberate vpon the matter: but all flew in; and, before a∣ny succour could arriue, had made an end of this wretched Nabis. Presently vpon the fact committed, the Tyrant his Mercinaries ranne vnto the dead bodie: where in stead of seeking reuenge, they stood foolishly gazing as beholders. Alexamenus with his Aetolians hasted into the Citie, and seized on the Palace: where hee fell to ransacking the Treasure; and troubled himselfe with none other care, as though all were alreadie done. Such of his followers as were dispersed in the Towne, did also the like; with the greater indignation of the Citizens: who seeing them∣selues free by the death of the Tyrant, could not endure to see those that had slaine him, beginne to tyrannize anew. Wherefore all the Towne was shortly in Armes: and for lacke of another Captaine, they tooke a little Boy of the Royall stocke, that had beene brought vp with Nabis his children; whom they mounted vpon a Good Horse, and made him their chiefe. So they fell vpon the Ae∣tolians that were idely stragling about; and put them all to the sword. Alexame∣nus with not many of his Companie, were slaine in keeping the Citadell: and those few that escaped thence into Arcadia, were taken by the Magistrates: who solde them all as bond-slaues, In this doubtfull Estate of things at Lacedaemon, Philopoemen came thither: who calling out the chiefe of the Citie, and speaking such wordes vnto them, as Alexamenus should haue done after hee had slaine the Ty∣rant; easily perswaded them for their owne good and safetie, to incorporate them∣selues with the . Thus by the enterprise, no lesse dishonourable than difficult, of the Aetolians, and the small, but effectuall, trauaile of ; the Achaeans made a notable purchase: and Lacedaemon, that had hitherto bin go∣uerned eyther by Kings, or by Tyrants that called themselues Kings, became the member of a Common-wealth; whereof the name had scarce any reputation, when Sparta ruled ouer all Greece. §. VII. ANTIOCHVS, perswaded by THOAS the Aetolian, comes ouer into Greece, ill at∣tended. Sundrie passages betweene him, the Aetolians, Chalcidians and others. Hee winnes Chalcis, and thereby the whole Ile of Euboea. The vanitie of the Kings Embassadors and the Aetolians, with the Ciuil answere of TITVS to their discourse, before the Achaeans. That it concerned the Greekes to haue desired peace, betweene the Romans and ANTIOCHVS; as the best assurance of their owne libertie. Of many pettie Estates that fell to the King. Of AMINANDER; and an idle vanitie, by which King PHILIP was lost. HANNIBAL giues good counsaile in vaine. Some Townes wonne in Thessalie. The King retires to Chalcis; Where hee marrieth a young Wife, and reuels away the rest of Winter. Vpon the comming of the Roman Con∣sul all forsake ANTIOCHVS. Hee with two thousand Aetolians keepes the Streights of Thermopylae. Hee is beaten, and flies into Asia: leauing all in Greece vnto the Victors. ANTIOCHVS was troubled much in Asia with Smyrna and Lampsa∣cus, that would not hearken to any Composition. He thought it nei∣ther safe nor honourable, to leaue them Enemies behind him; and to winne them by force, was more than hitherto hee was able. Yet was hee desirous with all speed conuenient to shew himselfe in Greece; where he had bin told, that his presence would effect wonders. It was said, That in all the Countric there was a very small number, which bore heartie affection vnto the Romans: That Nabis was alreadie vp in Armes: That Philip was like a Bandog in a chaine, desiring nothing more than to breake loose; and that the Aetolians, without whom the Romans had done nothing, nor nothing could haue done, were readie to conferre vpon him the greatnesse, which they had vnworthily bestowed vpon insolent Barbarians. Of all this the least part was true. Yet that which was true made such a noise, as added credit vnto all the rest. Whilest therefore the King was thinking to send Honnibal into Africk, there to molest the Romans, and so giue him the better leisure of vsing his owne opportunities in Greece: Thoas the Aetolian came ouer to him, and bade him lay all other care aside; for that his Countreymen had alreadic taken Demetrias; a Towne of maine importance, that should giue him entertaiment, whence hee might proceed as became the greatnesse of his ver∣tue and fortune. This did serue to cut off all deliberation. As for Hannibal: Thoas was bold to tell the King, first, That it was not expedient for him to diuide his for∣ces at such a time, when the very reputation of his numbers, brought into Greece, might serue to lay open vnto him all places, without need of vsing violence: and secondly, That in any such great enterprise there could not bee chosen a more vnfit man to be employed in the Kings seruice, than was that famous Hannibal the Car∣thaginian. For he said, That the King should as greatly feele the losse of a Fleet or Armie, perishing vnder such a notable Commaunder if his fortune were bad, as if the same had miscarried vnder one of meaner qualitie: whereas neuerthelesse if Hannibal preuailed; Hannibal alonc should haue all the honour, and not Antiochus. In this regard hee was of opinion, That such a renowned Warriour should bee al∣wayes neere vnto the Kings person, to giue aduice: which being followed as often as it was found commodious, the good successe would wholly redound vnto the honour of him that had the soueraigne Command; euen of the King himselfe. An∣tiochus gladly hearkned vnto this admonition; being iealous of the vertue, that shi∣ned brighter than the Maiestie of his owne fortune. And thereupon hee laid aside the determination; which tended more to the aduancement of his desires, than did any thing else by him then or after thought vpon. Presently after this He made readie for Greece. Before his setting forth, in a friuo∣lous pomp of ceremony, he went vp from the Sea-side to Ilium; there to do sacrifice to Minerua of Troy. Thence passing ouer the Aegean Sea, Hee came to Demetrias. Eurylochus the Magnetian, the same whome the Aetolians had lately waited on home, when by that pretext they wanne Demetrias; was now the chiefe man and Ruler of his Nation. therefore with his Countreymen, in great frequencie, came to doe their duties to the King Antiochus, and bid him welcome. The King was glad of this: and tooke it as a signe of good lucke, to bee so entertained at the beginning. But it may bee suspected, that the Magnetians found not the like cause of joy. For whereas they had expected a Fleet and Armie somewhat like to that of Xerxes: they saw three hundred ships, of which no more than fortie were seruice∣able for the Warres; with an Armie of tenne thousand Foot, fiue hundred Horse, and sixe Elephants. The Aetolians no sooner heard of his comming, than they called a Parliament; and made a Decree, whereby they inuited him into their Countrie. He knew before that they would so doe; and was therefore well onward on his way towards them, when they met him that brought the Decree. At his comming to Lamia, the Aetolians gaue him as ioyfull entertainment as they could deuise. Being brought into their Councell, He made an Oration: wherein hee de∣sired them to hold him excused, that hee came not sollowed with a greater Armie. This was, he said, in true estimation a signe of his good will: in that hee staid not to make all things readie; but hasted vnto their aid, euen whilest the season was vnfit for nauigation. Yet it should not be long, ere the hope of all those which had ex∣pected him, would be satisfied vnto the full. For it was his meaning to fill all Greece with Armies, and all the Sea-coast with his Fleets. Neyther would hee spare for a∣ny charge, trauaile, or danger, to follow the businesse which hee had vndertaken: euen to driue the Romans and their authoritic out of ; leauing the Countrie free indeed, and the Aetolians therein the chiefe. Now as the Armies that were following him, should be very great: so was it his meaning, that all prouisions to them belonging should be correspondent; because hee would not bee any way bur∣den some vnto his Confederates. But at the present he must needs entreat them, ha∣uing thus hastily come ouer vnto their aide, vnprouided of many necessaries: that they would helpe him with Corne and other victuals, whereof he stood in need. So he left them to their consultation: the conclusion whereof was, after a little dispute, (for a vaine motion was made by some, that the differences betweene the Romans and them, should be put by Compromise to the decision of Antiochus ) That they would yeeld vnto the Kings desire, and him with all their forces. Here we may , how vaine a thing it is for an absolute Prince to engage himselfe, as did Antiochus, in a businesse of dangerous importance, vpon the promised assurance of a State that is meerely popular. For if the vehemencie of Thoas, and some other of that Faction, had not preuailed in this Councell: the Aetolians, for gaine of two or three Townes, yea for hope of such gaine that might haue deceiued them; were like to haue abandoned this King their friend, vnto the discretion of the Ro∣mans. And what remedie had there beene, if this had so fallen out? He could haue bemoaned himselfe to Thoas, and complained of the wrong: but he must haue been contented with this answere, That the fault was in those of the opposite side; whom Thoas would therefore haue pronounced to bee very wicked men. It hap∣pened much better for the present; though in the future it prooued much worse, both for him, and for the Aetolians. He was chosen Generall of all their forces: and thirtie Commissioners were appointed to bee about him, as a Councell of Warre for the Nation. These armed such as readily they could, whilest it was in dispute where they should beginne the Warre. Chalcis was thought the meetest place to be first vndertaken: whither if they came suddenly, they should not peraduenture need to vse much force. The King had brought with him into Aetolia but a thou∣sand Foot; leauing the rest behind him at Demetrias. With these hee hasted away directly toward Chalcis; being ouertaken by no great number of the Aetolians, which accompanied him thither. At his comming, the Magistrates, and some of the chiefe Citizens, issued forth to parle with him. There the Aetolians beganne, as they had lately done before, to tell, how the Romans had onely in words and false sem∣blance, set Greece at libertie. But such libertie, as might be true and vsefull, they said would neuer be obtained; vntill by remoouing the necessitie of obeying their pleasure that were most mightie, euerie seuerall had where to find redresse of any pressure. And to this end was the great Antiochus come thither; a King well able to counterpoise, yea to ouerweigh the Romans: who neuerthelesse desired them onely, so to joyne with him in League, as that if either the Romans or Hee should offer them wrong, they might keepe it in their power, to seeke redresse at the other hands. The Chalcidians made hereto the same answere, which, to the like allegations, they had made not long before: That their freedome was not imaginarie, but absolute; for which they were to thanke the Romans; without whose good liking, they would enter into no new confederacie. That which they spake of themselues, they could likewise affirme of all the Greekes: forasmuch as none of them payed any Tribute; was kept vnder, by any Garrison; or liued o∣therwise than by their owne Lawes, and without being tied vnto condition which displeased them. Wherefore they wondred, why the King should thus trouble himselfe, to deliuer Cities that were alreadie free. But since hee, and the Aetolians, requested their friendship: they besought both him, and the Aetolians, to doe a friendly Office, in departing from them quietly, and leauing them in such good case as they were. With this answere the King departed: for he was not, as then, strong enough to force them. But very soone after, hee brought thither a greater power; which them, and made them yeeld: before all the succours could arriue, which Titus had sent for their defence. The chiefe Citie of being thus gotten; all the rest of the Iland shortly yeelded to Antiochus. Foure or fiue hundred Roman Souldiers, that came ouer late haue defended Chalcis, reposed themselues at Delium, a little Towne of Boeotia, lying ouer against the Iland; where was a Temple and Groue, consecrated vnto Apollo, that had the priuiledge of an inuiolable Sanctuarie. In this place were some of them walking, and beholding the things there to be seene, whilest others were busied as they found cause: without feare of any danger; as being in such a place, and no warre hither to proclaimed. But Menippus, one of Antiochus his Captaines, that had wearied himselfe in many vaine Treaties of peace; tooke aduantage of their carelessenesse, and vsed them with all extremitie of . Very few of them escaped: fiftie were taken; and the rest slaine. Here at Quintius was grieued: yet so, as it pleased him well to consider, that his Romans had now more just cause than before, to make warre vpon the King. Antiochus liked well these beginnings, and sent Embassadours into all quarters of Greece; in hope, that his reputation should perswade very many to take his part. The wiser sort returned such answere, as the Chalcidians had done. Some reserued themselues vntill hee should come among them: knowing that eyther, if hee came not, Hee must holde them excused for not daring to stirre; or, if hee came, the Romans must pardon their just feare, in yeelding to the . None of those that lay farre off, joyned with him in true meaning; saue the Eleans, that alwayes fauoured the Aetolians, and now feared the Achae∣ans. Little reason there was, that hee should thinke to draw the Achaeans to his partie. Neuerthelesse hee assayed them, vpon a vaine hope that the enuie, which Titus was said to beare vnto Philopoemens vertue, had bred a secret dislike be∣tweene that Nation and the Romans. Wherefore both Hee and the Aetolians sent Embassadours to the Councell at Aegium; that spared not braue wordes, if the would haue so beene taken. The Kings Embassadour told of great Armies and Fleets that were comming: reckoning vp the Dahans, Medians, Elimaeans and Cadusians; names that were not euery day heard of, and therefore as hee thought, the more terrible. Then told he them what notable men at Sea, the Sydonians, Ty∣rians, Aradians, and Pamphylians were; such indeed as could not be resisted. Now concerning monie and all warlike furniture: it was, he said, well knowne, that the Kingdomes of Asia had alwayes thereof great plenty. So as they were much : who considering the late warre made against Philip, did thinke that this with Antiochus would prooue the like: the case was too farre different. Yet this most powerfull King, that for the libertie of Greece was come from the vtmost parts of the East; requested no more of the Achaeans, than that they would hold themselues as neutrall, and quietly looke on, whilest He tooke order with the Romans. To the same effect spake the Aetolian Embassadour: and further added, That in the battell at , neither Titus had done the part of a Generall, nor the Romans of good Souldiers: but that both Hee and his Armie had beene there destroyed, had they not beene protected by vertue of the Aetolians, which carried the day. Titus was present at the Councell, and heard all this: to which he made as fit answere, as could haue beene desired. He told the Achaeans, That neither the Kings Embassadour, nor the Aetolian, did so greatly labour to perswade those vnto whom they addressed their Orations; as to vant themselues the one vnto the other. So as a man might well discerne, what good correspondence in vanitie it was, that had thus lincked the King and the Aetolians together. For euen such bragges as here they made, be∣fore the Achaeans who knew them to be liers, had the Aetolians also made vnto King Antiochus: proclayming the victorie ouer Philip to bee meerely their Act: and the whole Countrie of Greece to bee dependant on them. Interchangeably had they beene feasted by the King, with such tales as his Embassadour told euen now; of Dahans, and Aradians, and Elimaeans, and a many others: that were all but a compa∣nie of Syrians, such as were wont to be sold about for bondslaues, and good for lit∣tle else. These diuers names of rascall people were, he said, like to the diuersitie of Venison, where with a friend of his at Chalcis (no such vanter as were these Embas∣sadours) had sometime feasted him. For all that varietie, whereat hee wondred, was none other, as his Host then merrily tolde him; than so many pieces of one tame swine, drest after fashions with varietie of . Setting therefore a∣side this vanity of idle pomp: it were good to make iudgement of the great King, by his present doings. He had, notwithstanding all this great noyse, no more than ten thousand men about him: for which little Armie he was faine in a manner, to begge victuailes of the Aetolians; and take vp monie at vsurie, to defray his charges. And thus he ran vp and downe the Countrie; from Demetrias to Lamia; thence backe to Chalcis; and being there shut out, to Demetrias againe. These were the fruits of lies: wherewith since both Antiochus and the Aetolians had each deluded other; meet it was that they should, as perhaps alreadie they did, repent, whilest wiser men tooke heed by their example. To a fauourable Auditorie much perswasion is needlesse. The Achaeans did not loue so well the Aetolians, as to desire that they should become Princes of Greece: but rather wished to see them, of all other, made the veriest abiects. Wherefore they stood not to after newes, Antiochus did, how he sped in Euboea, or what other Cities were like to take his part: but readily proclaymed war against him, and against the Aetolians. How the hatred betweene these two Nations grew inueterate sufficiently ap∣peares in the storie foregoing. Now haue they gotten each their Patrons; the one, the Romans; the other, King Antiochus. Herein did each of them vnwisely: though far the greater blame ought to be laid, on the turbulent spirits of the Aetolians. For when the Romans departed out of Greece, and left the Countrie at rest: there was no∣thing more greatly to haue beene desired, than that they might neuer finde occasi∣on to returne with an Armie thither againe. And in this respect ought the Greekes to haue sought, not how Smyrna and Lampsacus might recouer their libertie (which had neuer beene held a matter worth regarding, vntill now of late) but how the powers of the East and West, diuided and kept asunder by their Countrie, as two Seas by an Isthmus or necke of land, might be kept from ouerflowing the barre that parted them. Neither had the Romans any better pretence for their seeking to make free those base Asiatiques, which originally were Greekish; than the generall ap∣plause, wherwith all the Nation entertained this their louing offer. Yet were Lysima∣chia, and the Townes in Thrace, lately gotten by Antiochus, pretended as a very great cause of feare, that should moue them to take armes euen in their owne defence. But if all Greece would haue made intercession, and requested that things might con∣tinue as they were, promising ioyntly to assist the Romans, with their whole for∣ces both by Land and Sea, whensoeuer King Antiochus should make the least offer to stirre against them: then had not onely this quarrell beene at an end; but the Ro∣man Patronage ouer the Countrie, had been far from growing, as soone after it did, into a Lordly rule. The Achaeans were at this time, in a manner, the onely Nation of Greece, that free∣ly and generously declared themselues altogether for the Romans, their friends and benefactours. All the rest gaue doubtfull answeres of hope vnto both sides: or if some few, as did the Thessalians, were firme against Antiochus; yet helped they not one another in the quarrel, nor shewed themselues his enemies, till hee pressed them with open force. The Boeotians willingly receiued him, as soone as hee entered vpon their borders, not so much for feare of his power, as in hatred of Titus and the Ro∣mans, by whom they had beene somewhat hardly vsed. Aminander the Athamanian, besides his old friendship with the Aetolians, was caught with a bait; which it may be doubted, whether he did more foolishly swallow, or Antiochus cast out. He had married the daughter of an Arcadian, that was an idle-headed man, and vanted himselfe to be descended from Alexander the Great: naming his two sonnes, in that regard, Philip and Alexander. Philip, the elder of these brethren, accompanied his sister to the poore Court of Athamania: where hauing made his follie knowne, by talking of his Pedigree; He was iudged by Antiochus and the Aetolians, a man fit for their turnes. They made him beleeue, that in regard of his high parentage, and the famous memorie of Alexander his forefather; it was their purpose, to doe their best for the conquest of Macedon to his behoofe: since no man had thereto so good title as he. But for the enabling of them hereunto; it behoued him to draw Aminander to their partie, that so they might the sooner haue done with the Romans. Philip was highly pleased herewith; and by perswasions of himselfe, or of his sister, effe∣cted as much as they desired. But the first piece of seruice done by this imaginarie King (whether it proceeded from his owne phrenzie, in hope to get loue of the Ma∣cedonians that should be his subiects; or whether from some vanitie in King Antio∣chus that employed him) wrought more harme to his friends, than he and Aminan∣der were able to doe good. There were two thousand men committed to his lead∣ing: with which he marched vnto Cynoscephalae, there to gather vp the bones of the slaughtered Macedonians; whom their King had suffered all this while to lie vnburi∣ed. The Macedons troubled not themselues to thinke on this charitable act, as if it were to them any benefit at all: but King Philip tooke it in high indignation; as in∣tended meerely vnto his despight. Wherefore he presently sent vnto the Romans; and gaue them to vnderstand, that hee was readie with all his power to aid them wherein soeuer they should be pleased to vse him. The Aetolians, Magnetians, Euboeans, Boeotians, and Athamanians, hauing now all ioyned with him; Antiochus tooke counsaile of them about the prosecution of the warre in hand. The chiefe question was, Whether it were meet for him to in∣uade Thessalie, that would not hearken to his perswasions; or whether to let all a∣lone vntill the Spring: because it was now mid-winter. Some thought one thing, and some another: confirming each his owne sentence, with the weightiest reasons which he could alleadge; as in a matter of great importance. Hannibal was at this meeting: who had long beene cast aside, as a vessell of no vse; but was now requi∣red to deliuer his opinion. He freely told the King, That what he should now vt∣ter, was euen the same which hee would haue spoken, had his counsaile at any time before been asked since their comming into Greece. For the Magnetians, Boeotians, and other their good friends, which now so willingly tooke their parts: what were they else than so many poore Estates, that, wanting force of their owne, did adioyne themselues for vnto him, that was strongest at the present; and would after∣wards, when they saw it expedient, be as readie to fall to the contrary , alleadg∣ing the same feare for their excuse? wherefore hee thought most behoouefull, to win King Philip of Macedon vnto their partie: who (besides that being once enga∣ged, he should not afterwards haue power to recoyle and forsake them at his plea∣sure) was a mighty Prince, and one that had meanes to sustaine the Roman Warre with his proper forces. Now that Philip might be easily perswaded to ioyne with them; the benefit likely to redound vnto himselfe, by their societie, was a very strong Argument: though indeed what neede was there, of proouing by inference the likelihood of this hope? For, said Hee, These Aetolians bere present; and name∣ly, this THOAS, being lately Embassador from them into Asia, among other Motiues which he then vsed to excite the King vnto this Expedition, mainly on the same point. He told vs that PHILIP was moued beyond all patience, the Lordly of the Ro∣mans: likening that King to some wild beast, that was chained or lockt vp within some grate, and would faine breake loose. If this be so: let vs breake his chaine, and pull downe the grate, that he may regaine his libertie, and satisfie his angry stomacke, vpon those that are common Enemies to vs and him. But if it prooue , and that his feare be greater than in∣dignation: then shall it behoue vs to looke vnto him, that hee may not seeke to please his good masters the Romans, by offending vs. Your sonne SELEVCVS now at Lysimachia, with part of your Armie: if PHILIP not hearken to your Embassage; let SELEVCVS be in readines, to fall vpon Macedon, and finde him worke to defend his owne on the other side, without putting vs here to trouble. Thus much concerning PHILIP; and the present War in Greece. But more generally for the mannaging of this great enterprise, wherein you are now embarqued against the Romans, I told you my opinion at the beginning: Whereto had you then giuen eare, the by this time should haue heard other newes, than that Chal∣cis in Euboea was become ours. Italie and Gaule should haue beene on fire with warre: and, little to their comfort, they should haue vnderstood, that HANNIBAL was againe come into Italie. Neither doe I see what should hinder vs euen now from taking the same course. Send for all your Fleete and Armie hither (but in any case let Shippes of burden come along with them, loaden with store of victuals: For as the case now stands, we haue here too few hands, and too many mouthes.) Whereof let the one halfe be employed against Italie; whilest you in person with the other halfe, tarrying on this side the Ionian Sea, may both take order for the affaires of Greece, and therewith all make countenance, as if you were euen readie to follow vs into Italie: yea, and be ready to follow vs indeed, if it shall be requisite. This is my aduice: who though perhaps I am not very skilfull in all sorts of warre: yet how to warre with the Romans, I haue been by long experience, both to their cost and mine owne. Of this counsaile which I giue, I promise you my faithfull and diligent seruice for the execution: but what counsaile soeuer you shall please to follow, I wish it may bee prosperous. Many were pleased with the great spirit of the man, and said hee had spoken brauely: but of all this was nothing done; saue onely that one was sent into Asia, to make all things ready there. In the meane while they went in hand with Thessalie, about which they had before disputed. There when they had won one Towne by force, many other places, doubting their owne strength, were glad to make submission. But , that was chiefe of the Countrey, stood out: not regarding any terrible threats of the King that lay before the wals with his whole Armie. This their faith and courage was rewarded by good fortune. For M. , a Roman Propraetor did send helpe thither. Likewise Philip of Macedon professed himselfe Enemie vnto Antiochus: where by the fame of the succour comming to Larissa grew such, as wrought more than the succour could haue done, had it arriued. For Antiochus perceiuing many fires on the Mountaines toppes off; thought that a great Armie of Romans and Macedonians had beene comming vpon him. There∣fore excusing himselfe by the time of the yeere; Hee brake vp his siege, and mar∣ched away to Chalcis. At Chalcis he fell in loue with a yong Maiden, daughter vnto a Citizen of the Towne: whom, without regard of the much disproportion that was betweene them, both in yeeres and fortune, He shortly married; and so spent the Winter following, as as he could, without thinking vpon the war in hand. His great men and Captaines followed his example; and the souldiors as readily imitated their Captaines: in such wise that when he tooke the field, he might euidently perceiue in what loose manner of discipline his Armie had passed the Winter. But M. Acilius Glabrio, the Roman Consul, shall meet him very shortly, and helpe him to reclaime them from this loosenesse of nuptiall Reuels; by setting them to harder exercise. M. Acilius was chosen Consul with P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica. The warre a∣gainst Antiochus fell to him by lot; whereas otherwise He was no way so honoura∣ble, as Nasica his Colleague: vnto whom fell a charge, of farre lesse credit and im∣portance. Nasica, besides the great Nobilitie of his Familie, had beene long since, in time of the Punicke Warre, crowned with the title of The best man in Rome: when the Senate, for very feare and superstition, durst not haue so pronounced him, had they not so thought him; as being commanded by Oracle, That none other man than the verie best, should entertaine an old stone, which the Diuell then taught them to call The Mother of the gods. But no praerogatiue of Birth, Vertue, or good Opinion, gaue such aduantage to the better man, as to make choice of his owne Prouince; or arrogate more vnto himselfe, than his lot should affoord him. This vnpartiall distribution of employments, helped well to maintaine peace and con∣cord. P. Scipio therefore was appointed to make warre against the Boijans: wherein he purchased the honour of a Triumph, nothing so glorious as was that of his Col∣league; though purchased with harder seruice, requiring the more abilitie in mat∣ter of warre. But M. Acilius went ouer into Greece, with ten thousand Foot, two thou∣sand Horse, and fifteene Elephants. Ptolemie King of Aegypt, notwithstanding his late Alliance with King Antiochus: and Philip King of Macedon; had lately sent Em∣bassadours to Rome, making offer to come each of them in person with all his forces into Aetolia, there to assist the Consul in this warre. Ptolemie sent also gold and sil∣uer, toward the defraying of charges; as one that meant none other than good ear∣nest. But hee was too yong, and dwelt too farre off. So his monie was returned vnto him with thankes; and his louing offer as louingly refused. Vnto Philips Em∣bassadors answere was made, that this his friendly offer was gratefully accepted: and that the Senate and People of Rome would thinke themselues beholding to him, for the assistance that Hee should giue to Acilius the Consul. Masanissa likewise, and the Carthaginians, did striue, which of them should be most forward in gratify∣ing the Romans. Each of them promised a great quantitie of graine; which they would send partly to Rome, partly to the Armie in And herein Masanissa farre out-went the poore Citie of Carthage: as also, in that he offered to lend the Consul fiue hundred Horse, and twentie Elephants. On the other side, the Carthaginians vndertooke to set out a Fleet at their owne charges: and to bring in at one payment all the Tribute-monie, which was behinde, and ought to bee discharged by many yeerely pensions. But the Romans did neither thinke it good, to let them arme a Fleet; nor would let them themselues out of Tribute, by paying all at once. As for the Corne; it was accepted with Condition, That they should be contented to receiue the price of it. The hastie and ridiculous issue of this war, that began with such noyse and pre∣parations, were hardly credible: were not the difference exceeding great, betweene the Roman and the Asiatick souldior. Antiochus had gotten this Spring a few townes of Acarnania, after the same manner as hee had preuailed in other parts of Greece; partly by faire words, and treason of the Rulers; partly by terrour, that was like to proue their excuse, when they should againe forsake him. But King Philip and Bae∣bius, hauing recouered many places; and the Roman Consul being arriued, against whom none made resistance; He was glad to withdraw himselfe. Aminander fled out of his Athamania: which the Macedonian tooke and enioyed; as in recom∣pence of his good seruice to the Romans. Philip, the brother of Aminanders wife, was taken by the Consul; made a mocking stocke: and sent away prisoner to Rome. The Thessalians vsed much more diligence in returning to their old friends, than they had done in yeelding to the King. All their Cities, one after other, gaue vp themselues: the Garrisons of Antiochus, compounding onely for their owne liues, and departing vnarmed: yet so, that a thousand of them stayed behind, and tooke pay of the Romans. This did wonderfully perplex Antiochus: who hauing with∣drawne himselfe to Chalcis, and hearing how things went, cried out vpon his friends: and said, That they had betrayed him. He had taken a great deale of toile during one halfe of a Winter, and spent the other halfe in such Nuptials, as were little to his honour: after which, in time of need, He found all the promises of the Aetoli∣ans meerely verball: and himselfe reduced into termes of great extremitie. Hee therefore admired Hannibal as a wise man, yea a very Prophet, that had foreseene all this long before. Neuerthelesse He sent word to the Aetolians, that they should now make readie all their forces: as considering their owne need to bee no lesse than his. But the Aetolians had cause to thinke, that they themselues were shamefully disappointed by Antiochus: who hauing promised to doe great wonders, was in all this while seconded by no greater numbers out of Asia, than so many as would fill vp the same ten thousand which he first brought ouer. Yet came there some of them, though fewer than at any time before, which ioyned with him. Hereat the King was angrie: and could get no better satisfaction, than that Thoas and his fel∣lowes had done their best, in vaine, to haue made all the Nation take armes. Since therefore neither his owne men came ouer to him out of Asia, nor his friends of Greece would appeare in this time of danger: He seized vpon the Streights of Ther∣mopylae: as meaning to defend them against the Romans, vntill more helpe should come. Of the Streights of Thermopylae there hath beene spoken enough l. 3. c. 6. §. 3. before, vpon many occasions: and then chiefly, when they were defended by Leonidas a∣gainst the huge Armie of Xerxes. Wherefore it may easily be conceiued, how the Romans, that landed about Apollonia, and so came onwards into Thessalie, were vna∣ble to passe that Ledge of Mountaines, diuiding the one halfe of Greece: vnlesse they could win this difficult entrance. But there was great difference betweene Leonidas and Antiochus. The former of these, with an handfull of men, defended this pas∣sage two or three dayes together, against a World of men comming to inuade the Countrey. The latter, hauing taken vpon him to doe great miracles, and effect what he listed himselfe in Greece: did commit himselfe vnto the safetie of this place, when he was charged by not many more than he had in his owne Armie. There whilest he lay, Hee sent earnest one after other to the Aetolians, entreat∣ing them not to forsake him thus: but at least wise now to helpe, and keepe the tops of the Mountaines, lest the Romans finding any by-path, should come downe vpon him. By this importunitie, he got of them two thousand, that vndertooke to make good the few passages: by which onely, and not without extreme difficultie, it was possible for the Enemie to ascend. The Roman Consul in like sort, prepared to force the Streights: without staying to expect King Philip: that was hindered by sickenesse from accompanying him. He had with him M. Porcius Cato, and L. Vale∣rius Flaccus, that had both of them beene Consuls. These he sent forth by night with two thousand men, to trie whether by any meanes they could get vp to the Aetolians. He himselfe encouraged his Armie: not onely by telling them, with what base-conditioned enemies they had to deale: but what rich Kingdomes An∣tiochus held, that should bountifully reward them if they were victors. This was on the day before the battaile. All that night Cato had a sore iourney (for what happened vnto L. Valerius it is vncertaine, saue onely that hee failed in his intent) and so much the worse, for that he had no skilfull guide. Seeing therefore his men exceedingly tired, with climbing vp Rocks and crooked wayes: Hee com∣manded them to repose themselues; whilest Hee, being a verie able man of bodie, tooke in hand the discouerie, accompanied with no more than one of like met∣tle to himselfe. After a great deale of trouble, He found at length a path: which he tooke to be, as indeed it was, the best way leading vnto the Enemies. So thither he brought his men; and held on the same path till toward breake of day. It was a place not haunted, because in time of peace there was a faire way through the Streights below, that required no such trouble of climbing: neyther had this en∣trance of the Thermopylae beene so often the Seat of Warre, as might cause any tra∣uailers to search out the passages of those desolate Mountaines. Wherefore the way that Cato followed, though it were the best: yet did it lead him to a bogge at the end, which would suffer him to passe no further. So he staid there vntill day-light: by which he discouered both the Campe of the Greekes vnderneath him; and some of the Aetolians verie neere vnto him, that were keeping watch. He therefore sent foorth a lustie Crue of his men, whom he thought fittest for that seruice; and willed them by any meanes to get him some prisoners. This was effected: and he thereby vnderstood, that these Aetolians were no more than sixe hundred; as also that King lay beneath in the Valley. So he presently set vpon the Aetolians; ouer∣threw them; slue a great part of them; and chaced the rest, that by flying to their Campe, guided him vnto it. The fight was alreadie begun between the Armies be∣low: and the Romans, that had easily repelled the Kings men, and driuen them into their Campe, found it in a manner a desperate piece of worke to assault the Campe it selfe; which occupied the whole bredth of the Streights; was notably fortified; and not onely defended by Antiochus his long Pikes, which were best at that kinde of seruice; but by Archers and Slingers that were placed ouer them on the Hil-side, and powred downe a showre of weapons on their heads. But Cato his approch de∣termined the matter. It was thought at first, that the Aetolians had beene com∣ming to helpe the Kings men: but when the Roman armes and ensignes were dis∣couered, such was the terrour, that none made offer of resistance; but all of them forsooke the Campe, and fled. The slaughter was not great: for that the badnesse of the way did hinder the Roman Armie from making pursuit. Yet this dayes losse draue Antiochus out of Greece, who directly fled to Chalcis; and from thence, with the first opportunitie, got him backe into Asia. All the Cities that had embraced the friendship of Antiochus, prepared forthwith to entertaine the Romans, and entreat for pardon: setting open their gates; and pre∣senting themselues vnto the Consul, in manner of suppliants. Briefly, in few dayes all was recouered that Antiochus had gained: the Aetolians onely standing out, be∣cause they knew not what else to doe. Neither did the Consul giue them any respite. At his returne from Chalcis He met with King Philip, that hauing recouered health, came to joyne with him against Antiochus: ouer whom since the victorie was already gotten, Hee did gratulate vnto the Romans their good successe; and offered to take part with them in the Aetolian Warre. So it was agreed, That the Consul should be∣siege Heraclea; and Philip, Lamia; at the same time. Each of them plied his worke hard; especially Philip, who faine would haue taken Lamia before the Consul should come to helpe him. But it could not be. For his Macedonians that vsed to worke by Myne, were ouermuch hindered by the stonie ground. Yet was Lamia euen ready to be ta∣ken, when the Consul, hauing wonne , came thither; and told Philip, that the spoile of these Townes was a reward vnto those that had fought at Thermopylae. Herewith Philip must be contented; and therefore went his way quietly. But Acilius, that could so ill endure to see Philip in likelihood of thriuing by the Romans victorie, got not Lamia himselfe: vntill such time as another Consul was readie to ease him of his charge. The losse of Heraclea did so affright the Aetolians, that they thought no way sa∣fer than to desire peace. Yet had they sent vnto King Antiochus presently after his flight: entreating him not to forsake them vtterly, but eyther to returne with all those forces which he had purposed to bring into Greece; or if any thing with-held him from comming in person, at leastwise to helpe them with money and other aid. They prayed him to consider, that this did not onely concerne him in honour; but appertained vnto his owne safetie: since it would be much to his hurt, if the Ae∣tolians being wholly subdued, the Romans, without any Enemies at their backes, might set vpon him in Asia. He considered well of this; and found their words true. Therefore He deliuered vnto Nicander, one of their Embassadors, a summe of mo∣ney, that might serue to defray the charges of the Warre: promising that ere long he would send them strong aid, both by Land and Sea. Thoas, another of their Embassadors, He retained with him: who willingly stayed, that he might vrge the King to make his word good. But when Heraclea was taken from them: then did the Aetolians lay aside all hope of amending their fortune by the helpe of Antiochus; and made suit vnto the Consul to obtaine peace, vpon any reasonable Condition. The Consul would scarce vouch safe to giue them audience, but said Hee had other businesse in hand: onely He granted them tenne dayes of Truce, and sent L. Vale∣rius Flaccus with them to Hypata; willing them to make him acquainted with as much, as they would haue deliuered vnto himselfe. At their comming to Hypata; they began, as men fauouring their owne cause, to alleadge how well they had de∣serued of the Romans. Whereto Flaccus would not hearken. He told them plainly, That the memorie of all such good Offices past, was quite obliterated by the ma∣lice which they had shewed of late. Wherefore hee willed them to acknowledge their fault, and to entreat pardon. Better they thought to doe so euen betimes, than to stay till they were reduced into termes of more extremity. Hereupon they agreed to commit themselues vnto the faith of the Romans; and to that effect sent Embassadours to the Consul. This phrase of committing vnto the faith; signified, in their vse of it, little else, than the acknowledgement of a fault done, and the cra∣uing of pardon. But the Romans vsed those words in another sense; and counted them all one, as Legat. . è . 13. yeelding to discretion. Wherefore when the Consul heard them speake in this manner: Hee asked them whether their meaning were agreeable to their words. They answered that it was: and shewed him the Decree of their Na∣tion, lately made to this purpose. Then sayde Hee, I command you first of all, That none of yee presume to goe into Asia, vpon any businesse priuate or publike: then, That yee deliuer vp vnto me Dicaearchus the Aetolian, Menestratus the Epirot, Aminander the Athamanian, and such of his Countrimen as haue followed him in reuolting from vs. Whilest hee was yet speaking: Phameas the Embassadour in∣terrupted him; and prayed him not to mistake the Custome of the Greekes, who had yeelded themselues vnto his faith; not vnto slauerie. What? (saide the Consul) Doe yee stand to pleade Custome with mee, being now at my discretion? Bring hither a chaine. With that, chaines were brought; and an iron collar by his appointment fitted vn∣to euerie one of their neckes. This did so affright them, that they stood dumbe and knew not what to say. But Valerius and some others entreated the Consul, not to deale thus hardly with them, since they came as Embassadours; though since, their Condition was altered. Phameas also spake for himselfe: and said, That nei∣ther He nor yet the Apocleti or ordinarie Councel of the Nation, were able to fulfill these iniunctions; without approbation of the generall Assembly. For which cause Hee entreated yet further ten dayes respite; and had granted vnto him Truce for so long. This surcesance of warre, during tenne and other tenne dayes together, began presently after the taking of Heraclea; when Philip had beene commaunded away from Lamia, that else he might haue wonne. Now because of the indignitie herein offered vnto that King, and to the end that hee might not returne home with his Armie, like one that could not bee trusted in employment: especially the Romans being like hereafter to haue further need of him, in the continuance of this Warre: He was desired to set vpon the Atharnanians, and some other pettie Nations their borderers, whilest the Consul was with the Aetolians; taking for his reward, all that He could get. And Hee got in that space all , Perrhaebia, Ape∣rantia, and Dolopia. For the Aetolians, hearing what had befalne their Embassadors, were so enraged, That although they were very ill prouided for Warre; yet they could not endure to heare more talke of peace. And it happened, that Nicander a∣bout the same time was come backe from Antiochus, with money and hopefull promises: the Romans abiding still about Heraclea; and Philip hauing lately risen from before Lamia, yet not being far gone . His monie Nicander conueighed into Lamia, by verie vnusuall dexteritie. But hee himselfe being to passe further to the Assembly of the Aetolians, there to make report of his Embassage; was verie much perplexed about this his journie, which lay betweene the Roman and Ma∣cedonian Campes. Yet hee made the aduenture: and keeping as farre as hee could from the Roman side, sell vpon a Station of Macedonians; by whom hee was taken, and led vnto their King. He expected no good; but eyther to bee deliuered vnto the Romans, or vsed ill enough by Philip. But it seemes, that the King bad not hi∣therto concocted well the indignitie, of his being sent away from Lamia. For Hee commanded his seruants to entreat Nicander friendly: and hee himselfe being then at supper, did visit him as soone as hee rose vp: giuing him to vnderstand; That the Aetolians did now reape the fruits of their owne madnesse; much as they could neuer hold themselues contented, but would needs bee calling strangers into Greece. They had pleased themselues well, in their acquaintance first with the Romans, and then with King Antiochus: but himselfe, being their neighbour, they could neuer well endure. It was now therefore, He said, high time for them to haue regard vn∣to his friendship, whereofhitherto they had neuer made any triall: for surely their good affection, one vnto the other, would bee much more auailcable vnto each of them; than their mutuall catching of aduantages; whereby they had wrought themselues much displeasure. Thus much the King willed Nicander to signifie vn∣to his Countrimen; and priuately to hold in minde the courtesie which hee then did him, in sending him safe home. So giuing him a Conuoy to gard him to Hypata; Hee louingly dismissed him. For this benefit, Nicander was alwayes after dutiful∣ly affected to the Crowne of Macedon: so as in the warre of Perseus hee made suspected vnto the Romans; and therefore was had away to Rome, where he ended his life. When the Consul vnderstood, that the Aetolians refused to make their submis∣sion, in such wise as he required it: hee foorthwith meant to prosecute the warre a∣gainst them, without any longer forbearance. They were preparing to make head against him at Naupactus: whither hee therefore directly marched, to trie what they could or durst. The siege of Naupactus was of greater length, than the Romans had preconceiued it: for it was a strong Citie, and well manned. But Acilius stood vpon point of honour; wherein he thought that hee should haue beene a loser, by rising from before it without Victorie. So He staid there welneere all the following time of his Consulship; whilest the Macedonian King and the Achaeans made farre better vse of the Roman Victorie. Philip, as is said before, being allowed to take in such places as had reuolted vnto Antiochus, and were not hitherto reclaimed, wan the strong Citie of Demetrias; and with an hastie course of Victorie, subdued the Athamanians and others. The Achaeans called to accompt the Eleans and Messenians: which had long beene addicted to the Aetolian side; and followed it, in taking part with Antiochus. The Eleans gaue good wordes; whereby they saued themselues from trouble awhile. The Messenians being more stout, before they were inuaded; had none other helpe when the Achaean Praetor wasted their Countrie, than to of∣fer themselues vnto the Romans. Titus was then at Corinth: to whom they sent word, That at his Commandement their gates should be opened; but that vnto the Achaeans it was not their meaning to yeeld. A message from Titus to the Achaean Praetor, did suffice to call home the Armie, and finish the Warre: as also the per∣emptorie Commaund of the same Titus caused the Messenians to annex themselues vnto the Achaeans, and become part of their Common-weale. Such was now the Majestie of a Roman Embassador. Titus did fauour the Achaeans; yet could not like it well, that eyther they or any other should take too much vpon them. He thought it enough, that they had their libertie, and were strong enough to defend it against a∣nie of their neighbours. That they should make themselues great Lords, and able to dispute with the Romans vpon euen termes; it was no part of his desire. They had lately bought the Ile of Zacynthus which had once beene Philips, and was after∣ward giuen by him to Aminander who sent a Gouernour thither. But when Ami∣nander in this present Warre, was driuen out of his owne Kingdome by Philip: then did the Gouernour of Zacynthus offer to sell the Iland to the Achaeans; whom hee found readie Chapmen. Titus liked not of this: but plainely told them, That the Romans would be their owne Caruers, and take what they thought good, of the Lands belonging to their Enemies; as a reward of the victorie which they had ob∣tained. It was bootlesse to dispute. Wherefore the Achaeans referred themselues vnto his discretion. So he told them, that their Common-wealth was like a Tor∣toise, whereof Peloponnesus was the shell: and that holding themselues within that compasse, they were out of danger; but if they would needes bee looking abroad, they should lie open to blowes, which might greatly hurt them. Hauing settled things thus in Peloponnesus, Hee went ouer to Naupactus: where Glabrio the Consul had laine two moneths, that might haue beene farre better spent. There, whether out of compassion which Hee had vpon the Aetolians, or out of dislike of King Phi∣lips thriuing so fast: Hee perswaded the Consul to grant vnto the besieged, and to the whole Nation, so long Truce, that they might send Embassadours to Rome; and themselues, craue pardon of the Senate. Most like it is, that Naupactus was in great danger: else would not the Aetolians haue made such earnest suit as they did vnto Titus, for procuring of this fauour. But if Glabrio had beene sure to carrie it, in any short space: it may well bee thought hee would not haue gone away without it; since the winning of that Towne, wherein was then the whole floure of the Nation, would haue made the promised submission much more humble and sincere. When they came to Rome, no entreatie could helpe them to better Conditions, than one of these two; That either they should wholly permit themselues to the good pleasure of the Senate; Or else pay a thousand Talents, and make neither Peace nor Warre with any, further than as the Romans should giue approbation. They had not so much monie: neither could they well hope to be gently dealt withall, if they should giue themselues away vnto discretion; which what it signified, they now vnder∣stood. Wherefore they desired to haue it set downe, in what points, and how farre foorth, they should vnto the good pleasure of the Senate. But heereof they could get no certaine answere: so that they were dismissed as enemies, after long and vaine attendance. Whilest the Aetolians were pursuing their hopes of peace, the Consul had little to doe in Greece; and therefore tooke vpon him grauely to set things in order among the tractable Achaeans. Hee would haue had them to restore the banished Lacedae∣monians home into their Countrie; and to take the Eleans into the fellowshippe of their Common-wealth. This the Achaeans liked well enough: but they did not like it, that the Romans should bee meddling in all occurrences. Wherefore they de∣ferred the restitution of the banished Lacedaemonians: intending to make it an Act of their owne meere grace. As for the Eleans: they were loth to bee beholding to the Romans, and thereby to disparage the Achaeans: into whose Corporation they were desirous to bee admitted; and saw that they should haue their desire, without such compulsiue mediation. The Roman Admirall C. Liuius, much about the same time, fought a battaile at Sea with Polyxenidas, Admirall to the King Antiochus. King Eumenes brought helpe to the Romans, though it was not great: and fiue and twentie saile of Rhodians came after the battaile, when they were following the Chace. The Kings Fleet was the better of saile: but that of the Romans the better manned. Wherefore Polyxeni∣das being vanquished in fight, was yet out of danger; as soone as he betooke himselfe to a speedie retrait. And such end had the first yeeres warre, betweene King Antiochus and the Ro∣mans. After this, as many of the Greekes as had followed the vaine hopes of the Ae∣tolians, were glad to excuse themselues by feare; thinking themselues happie when by Embassadours they had obtained pardon. On the contrarie side, Philip of Ma∣cedon, Arch-enemie of late vnto the Romans, did now send to gratulate this their Victorie: and, in recompence of his good affection, had restored vnto him Deme∣trius his yonger sonne; whom some few yeeres they had kept as an hostage. Also King Ptolemie of Aegypt, gratulating the Roman Victorie, sent word how greatly all Asia and Syria were thereby terrified. In which regard Hee desired the Senate not to foreslow time; but to send an Armie, as soone as might be, into Asia: promising, that his assistance, wherein soeuer it pleased them to vse it, should not bee wanting. This Ptolemie was the sonne-in-law of King Antiochus: but hee was the friend of Fortune. He vnderstood long before, as did all that were indifferent beholders of the Contention, that the Romans were like to haue the vpper hand. The same did Antiochus now beginne to suspect, who had thought himselfe awhile as safe at E∣phesus, as if hee had beene in another World: but was told by Hannibal, That it was not so farre out of Greece into Asia, as out of Italie into Greece; and that there was no doubt but the Romans would soone be there, and make him trie the chance of a bat∣taile for his Kingdome. §. VIII. LVCIVS SCIPIO, hauing with him PVBLIVS the African his elder Brother, for his Lieutenant, is sent into Greece, He grants long Truce to the Aetolians, that so he might at leisure passe into Asia. Much trouble some businesse by Sea; and diuers fights. An inuasion vpon EVMENES his Kingdome; with the siege of Pergamus, raysed by an handfull of the Achaeans. L. SCIPIO the Consul comes into Asia: where ANTIOCHVS most earnestly desireth peace, and is denied it. The battaile of MAG∣NESIA: wherein ANTIOCHVS being vanquished, yeeldeth to the Romans good plea∣sure. The Conditions of the peace. In what sort the Romans vsed their Victorie. L. CORNELIVS SCIPIO, after a most sumptuous triumph ouer ANTIOCHVS, is surnamed The Asiatique, as his brother was stiled The African. LVCIVS CORNELIVS SCIPIO, the brother of P Scipio the African, was chosen Consul at Rome with C. Laelius. Laelius was verie gracious in the Senate: and therefore being desirous (as generally all Consuls were) of the more honourable employment, offered to referre to the arbitrement of the Senate, if L. Cornelius would be so pleased, the disposition of their Prouinces; without putting it to the hazard of a Lotterie. Lu∣cius hauing talked with his brother Publius, approued well of the motion. Such a question had not of long time beene put vnto the Fathers: who therefore were the more desirous, to make an vnblameable Decree. But the matter being otherwise somewhat indifferent; P. Scipio the African said openly thus much, That if the Se∣nate would appoint his brother to the warre against , He himselfe would follow his brother in that warre, as his Lieutenant. These words were heard with such approbation, that the controuersie was foorth with at an end. For if Antiochus relyed vpon Hannibal, and should happen to be directed wholly by that great Cap∣taine: what better man could they oppose, than Scipio; that had beene victorious against the same Great Worthie? But indeed a worser man might haue serued well enough the turne. For Hannibal had no absolute Command, nor scarce any trust of great importance: excepting now and then in consultation; where his wisdome was much approued, but his libertie and high spirit as much disliked. It is worthie of remembrance; as a signe of the freedome that he vsed in his , euen whilest he liued in such a Court. Antiochus his Armie in presence of this famous Captaine: thinking, as may seeme, to haue made him wish, that hee had beene ser∣ued by such braue men in Italie. For they were gallantly decked, both Men, Hor∣ses, and Elephants, with such costly furniture of Gold, Siluer, and Purple; as glit∣tered with a terrible brauerie on a Sun-shine day. Whereupon the King, well plea∣sing himselfe with that goodly spectacle, asked Hannibal what he thought; and whe∣ther all this were not enough for the Romans. Enough (said Hannibal) were the Romans the most couetous men in all the World: meaning, that all this Cost vpon the backes of Cowardly Asiatiques, was no better than a spoile to animate good Souldiers. How little this answere pleased the King; it is easie to ghesse. The little vse that he made of this Carthaginian, testifies that his dislike of the man, caused him to lose the vse of his seruice, when he stood in greatest necessitie thereof. The Scipio's made all haste away from Rome as soone as they could. They carried with them, besides other Souldiers newly prest to the warre, about fiue thousand Voluntaries, that had serued vnder P. Africanus. There was also a Fleet of thirtie Quinquereme Gallies, and twentie Triremes newly built, appointed vnto L. Ae∣mylius Regillus, that was chosen Admirall the same yeere for that Voyage. At their comming into Greece, they found the old Consul Glibrio besieging Amphyssa a Citie of the Aetolians. The Aetolians after that they were denied peace, had expected him once againe at Naupactus. Wherefore they not onely fortified that Towne: but kept all the passages thereto leading; which heedlessely, as in a time of confusion, they had left vngarded the last yeere. Glabrio knowing this, deceiued their expectation, and fell vpon Lamia: which being not long since much weakned by Philip, and now by him attempted on the sudden; was carried at the second assault. Thence went Hee to Amphyssa: which he had almost gotten; when L. Scipio, his successor, came with thirteene thousand Foot and fiue hundred Horse, and tooke charge of the Ar∣mie. The Towne of Amphyssa was presently forsaken by the inhabitants, but they had a Castle, or higher Towne, that was impregnable; whereinto they all retired. The Athenian Embassadors had dealt with P. Scipio, in behalfe of the Aetolians: en∣treating him to stand their friend, and helpe them in obtaining some tolerable Con∣dition of peace. He gaue them gentle words: and willed them to perswade the Ae∣tolians, that they should faithfully and with true meaning desire it. This was gladly taken. But many messages passing to and fro though Publius continued to put them in good hope; yet the Consul made still the same answere, with which they had beene chaced from Rome. The conclusion was, That they should sue for a longer time of respite from warre: whereby at more leisure they might attend some better disposition of the Senate; or any helpefull commoditie which time should affoord. So they obtained halfe a yeeres Truce: after which, the Winter was like to affoord them another halfe yeeres leisure of breathing. Hereof were not they more glad, than was P. Scipio: who thought all time lost, which with-held the Warre from pas∣sing ouer into Asia. The businesse of Aetolia being thus laide aside: and the olde Consul Glabrio sent home into Italie: the Scipio's marched into Thessalie; intending thence to take their way by Land, through Macedon and Thrace vnto the Hellespont. Yet they considred, That hereby they must commit themselues vnto the loyaltie of King Philip: who might either doe them some mischiefe by the way, if hee were disposed to watch a notable aduantage: or at the least, would he be vnfaithfull, though he were not so couragious; yet might he take such order with the Thracians, that euen for want of victuailes, by no greater inconuenience, they should be disgracefully forced to re∣turne. He had promised them the vtmost of his furtherance: wherein, whether he meant sincerely, they thought to make some triall; by causing a Gentleman to ride Post vnto him, and obserue his doings as hee should take him on the sudden. The King was merrie at a feast, and drinking, when the Messenger came: whom he louingly bade welcome; and shewed him the next day, not only what prouision of victuailes he had made for the Armie, but how he had made bridges ouer the ri∣uers, and mended the bad wayes by which they were to passe. With these good newes Gracchus returned backe in haste vnto the Scipio's: who entring into Macedon, found all things in a readines, that might helpe to aduance their iourney. The King entertayned them royally; and brought them on their way, euen to the Hellespont: where they stayed a good while, vntill their Nauie was in readinesse to transport them into Asia. Much was done at Sea in the beginning of this yeere; though, for the most part, little of importance. Polyxenidas, the Admirall of , was a banished : true to the King; and desirous of reuenge vpon his Countreymen that had ex∣pelled him. Hee, hearing that the Rhodian Fleet was at Samos, the Romans and Eu∣menes hauing not as yet put to Sea; thought to doe some what vpon those that were so early in their diligence, before their followes should arriue to helpe them. Yet went he to worke; and sent word, as in great secrecie, to the Rhodian Ad∣mirall, That if the sentence of his banishment might be repealed, He would, in re∣quitall thereof, betray all the Kings Fleet. After many passages to and fro, this was belceued: and the Rhodian Admiral grew so carelesse, expecting still when he should receiue a watch word from Polyxenidas, that himselfe was taken by Polyxenidas in his owne Hauen. The Kings Fleet setting foorth from Ephesus by night; and, for feare of being discouered, resting one day in harbour by the way; came the second night to Samos: where, by morning, it was readie to enter the Hauen. Pausistratus the Rhodian Admirall seeing this, thought it his best way of resistance, to bestow his men on the two head-lands or points of the Hauen; so to gard the mouth of it: for that he saw no likelihood of defending himselfe by Sea. But Polyxenidas had al∣readie landed some companies, in another part of the Iland: which falling vpon the backe of Pausistratus, compelled him to alter his directions, and command his men aboord. This could not be without great confusion: so as the enemies tooke him out of all order; and sunke or boorded all his Nauie, fiue excepted, that by a sudden deuice made shift to escape. Each of them hung out a burning Cresset vp∣on two poles; at the Beake-head: and then rowed forwards directly vpon the Enemie: who hauing not bethought himselfe what shift to make against such vnexpected danger of firing, was content to giue way vnto these desperate Gal∣lies, for feare lest they should burne, together with themselues, a part of the Kings Fleete. Not long after this, the Romans had some losse by tempest: whereof Polyxenidas could not take such aduantage as hee had hoped; because, putting to Sea for that purpose, Hee was driuen backe againe by the like foule weather. But the Rhodians, to shew that they were not discouraged, set forth twentie other Gallies: the Romans also with King Eumenes repaired their Fleet; and all of them together, in great bra∣uerie, presented battaile to Polyxenidas before the Hauen of Ephesus. When hee durst not accept it: they went from place to place, attempting many things, as ey∣ther they were entreated by the Rhodians, or perswaded by some appearing hopes of doing good. Yet performed they little or nothing: for that one while they were hindred by stormes at Sea; and another while by strong resistance, made against them at Land. Eumenes with his Fleet was compelled to forsake them; and returne home to the defence of his owne Kingdome. For Antiochus wasted all the grounds about Eloea and Pergamus: and leauing his sonne Seleucus to besiege the royall Citie of Pergamus, did with the rest of his Armie spoile the whole Countrey thereabout. Attalus, the brother of King Eumenes, was then in Pergamus; hauing with him no better men to defend the Citie, than were they that lay against it. Wherefore hee had reason to stand in feare; being too much inferiour in number. There came to his aid a thou∣sand Foot, and an hundred Horse of the Achoeans: old souldiors all, and trayned vp vnder Philopoemen; whose Scholler, in the Art of war, Diophanes their Commander was. This Diophanes, beholding from the walles of Pergamus, which was an high Towne, the demeanour of the Enemie; began to disd une, that such men as they should hold him besieged. For Seleucus his Armie which was encamped at the hill∣foot, seeing that none sallie foorth vpon them, grew so carelesse: as otherwise, than by spoyling all behind their backes, they seemed to forget that they were in an Enemies Countrie. Diophanes therefore spake with Attalus: and told him that hee would goe foorth to visit them. Attalus had no liking to this aduenture; for he said, that the match was nothing . But the Achoean would needes haue his will: and issuing forth, encamped not farre from the Enemie. They of Pergamus thought him little better than mad. As for the besiegers; they wondred at first what his meaning was: but when they saw that he held himselfe quiet, they made a iest of his boldnesse; and laughed to see with what an handfull of men he looked so stout∣ly. So they returned vnto their former negligence and disorders. Which perceiuing, Hee commanded all his men to follow him, euen as fast as they well might: and he himselfe, with the hundred Horse, brake out on the sudden vp∣on the Station that was next at hand. few of the enemies had their Horses readie saddled, but more few, or none, had the hearts to make resistance: so as He draue them all out of their Campe; and chaced them as farre as he might safely ad∣uenture, with great slaughter of them, and no losse of his owne. Hereat all the Ci∣tizens of Pergamus (who had couered the wals of the Towne, men and women, to beholde this spectacle) were very ioyfull; and highly magnified the vertue of these Achoeans. Yet would they not therefore issue of their gates, to helpe the Achoe∣ans in doing what remained to bee done. The next day Seleucus encamped halfe a mile further from the Towne, than hee had done before: and against him went foorth Diophanes the second time; who quietly rested awhile in his old Station. When they had staid many houres, looking who should begin: Seleucus, in faire or∣der as he came, withdrew himselfe toward his lodging that was further off. Diopha∣nes moued not whilest the Enemie was in sight: but as soone as the ground betweene them hindred the prospect, he followed them in all haste, & soone ouertaking them with his Horse, charged them in Rere; so as hee brake them, and with all his forces pursued them at the heeles, to their very Trenches. This boldnes of the Achoeans, and the basenesse of his owne men, caused Seleucus to quit the siege, little to his honour. Such being the qualitie of these Asiatiques; Philopoemen had cause to tell Romans, That hee enuied their victorie. For when Antiochus lay feasting at Chalcis after his marriage, and his souldiors betooke themselues to Riot, as it had beene in a time of great security: a good man of war might haue cut all their throates, euen as they were tipling in their victualing houses; which Philopoemen said that he would haue done, had He beene Generall of the Achaeans, and not, as he then was, a priuate man. Antiochus was full of busines: and turning his care from one thing to another, with a great deale of trauaile, brought almost nothing to passe. He had beene at Pergamus: into which Eumenes, leauing the Romans, did put himselfe with a few of his Horse and light armature. Before Pergamus he left his sonne before hath beene shewed, and went to Elaea: whither hee heard that Aemylius the Roman Ad∣mirall was come, to bring succour to Eumenes. There hee made an Ouerture of peace: about which to consult, Eumenes was sent for by Aemylius, and came from Pergamus. But when it was considered, that no conclusion could be made without the Consul; this Treatie brake off. Then followed the Ouerthrow newly menti∣oned; which caused Seleucus to giue ouer the siege of Pergamus. Afterwards, foure or fiue Townes of scarce any worth or note were taken by the King: and the Syrian Fleet, being of seuen and Saile, was beaten by the Rhodian which was of like number. But of this victorie the Rhodians had no great cause to reioyce: for that Hannibal the Carthaginian, who, together with a Courtier of Antiochus, was Admirall of the Syrians, did them in manner as great hurt as they could doe to Apollonius; and hauing the victorie taken out of his hand by Apollonius his flight, yet made such a retrait, that the Rhodians durst not farre aduenture vpon him. Now of these Actions which were but as Praefaces vnto the war; the last and greatest was a victorie of the Romans by Sea, against Polyxenidas the Kings Admirall. The bat∣taile was sought by Myonnesus a Promontorie in Asia: where Polyxenidas had with him fourescore and nine Gallies; and fiue of them greater, than any of the Romans. This being all the strength which he could make by Sea: we may note the vanity of those bragges, wherewith Antiochus vanted the last yeere, That his Armada should couer all the shores of Greece. The Romans had eight and fiftie Gallies; the Rhodians, two and twentie: the Roman being the stronger built, and more stoutly manned; the Rhodian more light and thin planckt, hauing all aduantage of speed, and good Sea-men. Neither forgot they to helpe themselues by the same deuice; with which, fiue of their Gallies had lately escaped from Samos. For with fire in their prowes they ran vpon the Enemie: who declining them for feare, laid open his side: and was thereby in greater danger of being . After no long fight, the Kings Nauie hoysted saile: and hauing a faire wind, bore away toward Ephesus as fast as they could. Yet fortie of their Gallies they left behind them: whereof thirteene were ta∣ken: all the rest burnt or sunke. The Romans and their fellowes lost only two or three ships: but got hereby the absolute Masterie of the Sea. The report of this misaduenture, may seeme to haue taken from Antiochus all vse of reason. For as if no hope had beene remayning, to defend those places that hee held in Europe: Hee presently with-drew his Garrisons from Lysimachia: which might easily haue been kept, euen till the end of Winter following, and haue reduced the besiegers (if the siege had beene continued obstinately) to termes of great extre∣mitie. He also gaue ouer the siege of Colophon: and laying aside all thought saue one∣ly of defence, drew together all his Armie; and sent for helpe to his father-in-law, King Ariarathes the Cappadocian. Thus the Roman Consul, without impediment, not onely came to the Helles∣pont; but had yeelded vnto him all places there, belonging to Antiochus on Europe side. The Fleet was then also in readinesse, to transport him ouer into Asia: where Eumenes had taken such care before, that Hee landed quietly at his owne good case; euen as if the Countrie had beene his alreadie. The first newes that hee heard of the Enemie, was by an Embassadour that came to sue for peace. This Embassa∣dour declared in his Masters name, That the same things which had hindered him from obtayning peace of the Romans heretofore, did now perswade him, that hee should easily come to good agreement with them. For in all disputations hereto∣fore, Smyrna, Lampsacus, and Lysimachia, had beene the places about which they va∣ried. Seeing therefore the King had now alreadie giuen ouer Lysimachia; and was further purposed, not to striue with the Romans about Lampsacus and Smyrna: what reason was there, why they should neede to trouble him with warre? If it was their desire, that any other Townes vpon the Coast of Asia, not mentioned by them in any former Treaties, should be also set at libertie, or otherwise deliuered into their handes: the King would not refuse to gratifie them therein. Briefly, let them take some part of Asia: so as the bounds, diuiding them from the King, might not bee vncertaine; and it should bee quietly put into their handes. If all this were not e∣nough: the King would likewise beare halfe the Charges, whereat they had beene in this warre. So praying the Romans to hold themselues contented with good offers, and not to bee too insolent vpon confidence of their fortune; Hee expected their answere. These offers which to the Embassadour seemed so great, were iud∣ged by the Romans to be verie little. For they thought it reasonable, that the King should beare all the charges of the warre, since it began through his onely fault: and that He should not onely depart out of those few Townes, which hee held in Aeolis and Ionia; but quite out of Asia the lesse, and keepe himselfe on the other side of Mount Taurus. When the Embassadour therefore , that no better bargaine could bee made, He dealt with P. Scipto in priuate: and to him he promised a great quantitie of gold, together with the free restitution of his sonne; who (it is vncer∣taine by what mischance) was taken prisoner and most honourably entertained by the King. Scipto would not hearken to the offer of gold: nor otherwise to the resti∣tution of his sonne, than vpon Condition, That it might bee with making such a∣mends for the benefit, as became a priuate man. As for the publike businesse: Hee onely said thus much, That since Antiochus had alreadie forsaken , and suffered the warre to take hold on his owne Kingdome; there was now none other way for him, than either to fight, or yeeld to that which was at his hands. Wherefore, said He, tell your King in my name, that I would aduise him to refuse no Condition whereby he may haue peace. The King was not any whit moued with this aduice. For seeing that the Con∣sul demanded of him no lesse, than if hee had beene alreadie subdued: little reason there was that he should feare to come to battaile; wherein hee could lose, as hee thought, no more, than by seeking to auoid it he must giue away. He had with him threescore and ten thousand Foot, and twelue thousand Horse; besides two and fiftie Indian Elephants, and many Chariots armed with hookes or sythes, accor∣ding to the manner of the Easterne Countries. Yet was hee nothing pleased, to heare that the Consul drew neere him apace, as one hastning to fight. But how so∣cuer hee was affected; Hee made so little shew of feare, that hearing P. Scipio to lie sicke at , He sent thither vnto him his sonne without ransome: as one both de∣sirous to comfort this noble Warriour in his sickenes, and withall not desirous to re∣taine the yong Gentleman for a pledge of his owne safetie. Thus ought his boun∣tie to bee constant. Otherwise it might be suspected, That herein he dealt craftily. For since he could haue none other ransome of Scipio, than such as an honourable man, that had no great store of wealth, might pay: better it was to doe such a cour∣tesie before the battell, as would afterwards haue beene little worth; than to stay vntill the Romans, perhaps victorious, should exact it at his hands. P. Scipio was great∣ly with the recouerie of his sonne: so as the ioy thereof was thought, to haue beene much auaileable vnto his health. In recompence of the Kings humani∣tie, He said onely thus much vnto those that brought him this acceptable Present, I am now able to make your King none other amends, than by aduising him not to fight, vn∣till hee shall heare that I am in the Campe. What he meant by this, it is hard to conie∣cture. Antiochus resolued to follow his counsaile: and therefore withdrew him∣selfe from about Thyatira, beyond the Riuer of Phrygius or Hyllus, vnto Magnesia by Sipylus: where encamping, He fortified himselfe as strongly as hee could. Thi∣ther followed him L. Scipio the Consul; and sate downe within foure miles of him. About a thousand of the Kings Horse, most of them Gallo-Greekes, came to bid the Romans welcome: of whom at first they slue some; and were anon, with some losse driuen backe ouer the Riuer. Two dayes were quietly spent, whilest neither the King nor the Romans would passe the water. The third day the Romans made the aduenture: wherein they found no disturbance; nor were at all opposed, vntill they came within two miles and an halfe of Antiochus his Campe. There, as they were taking vp their lodging, they were charged by three thousand Horse and Foote: whom the ordinarie Corps dugard repelled. Foure dayes together after this, each of them brought foorth their Armies; and set them in order before the Trenches, without aduancing any further. The day the Romans came halfe way forward, and presented battaile; which the King would not accept. Thereupon the Con∣sul tooke aduice what was to bee done. For either they must fight vpon whatsoe∣uer disaduantage, or else resolue to abide by it all Winter, farre from any Countrey of their friends, and therefore subiect vnto many difficulties: vnlesse they would staine their honour by returning farre backe, to winter in a more conuenient place; and so deferre the warre vntill the next Spring. The Roman souldier was throughly perswaded of that Enemies base temper. Wherefore it was the generall Crie, that this great Armie should bee assailed, euen in the Campe where it lay: as if rather there were so many beasts to be slaughtered, than men to bee fought with. Yet a day or two passed, in discouering the fortifications of Antiochus, and the safest way to set vpon him. All this while P. Scipio came not. Wherefore the King, being loth to dishearten his men, by seeming to stand in feare of the Enemie, resolued to put the matter to triall. So when the Romans tooke the field againe, and ordered their Battailes: He also did the like; and aduanced so farre, that they might vnder∣stand his meaning to fight. The Roman consisted of foure Legions, two Roman and two Latine: in each of which were fiue thousand and foure hundred men. The Latines, as vsually, were in the points; the Romans, in the maine battell. All of them, according to their wonted for me, were diuided into Maniples. The Hastati had the leading: af∣ter them followed the Principes, at such distance as was vsuall; and last of all, the Triarij. Now beside these, there were about three thousand Auxiliaries; partly Achaeans; and partly such as belonged to Eumenes: which were placed in an equall Front beyond the Latines in the right wing. Vtmost of all (saue some fiue hundred Cretians, and of the Trallians ) were almost three thousand Horse: of which, Eumenes had brought thither eight hundred; the rest being Roman. The left wing was fen∣ced by the banke of the riuer: yet foure Troups of horse were placed there, though such helpe seemed in a manner needlesse. Two thousand Voluntaries, Macedoni∣ans and Thracians, were left to guard the Campe. The Consul had with him sixe∣teene African Elephants, which he bestowed in his Rere: forasmuch as had they come to fight with those of Antiochus, they onely would haue serued to discourage his men; as being sure to be beaten: the Indian being farre the greater, and more couragious beasts: whereof Antiochus had likewise much aduantage in number. The Kings Armie being compounded of many Nations, diuersly appointed, and not all accustomed to one manner of fight, was ordered according to the seuerall kindes, in such wise as each might be of most vse. The maine strength of his Foote consisted in sixteene thousand, armed all Macedonian- like, and called Phalangiers. These Hee placed in the middest, and diuided into tenne Battalions: euery one ha∣uing two and thirtie in File, and fiftie in Front. Betweene euery Battalion were two Elephants, goodly beasts, and such as being adorned with Frontals, high Crests, Towres on their backes, and besides him that gouerned the Elephant, foure men in Tower, made a gallant and terrible shew. On the right hand of these were fifteene hundred Horse of the Gallo-Greekes: then, three thousand Barbd Horse: and Regiment of almost a thousand Horse, called the Agema, that were all Medians, the choice of the Countrie, and accompanied by some others. All which Troupes of Horse, diuided in their seuerall kindes, doe seeme to haue followed one another in depth, rather than to haue been stretched out in Front. Adioyning to these, were sixteene Elephants together in one flocke. A little further to the right hand, was the Kings owne Regiment; called the Argyraspides, or Siluershields, by a name borrowed from their furniture, but nothing like so valiant as those of the same name, that had serued vnder Great Alexander: then, twelue hundred Ar∣chers on horsebacke, three thousand light-armed Foote, two thousand and fiue hundred Archers of Mysia; with foure thousand slingers and Archers of the Cirtaeans, and Elymaeans. On the left hand of the Phalangiers, were placed the like numbers of Gallo-Greekes, and Barbd Horse: as also two thousand Horse that were sent from Ariarathes, with two thousand and seuen hundred of diuers Nations; and a Regiment of a thousand Horse more lightly armed, that were cal∣led the Kings Troupe, being Syrians, Phrygians, and Lydians. In Front of all these Horse were the Chariots armed with Hooks or Sythes, and the Dromedaries, where∣on sate Arabians with long Rapiers, that would serue to reach from those high Ca∣mels. Beyond these were, as in the right wing, a rabble of many Nations, Carians, Cilicians, Pamphylians, Pisidians, Cyrtaeans, Elymaeans, and many others, hauing also with them sixteene Elephants. Antiochus himselfe commanded in the right wing: Seleucus in the left: and three of his principall Captaines ouer the Phalangiers. The first onset was giuen by the Dromedaries, and armed Chariots: of which the one, being like to the Horse; the other, to breake the Squadrons of the Foot; Eumenes with a few light-armed Cretians, Archers, Darters, and Slingers, ea∣sily made frustrate the danger threatned by them both. For with showtings, and noyses, and some wounds, they were driuen out of the field; and running backe vpon their owne men, did the same harme which they had intended to the Ene∣mies. Wherefore the Roman Horse following this aduantage, charged vpon the left wing: where they found no resistance; some being out of order; others being without courage. It is shamefull to rehearse, and so strange, that it may hardly seeme credible: that the Phalangiers, with such varietie of Auxiliaries, made little or no resistance; but all of them fled, in manner, as soone as they were charged. Onely the King, Antiochus himselfe, being in the left wing of his owne battaile: and seeing the Latines, that stood opposite vnto him, weakly flancked with Horse: gaue vpon them couragiously, and forced them to retire. But M. Aemylius, that had the Guard of the Roman Campe, issued foorth with all his power to helpe his fellowes: and, what by perswasion, what by threats, made them renewe the fight. Succour also came from the right wing, where the Romans were alreadie victorious: whereof when Antiochus discouered the approch; He not onely turned his Horse about, but ranne away vpon the spur without further tarriance. The Campe was defended a little while: and with no great valour; though by a great multitude that were fled into it. Antiochus is said to haue lost in this battaile fiftie thousand Foot, and foure thousand Horse; besides those that were taken. Of the Romans, there were not slaine aboue three hundred Foot, and foure and twentie Horse: of Eumenes his followers fiue and twentie. Antiochus fled to Sardes, and from thence to Apamea, the same night; hearing that Seleucus was gone thither before. He left the custodie of Sardes, and the Castle there, to one whom he thought faithfull. But the Townesmen and Souldiors were so dismayed with the greatnesse of the Ouerthrow; that one mans faith was worth nothing. All the Townes in those parts, without expecting summons, yeelded vp themselues by Embassadors: whom they sent to the Romans, whilest they were on the way. Neither were many dayes spent, ere Antiochus his Embassadour was in the Campe: hauing none other errand, than to know what it would please the Romans to impose vpon the King his Master. P. Scipio was now come to his bro∣ther, who obtained leaue to make the answere, because it should be gentle. They required no more than they had lately done: which was, That hee should quite abandon his Dominions on this side of Taurus. For their charges in that warre they required fifteene thousand Talents: fiue hundred in hand; two thousand and fiue hundred, when the Senate and People of Rome should haue confirmed the peace; and the other twelue thousand, in twelue yeeres next ensuing by euen por∣tions. Likewise they demanded foure hundred Talents for Eumenes; and some store of Corne, that was due to him vpon a reckoning. Now besides twentie hostages which they required, very earnest they were to haue Hannibal the Carthaginian, and Thoas the Aetolian, with some others who had stirred vp the King to this warre, de∣liuered into their hands. But any wise man might so easily haue perceiued, that it would be their purpose to make this one of their principall demaunds; as no great art was needfull to beguile their malice. The Kings Embassadour had full com∣mission, to refuse nothing that should be enjoyned. Wherefore there was no more to doe, than to send immediatly to Rome for the ratification of the Peace. There were new Consuls chosen in the meane while at Rome, M. Fuluius, and Cn. Manlius Volso. The Aetolians desired peace, but could not obtaine it: because they would accept neither of the two Conditions to them before propounded. So it was decreed, That one of the Consuls should make Warre vpon the Aetolians, the other, vpon Antiochus in Asia. Now though shortly there came newes, that Antiochus was alreadie vanquished in battaile, and had submitted himselfe vnto all that could be required at his hands: yet since the State of Asia was not like to bee so throughly settled by one Victorie, but that many things might fall out worthie of the Romans care; Cn. Manlius, to whom Asia fell by lot, had not his Prouince changed. Soone after this came the Embassadours of King Antiochus to Rome, accompa∣nied with the Rhodians and some others: yea by King Eumenes in person; whose presence added a goodly lustre to the businesse in hand. Concerning the peace to be made with King Antiochus, there was no disputation: it was generally approoued. All the trouble was, about the distribution of purchase. King Eumenes recko∣ned vp his owne deserts: and comparing himselfe with Masanissa, hoped that the Romans would bee more bountifull to him than they had beene to the Numidian, since they had found him a King indeed, whereas Masanissa was onely such in title; and since both he and his father had alwayes beene their friends, euen in the worst of the Roman fortune. Yet was there much adoe to make him tell what he would haue: He still referring himselfe to their courtesie; and they desiring him to speake plaine. At length he craued that they would bestow vpon him, as much of the Countrie by them taken from Antiochus, as they had no purpose to keepe in their owne hands. Neither thought hee it needfull, that they should trouble them∣selues with the care of giuing libertie to many of the Greeke Townes, that were on Asia side. For since the most of those Townes had beene partakers with the King in his Warre; it was no reason that they should be gainers by his ouer throw. The Rhodians did not like of this. They desired the Senate to be truly Patrons of the Gre∣cian liberty; and to call to minde, that no small part of Greece it selfe had beene subiect vnto Philip, and serued him in his Warre: which was not alleadged against them as a cause why they should not be made free, after that Philip was ouercome. But the maine point whereon they insisted, was this, That the Victory of the Romans against King Antiochus was so great, as easily might satisfie the desires of all their friends. The Senate was glad to heare of this; and very bountifully gaue away so much, that eue∣ry one had cause to be well pleased. Such end had the Warre against King Antiochus: after which, L. Cornelius Scipio, returning home, had granted vnto him the honour of a Triumph: the pompe whereof exceeded in riches, not onely that of Titus Quintius Flaminius, but of any ten that Rome had beheld vntill that day. Now forasmuch as the surname of The African had beene giuen vnto P. Scipio, it was thought conuenient by some, to re∣ward L. Scipio with the title of The Asiatick: which the fortune of his Victorie had no lesse deserued; though the vertue, requisite to the purchase thereof, was no way correspondent. §. IX. The Aetolians, and the Gallogreekes, vanquished by the Roman Consuls FVLVIVS and MANLIVS. MANLIVS hardly obtaines a Triumph: being charged (among other obiections) with attempting to haue passed the bounds appointed as fatall to the Romans by SIBYL. Of SIBYLS Prophectes; the Bookes of HER∣MES; and that Inscription, SIMONI DEO SANCTO. The ingratitude of Rome to the two SCIPIOES: and that beginning and faction among the Roman Nobilitie. MARC. FVLVIVS and Cn. Manlius had the same charge diuided be∣tweene them, which L. Cornelius Scipio, now styled Asiaticus, had late∣ly vndergone. It was found more than one mans worke, to looke at once to Greece and to Asia. And for this reason was it apparent, that L. Scipio had graunted so long a Truce to the Aetolians. But since, in this long Interim of Truce, that haughtie little Nation had not sought to hum∣ble it selfe to the Roman Maiestie, it was now to bee brought vnto more lowlie termes than any other of the Greekes. The best was, that so great a storme fell not vnexpected vpon the Aetolians. They had foreseene the danger, when their Em∣bassadours were vtterly denied peace at Rome: and they had prouided the last re∣medie; which was, to entreat the Rhodians and Athemans to become intercessours for them. Neither were they so deiected, with any terrible apprehensions, that they could not well deuise, euen vpon helping themselues, by repurchase of Coun∣tries lost, where they spied . Poore Kin Aminander liued in exile among them, whilest Philip of Macedon kept, for him, possession of his Lands and Castles. But the Athamanians (besides that ma∣nie of them bore a naturall affection to their owne Prince) hauing beene long accu∣stomed to serue a Mountaine Lord, that conuersed with them after an homelie manner; could not endure the proud and insolent manner of commaund, vsed by the Captaines of Philip his Garrisons. They sent therefore some few of them to their King, and offered their seruice toward his restitution. At the first there were onely foure of them; neither grew they, at length, to more than two and fiftie, which vndertooke the worke. Yet assurance, that all the reft would follow, made Aminander willing to trie his fortune. He was at the borders with a thousand Aeto∣lians, vpon the day appointed: at what time his two and fiftie aduenturers hauing diuided themselues into foure parts, occupied, by the readie assistance of the multi∣tude, foure the chiefe Townes in the Countrie, to his vse. The fame of this good successe at first; with letters running from place to place, whereby men were ex∣horted to doe their best in helping forward the Action, made the Lieutenants of Philip vnable to thinke vpon resistance. One of them held the Towne of Theium a few dayes; giuing thereby some leisure vnto his King to prouide for the rescue. But when he had done his best, he was thence; and could onely tell Philip, whom he met on the way, that all was lost. Philip had brought from home six thousand men; of whom, when the greater part could not hold out, in such a running march, he left all saue two behind him, & so came to Athenaeum, a little Athamani∣an Castle, still was his, as being on frontier of Macedon. Thence he sent Zeno, who had kept Theium a while, to place lying ouer Argithea, that was chiefe of the Countrie. Zeno did as he was appointed: yet neither he, nor the King had the boldnesse to descend vpon Argithea; or that they might perceiue the Athamanians, all along the hill sides, readie to come downe vpon them, when they should be bu∣sie. Wherefore nothing was thought more honourable than a safe retreat: specially when Aminander came in sight with his thousand Aetolians. The Macedonians were called back, from-wards Argithea, and presently withdrawne by their King towards his owne borders. But they were not suffered to depart in quiet at their pleasure. The Athamanians and Aetolians way-layd them, and them so closely, that their retreat was in manner of a plaine flight, with great of men and armes; few of those escaping, that were left behind, as to make a countenance of holding somewhat in the Countrey, vntill Philip his returne. The Aetolians, hauing found the businesse of Athamania so easie, made attempt, in their owne behalfe, vpon the Amphilochians and Aperantians. These had belon∣ged vnto their Nation, and were lately taken by Philip; from whom they diligent∣ly reuolted, and became Aetolian againe. The Dolopians lay next; that had been euer belonging to the Macedonian, and so did still purpose to continue. These tooke armes at first: but soone layed them away; seeing their neighbours readie to fight with them in the Aetolian quarrell, and seeing their owne King so hastily gone, as if hee meant not to returne. Of these victories the ioy was the lesse; for that newes came of Antiochus his last ouerthrow, and of M. Fuluius the new Consul his hasting with an armie into Greece. Aminander sent his excuses to Rome, praying the Senate, not to take it in despight, that he had recouered his owne from Philip with such helpe as hee could get. Neither seemes it that the Romans were much offended to heare of Philip his losses: for of this fault they neither were sharpe correctors, nor earnest reprouers. Fuluius went in hand with the businesse, about which he came, and layed siege to Ambracia, a goodly Citie, that had beene the chiefe seate of Pyrrhus his Kingdome. With this hee began; for that it was of too great importance to bee abandoned by the Aetolians: yet could not by them bee relieued, vnlesse they would aduenture to fight vpon equall ground. To helpe the Ambracians, it was not in the Aetolians power: for they were, at the same time, vexed by the Illyrians at sea, and ready to be driuen from their new conquest, by Perseus the sonne of Philip, who inuaded the Countries of the Amphilochians and Dolopians. They were vnable to deale with so many at once; and therefore as earnestly sought peace with the Romans, as they stoutly made head against the rest. In the meane while the Athenian and Rhodian Embassadors came; who besought the Consul to grant them peace. It helped well that Ambracia made strong resistance, and would not be terrified, by any vio∣lence of the assaylants, or danger that might seeme to threaten. The Consul had no desire to spend halfe his time about one Citie, and so be driuen to leaue vnto his successor the honour of finishing the warre. Wherefore he gladly kened vnto the Aetolians, and bade them seeke peace with faithfull intent, without thinking it ouer-deare, at a reasonable price; considering with how great a part of his King∣dome their friend Antiochus had made the same purchase. He also gaue leaue to A∣minander, offering his seruice as a mediatour, to put himselfe into Ambracia, and trie what good his perswasions might doe with the Citizens. So, after many de∣maunds and excuses, the conclusion was such, as was grieuous to the weaker, but not vnsufferable. The same Embassadours of the Athenians and Rhodians accom∣panied those of the Aetolians to Rome, for procuring the confirmation of Peace. Their cloquence and credit was the more needfull in this intercession, for that Phi∣lip had made very grieuous complaint about the losse of those Countries, which they had lately taken from him. Hereof the Senate could not but take notice; though it hindered not the peace, which those good Mediatours of Rhodes and A∣thens did earnestly sollicite. The Aetolians were bound to vphold the maiestie of the people of Rome, and to obserue diuers Articles, which made them lesse free, and more obnoxious to the Romans, than any people of Greece; they hauing been the first that called these their Masters into the Countrie. The Ile of Cephalenia was taken from them by the Romans: who kept it for themselues (as not long since they had gotten Zacynthus from the Achaeans, by stiffely pressing their owne right) that so they might haue possession along the coast of Greece, whilest they seemed to forbeare the Countrey. But concerning those places, whereto Philip, or others, might lay claime, there was set downe an Order so perplexed, as would necessarily require to haue the Romans Iudges of the controuersies, when they should arise. And hereof good vse will be shortly made: when want of employment elswhere, shall cause a more Lordly Inquisition to be held, vpon the affaires of Macedon and Greece. Cn. Manlius, the other Consull, had at the same time warre in Asia, with the Gallo-Greekes and others. His Armie was the same that had followed L. Scipio; of whose victorie, his acts were the consummation. Hee visited those Countries on the hither side of Taurus, that had scarce heard of the Romans; to whom they were abandoned by Antiochus. Among these there were some pettie Lords, or Tyrants, some free Cities, and some that were together at warres, without regard of the great alteration hapned in Asia. From euery of these hee got somewhat; and by their quarrels found occasion to visit those Prouinces, into which hee should else haue wanted an errand. He was euen loaden with bootie, when, hauing fetcht a compasse about Asia, he came at length vpon the Gallogreekes. These had long do∣miniered ouer the Countrie: though of late times, it was rather the fame and ter∣rour of their forepassed acts, than any present vertue of theirs, which held them vp in reputation. Of the Romans they had lately such triall, when they serued vn∣der King Antiochus, as made them to know themselues farre the worse men. Wherefore they thought it no small part of their safetie, that they dwelt vpon the Riuer Halys, in an Inland Countrie, where those enemies were not like to search them out. But when such hopes failed; and when some Princes of their owne Nation, that had beene friends of Eumenes, exhorted the rest to yeeld: then was no counsaile thought so good, as to forsake their houses and Countrie, and, with all that they could carrie or driue, to betake themselues vnto the high moun∣taines of Olympus and Margana. These mountaines were exceeding hard of ascent, though none should vndertake the custodie. Being therefore well manned and vi∣ctuailed for a long time; as also the naturall strength being helpt, by such fortifi∣cation as promised greatest assurance: it was thought, that the Consul would ei∣ther forbeare the attempt of forcing them, or easily be repelled; and that finally, when he had staied there awhile, winter, and much want, should force him to dis∣lodge. Yet all this auailed not. For whereas the Gallogreekes had beene carelesse of furnishing themselues with casting weapons, as if the stones would haue serued well enough to that purpose: the Romans, who came farre otherwise appointed, found greater aduantage in the difference of armes, than impediment in disaduan∣tage of ground. Archers and Slingers did easily preuaile against casters of stones; especially being such as were these Gallogreekes, neither exercised in that manner. of fight, nor hauing prepared their stones before hand, but catching vp what lay next, the too great, and the too little, oftner than those of a fit size. Finally, the Barbarians, wanting defensiue armes, could not hold out against the arrowes and weapons of the Roman light armature: but were driuen from a piece of ground, which they had vndertaken to make good, vp into their Campe on the top of the mountaine; and being forced out of their Campe, had none other way left, than to cast themselues headlong downe the steepe rockes. Few of the men escaped aliue: all their wiues, children, and goods became a prey vnto the Romans. In the very like manner, were the rest of that Nation ouercome soone after, at the other mountaine: onely more of them saued themselues by flight, as hauing fairer way at their backes. These warres being ended: Fuluius and Manlius were appointed, by the Senate, each of them to retaine as Proconsul his Prouince for another yeere. Fuluius, in his second yeere, did little or nothing. Manlius gaue peace to those whom hee had vanquished; as likewise to the Cappadocian, and some others, not by him vanquished, but submitting themselues for feare of the Roman armes. Hee drew from them all, what profit he could: and laide vpon them such conditions, as hee thought expedient. He also did finish the league of peace with Antiochus; whereto he swore, and receiued the Kings oath by Embassadours, whom hee sent for that purpose. Finally hauing set in order the matters of Asia, he tooke his way toward the Hellespont, loaden with spoile, as carrying with him (besides other treasures) all that the Gallogreekes had in so many yeeres extorted, from the wealthie Prouin∣ces that lay round about them. Neither did this Armie of Manlius returne home, rich in money alone, or cattell, or things of needfull vse, which the Roman soul∣dier had beene wont to take as the only good purchase; but furnished with sump∣tuous houshold-stuffe, and slaues of price, excellent Cookes, and Musicians for banquets, and, in a word, with the seedes of that luxurie, which finally ouer-grew and choked the Roman vertue. The Countrie of Thrace lay betweene Hellespont and the Kingdome of Mace∣don, which way Manlius was to take his iourney homeward. L. Scipio had found no impediment among the Thracians: either for that he passed through them, with∣out any such bootie as might prouoke them; or perhaps rather, because Philip of . l. 39. Macedon had taken order, that the Barbarians should not stirre. But when Manlius came along with an huge traine of baggage; the Thracians could not so well con∣taine themselues. Neither was it thought, that Philip tooke it otherwise than ve∣rie pleasantly, to haue this Roman Armie robbed, and well beaten on the way. He had cause to be angry; seeing how little himselfe was regarded, and what great re∣wards were giuen to Eumenes. For he vnderstood, and afterwards gaue the Romans to vnderstand, that Eumenes could not haue abidden in his owne Kingdome, if the People of Rome had not made warre in Asia: whereas contrariwise, Antiochus had offered vnto himselfe three thousand talents, and fiftie ships of warre, to take part with him and the Aetolians; promising moreouer to restore vnto him all the Greeke Cities, that had beene taken from him by the Romans. Such being the difference betweene him and Eumenes, when the warre began: he thought it no euen dealing of the Romans, after their victorie, to giue away not onely the halfe of Asia, but Chersonnesus and Lysimachia in Europe, to Eumenes; whereas vpon himselfe they be∣stowed not any one Towne. It agreed not indeed with his Nobilitie, to goe to Rome and begge Prouinces in the Senate, as Eumenes and the Rhodians had lately done. He had entertained louingly the two Scipio's, whom he thought the most honou∣rable men in Rome; and was growne into neere acquaintance with Publius, hol∣ding correspondence with him by letters, whereby hee made himselfe acquainted with the warres in Spaine and Africk. This perhaps he deemed sufficient, to breed in the Romans a due respect of him. But Eumenes tooke a furer way. For the Scipi∣o's had not the disposing of that which they wanne from Antiochus: as neither in∣deed had Manlius, nor the ten Delegates assisting him; but the Senate of Rome, by which those Delegates were chosen, and instructed how to proceed. When Philip therefore saw these vpstart Kings of Pergamus, whom he accounted as base compa∣nions, aduanced so highly, and made greater than himselfe; yea himselfe vnregat∣ded, contemned, and exposed to many wrongs: then found he great cause to wish, that he had not so hastily declared himselfe against Antiochus, or rather that hee had ioyned with Antiochus and the Aetolians, by whom he might haue beene freed from his insolent masters. But what great argument of such discontentednesse the Macedonian had, we shall verie shortly be vrged to discourse more at large. At the present it was beleeued, that the Thracians were by him set on, to assaile the Romans passing through their Countrie. They knew all aduantages: and they fell, vnex∣pected, vpon the carriages, that were bestowed in the midst of the Armie; where∣of part had alreadie passed a dangerous wood, through which the baggage follow∣ed; part was not yet so farre aduanced. There was enough to get, and enough to leaue behind: though both the getting, and the sauing, did cost many liues, as well of the Barbarians as of the Romans. They fought vntill it grew night: and then the Thracians withdrew themselues; not without as much of the bootie, as was to their full content. And of such trouble there was more, though lesse dangerous, before the Armie could get out of Thrace into Macedon. Through the Kingdome they had a faire march into Epirus; and so to Apollonia, which was their handle of Greece. To Manlius, and to Fuluius, when each of them returned to the Citie, was gran∣ted the honour of Triumph. Yet not without contradiction: especially to Man∣lius; whom some of the ten Delegates, appointed to assist him, did very bitterly taxe, as an vnworthie Commander. Touching the rest of their accusation; it suf∣ficeth that he made good answere, and was approoued by the chiefe of the Senate. One clause is worthie of more particular consideration. Reprehending his desire to haue hindred the peace with Antiochus; they said, That with much adoe he was kept Liu. l. 38. from leading his Armie ouer TAVRVS, and aduenturing vpon the calamitie threatned by SYBYLS verses, vnto those that should passe the fatall . What calamitie or ouer∣throw this was, wherewith Sibyls prophecie threatned the Roman Captaine or Armie, that should passe ouer Taurus, I doe not conceiue. Pompey was the first, that marched with an Armie beyond those limits: though the victories of Lucullus had opened vnto him the way, and had before-hand wonne, in a sort, the Coun∣tries on the other side of the Mount; which Lucullus gaue to one of Antiochus his race, though Pompey occupied them for the Romans. But wee finde not, that either Lucullus or Pompey suffered any losse, in presuming to neglect the bounds appoin∣ted by Sibyl. Indeed the accomplishment of this prophecie, fell out neere about one time, with the restitution of Ptolemie King of Aegypt; that was forbidden vn∣to the Romans by the same Sibyl. It may therefore seeme to haue had reference vnto the same things, that were denounced, as like to happen vpon the reduction of the Aegyptian King. Whether the Oracles of Sibyl had in them any truth, and Tull. de . lib, 2. were not, as Tullie noteth, sowed at randome in the large field of Time, there to take root, and get credit by euent; I will not here dispute. But I hold this more proba∣ble, than that the restitution of Ptolemie to his Kingdome by Gabinius the Roman, should haue any way betokened the comming of our Sauiour: as some both anci∣ent and moderne Christian Writers haue beene well pleased to interprete Sibyl in that prophecic. Of the Sibylline praedictions I haue sometimes thought reuerend∣ly: though not knowing what they were (as I thinke, few men know) yet follow∣ing the common beleefe and good authoritie. But obseruation of the shamefull Idolatrie, that vpon all occasions was aduanced in Rome by the bookes of Sibyl, had well preuailed vpon my credulitie, and made mee suspect, though not the faith and pious meaning, yet the iudgement of Eusebius: when that learned and excellent Isaac. Casaub. 1. Annal. Bar. n. 10. & 11. worke of Master Casaubon vpon the Annales of Cardinall Baronius, did altogether free mee from mine errour; making it apparent, That not onely those prophecies of Sibyl, wherein Christ so plainely was foreshewed, but euen the bookes of Hermes, which haue borne such reputation, were no better than counterfeited pieces, and at first entertained (whosoeuer deuised them) by the vndiscreet zeale of such, as delighted in seeing the Christian Religion strengthned with forreine proofes. And in the same ranke, I thinke, wee ought to place that notable Historie, reported by Eusebius from no meane Authors, Of the honour which was done to Simon Magus Euseb. Eccl. hist. . 13. in Rome; namely, of an Altar to him erected, with an inscription, Simoni Deo Sancto, that is, To Simon the holy God. For what can be more strange, than that a thing so memorable, and so publike, should haue beene quite omitted by Tacitus, by Sueto∣nius, by Dion, and by all which wrote of those times? Philosophers and Poets would not haue suffered the matter to escape in silence, had it beene true; neither can it be thought that Seneca, who then liued and flourished, would haue abstained from speaking any word of an Argument so famous. Wherefore I am perswaded, that this inscription, Simoni Deo Sancto, was, by some bad Criticisme, taken amisse in place of SEMONI SANGO: a title foure hundred yeeres older than the time of Simon Magus. For the goods of one Vitruuius a Rebell, had many ages before beene consecrated SEMONI SANGO, that is, To the Spirit or Demi-god Sangus, in whose Chappell they were bestowed. So as either by the ill shape of the old Roman letters, or by some spoile that Time had wrought vpon them; it might easily come to passe, that the words should bee misse-read, SIMONI SANCTO, and that some Christian who had heard of Simon Magus, but not of Sangus, thereupon should frame the coniecture, which now passeth for a true Historie. Such conie∣ctures, being entertained without examination, finde credit by Tradition, whereby also, many times, their fashion is amended, and made more Historicall, than was conceiued by the Authour. But it cannot be safe, to let our faith (which ought to stand firme vpon a sure foundation) leane ouer-hardly on a well painted, yet rot∣ten, post. Now concerning the Triumph of Cn. Manlius, it may be numbred among a few of the richest, which euer the Citie beheld. Out of that which hee brought into the Treasurie, was made the last paiment of those monies which the Com∣mon-wealth had borrowed from priuate men, in the second Punicke warre. So long was it, that Rome had still some feeling of Hannibal: which being past, there was re∣maining neither care, nor memorie, of any danger. This Triumph of Manlius was deferred by him, euen as long as hee well could: for that he thought it not safe, to make his entrance into the Citie, vntill the heat of an Inquisition, then raging therein, should be allayed. The two Scipio's were called, one after other, into iudgement, by two Tribunes of the people; men, onely by this accusation, knowne to Posteritie. P. Scipio the African, with whom they began, could not endure that such vnworthy men should question him, of purloining from the Common Treasury, or of being hired with bribes by Antiochus, to make an ill bargaine for his Countrey. When therefore his day of answere came; hee appeared before the Tribunes, not humbly as one accused, but followed by a great traine of his friends and Clients, with which he passed through the middest of the Assembly, and of∣fered himselfe to speake. Hauing audience, hee told the People, That vpon the same day of the yeere hee had fought a great battell with Hannibal, and finished the Punicke Warre, by a signall victory. In memory whereof, hee thought it no fit season to brabble at the Law; but intended to visit the Capitoll, and there giue thankes to Iupiter, and the rest of the gods, by whose grace, both on that day and at other times, hee had well and happily discharged the most weighty businesse of the Common-wealth. And hereto hee inuited with him all the Citizens: request∣ing them, That if euer since the seuenteenth yeere of his life, vntill he now grew old, the ho∣nourable places by them conserred vpon him, had preuented the capacitie of his age, and yet his deserts had exc'eded the greatnesse of those honourable places; then would they pray, that the Princes and great ones of their Citie might still bee like to him. These words were heard with great approbation: so as all the people, euen the Officers of the Court, followed Scipio; leauing the Tribunes alone, with none about them, excepting their owne slaues and a Crier, by whom ridiculously they cited him to iudge∣ment, vntill for very shame, as not knowing what else to doe, they granted him, vnrequested, a further day. After this, when the African perceiued that the Tri∣bunes would not let fall their suit, but enforce him to submit himselfe to a disgrace∣full triall: hee willingly relinquished the Citie, and his vnthankefull Romans, that could suffer him to vndergoe so much indignitie. The rest of his time hee spent at Liternum: quietly, with a few of his inward friends, and without any desire of see∣ing Rome againe. How many yeeres he liued, or whether he liued one whole yeere, in this voluntarie banishment; it is vncertaine. The report of his dying in the same yeere, with Hannibal and Philopoemen, as also of his priuate behauiour at Liter∣num, render it probable, that he out-liued the Tribuneship of his accusers; who meant to haue drawne him back to his answere, if one of their Colleagues (as one of them had power to hinder all the rest from proceeding) had not caused them to desist. Howsoeuer it was; the same Tribunes went more sharply to worke with L. Scipio the Asiatique. They propounded a Decree vnto the People, touching mo∣nie receiued of Antiochus, and not brought into the common Treasury; That the Senate should giue charge vnto one of the Praetors, to inquire, and iudicially deter∣mine, thereof. In fauour of this Decree, an Oration was made by Cato, the supposed author of these contentions, and instigator of the Tribunes. He was a man of great, but not perfect, vertue; temperate, valiant, and of singular industrie; frugall also, both of the publike, and of his owne; so as in this kinde hee was euen faultie: for though hee would not be corrupted with bribes, yet was he vnmercifull and vncon∣scionable, in seeking to increase his owne wealth, by such meanes as the Lawe did warrant. Ambition was his vice; which being poysoned with enuie, troubled both himselfe and the whole Citie, whilest hee liued. His meane birth caused him to hate the Nobility, especially those that were in chiefe estimation. Neither did he spare to bite at such as were of his owne ranke, men raised by desert, if their ad∣uancement were like to hinder his: but lately before this, when Glabrio, whose Lieutenant hee had been at , was his Competitor for the Censorship, and likely to carrie it, hee tooke an Oath against him, which was counted as no bet∣ter than malicious periurie, That he had not brought into the common Treasu∣rie some vessels of gold and siluer, gotten in the Campe of Antiochus. Now the hatred which he bare vnto the Scipioes grew partly, (besides his generall spight at the No∣bilitie) from his owne first rising, wherein hee was countenanced by Fabius Maxi∣mus, who brooked not the African; partly from some checke, that was giuen vnto himselfe, in the African voyage, by P. Scipio, whose Treasurer he then was. For when Cato did vtter his of the Consuls bad husbandry (iudging Magnificence to be no better) in some peremptory manner; Scipio plainely told him, That he had no neede of such double diligence in his Treasurer. Wherefore, either not caring what lies hee published, or for want of iudgement, thinking vnworthily of the ver∣tue that was farre aboue him, Cato filled Rome with vntrue reports against his Ge∣nerall; whose noble deedes confuted sufficiently the author of such false tales. And thus began the hatred: which being not regarded nor thought vpon by the Scipi∣oes, whilest it was nourished by their enemie, brake out vpon aduantage, especially against L. Scipio, his brother being dead, or out of the way. A seuere inquirie and iudgement being appointed of purpose against Scipio, matters were so carried, that he was seene condemned in a summe of money, farre exceeding his abilitie to pay. For non payment, his bodie should haue beene layd vp in prison: but from this ri∣gour of the Law hee was freed by Tiberius Graccbus, the same Tribune who had caused the suite against the African to be let fall. In his estate, which was confiscated to the vse of the Citie, when there neither appeared any signe of his hauing been beholding to , nor was found so much as what he had beene condemned to pay; then fell his accusers, and all whose hands had been against him, into the indignation of the People. But for this was L. Scipio no whit the better. His kinred, friends, and Clients made such a collection for him, as would haue set him in better estate than before, if he had accepted it. Hee tooke no more than such of his owne goods, as were of necessary vse, being redeemed for him by his neerest friends. And thus began the ciuill warre of the Tongue, in the Roman pleadings: which had either not beene, or not beene much regardable, vntill now, since the Punicke Warre. Securitie of danger from abroad, and some want of sufficient employ∣ment, were especiall helpes to the kindling of this fire; which first caught hold vp∣on that great Worthy, to whose vertue Rome was indebted, for changing into so great securitie her extreme danger. But these factious contentions did no long while containe themselues within heat of words, and cunning practice. For when the Art of leading the multitude, in such quarrelsome businesse, grew to perfecti∣on, they that found themselues ouer-matched by their aduersaries, at this kinde of weapon, began to make opposition, first with clubbes and stones, afterward with swords; and finally, proceeded from frayes and murders in the streets, vnto bat∣taile in the open field. Cornelia, daughter of Scipio the African, a Ladie of rare ver∣tue, that in honour of her two sonnes was more commonly named Mother of the Gracchi, saw those her two sonnes, whilest they were but yong, slaughtered in Rome, together with some of their friends, by those whom they opposed, and their death not reuenged by order of Law, but rather approue by the Senate. At these the Senatours began to take vpon them authoritie, more than was to them belon∣ging. They conferred vpon the Consuls all the whole power of the Citie, vnder this forme, Let the Consuls prouide, that the Commonweale receiue no detriment. By this Decree of theirs, and by their proclaiming any Citizen enemie to the State, they thought to haue woon a great aduantage ouer the multitude. But after the death of C. Gracchus, and of Saturninus a popular man, whom by such authority they did put out of the way; it was not long ere Marius, a famous Captaine of theirs, was so condemned, who by force of armes returned into the Citie, and murdered all the principall Senatours: whereupon began the ciuill warres; which giuing vnto Sylla, who preuailed therein, meanes to make himselfe absolute Lord of Rome, taught Caesar, a man of higher spirit, to affect and obtaine the like soueraigne pow∣er, when by the like Decree of the Senate hee was prouoked. It is true, that neuer any Consul had finally cause to rejoyce, of his hauing put in execution such autho∣ritie to him committed by the Senate. But as the furie of the multitude, in passing their Lawes, by hurling of stones, and other violence, made the Citie stand in neede of a Soueraigne Lord: so the vehemencie of the Senate, in condemning as enemies those that would not submit themselues, when they were ouer-topped by voyces in the House, did compell Caesar, or giue him atleast pretence, to right himselfe by armes: wherewith preuailing against his aduersaries, hee tooke such order, that nei∣ther Senate, nor People, should thenceforth be able to doe him wrong. So by inte∣stine discord, the Romans consuming all or most of their principall Citizens, lost their owne freedome, and became subiects vnto the arbitrarie gouernment of One: suf∣fering this change in three generations, after this beginning of their insolent rule, wherein they tooke vpon them as the highest Lords on Earth, to doe euen what they listed. Yet had not Rome indeed attained hitherto vnto compleat greatnesse, nor beleeued of her selfe as if she had, whilest a King sate crowned on the Throne of Alexander, continuing and vpholding the reputation of a former Empire. Wherefore this consummation of her honour was thought vpon betimes. How it was effected, the sequele will discouer. CHAP. VI. The second Macedonian Warre. §. I. The Condition wherein those Princes and Estates remained, which were associates of the Romans, when the warre with ANTIOCHVS was finished. The Romans quarrell with PHILIP. They deale insolently with the Achaeans. The Macedonian, being vnrea∣die for warre, obtaines peace at Rome, by his sonne DEMETRIVS; of whom thence∣foorth hee becomes iealous. AFTER the ouerthrow of Antiochus, although Philip of Macedon, Eumenes King of Pergamus, the Com∣monweale of the Achaeans, and all other the States of Greece, were gouerned by the same Lawes and Magistrates, as they formerly had beene, before the arriuall of the Romans in those parts: yet in truth (the publike declaration excepted) they were none other than absolute vassalls to the People of Rome. For of those fiue Prerogatiues belonging to a Monarch, or vnto Soueraigne power, in whom∣soeuer it rest; namely, To make Lawes, To create Magistrates, To arbitrate Peace and Warre, To beate Monie, and to reserue (as the French call it) le dermier resort, or the last Appeales, the Romans had assumed foure; and the greatest of them so absolute∣ly, that is, The Appeale, or last resort, as euery pettie iniurie offered to each other by the fore-named Kings or States, was heard and determined either by the Ro∣man Embassadours, or Commissioners, in those places whence the Complaint came, or otherwise by the Senatours themselues within Rome: from whose ar∣bitrement, or direction, if either King, or Common-weales, declined, He or they were beaten, and enforced to obedience; or had their Estates and Regalities vtter∣ly dissolued. Neuerthelesse it is true, that they had their owne Lawes, and Officers of their owne ordaining: yet so, as neither their Lawes were of force, when the Romans interposed their will to the contrary; neither was their election of Magi∣strates so free, as that they had not therein especiall regard vnto the good pleasure of these their Masters. And to such degree of seruitude the seuerall Estates of Greece did bow verie gently: either as being thankefull for their deliuerance from a yoke more sensibly grieuous; or, as being skilfull in the Art of flattery, and therein taking delight, since therein consisted their chiefe hope of thriuing; or, as being more fearefull of dis∣pleasing the strongest, than mindfull of their owne honour. But Eumenes liuing further off, and being most obsequious vnto the Romans, was not, of long time, que∣stioned about any of his doings: his conformitie vnto them in matter of warre and peace, together with the diuersion of their thoughts another way, giuing him leaue to vse his owne euen as he listed, vntill they should otherwise dispose of him. Nei∣ther was it a little auaileable to him, that his Kingdome bordered vpon the Nati∣ons, by them not throughly subdued. For vpon the same reason (as well as vpon his owne high deserts) were they very louing vnto Masanissa, and to his House, vn∣till Carthage was ruined, and their Dominion in Africk: as likewise afterwards to the Kings of Mauritania, Cappadocia, and others: holding people in subiection vn∣to themselues, by the ministerie of Kings; especially of such Kings, as were vsefull and obsequious vnto them. Now the Macedonian was of a more noble temper; and shewed himselfe not forgetfull of his owne former greatnesse, the honour of his race, or the high repu∣tation of his Kingdome. But such magnanimitie was none otherwise construed by the Romans, than as want of due reuerence to their Estate, and a valuation of him∣selfe against them: which, in the pride of their fortune, they could not endure. Wherefore, notwithstanding that hee had lately giuen passage to their Armies through his Country, prepared the waies for them, and furnished them both with victuals, and other things needfull, to transport them ouer the Hellespont into Asia, against Antiochus: yet vpon the complaint of Eumenes, and the States of Thessalie and Thrace, hee was commaunded to abandon the Cities of Aenus and Maronea, with all Pieces and Places demaunded by any of his neighbours; whereof many of them hee had lately conquered, by direction, or licence, euen from the Romans themselues. These Townes of Aenus and Maronea had beene part of his King∣dome: who from Thrace Northwards, and to the Northwest, extended his domini∣on very farre. He is thought to haue made himselfe Lord of Transyluania: in which Prouince it is said, Hist. of by Mart. Fumee, lib. 5. That innumerable Medals of gold haue beene found, in the age of our grandfathers, each of them weighing two or three crownes, and stamped with his Image on the one side, on the other side with Victorie. Of all these Lord∣ships the possession, or rather the title (for he liued not to settle his estate in Europe ) fell to Seleucus Nicator by right of warre, wherein he vanquished and slue Lysima∣chus: as also, by the like right, Ptolomie Ceraunus thought them his owne, when he had murdered Seleucus. But the inundation of the Gaules, which the Kingdome of Macedon could not sustaine, did shortly and easily wash away from that Crowne, together with the more part of Thrace, all those heapes of land newly thereto an∣nexed. Somewhat of this was afterwards regained by Antigonus the sonne of De∣metrius, and his successours: though not much; for they otherwise busied. The of the Gaules being ouer-past, those Countries which lately had beene oppressed by them, recouered their libertie; and not only held it, but learned, some of them, especially the Dardanians and wilde Thracians, to find their aduantages, and make vse of them, euen vpon Macedon. Against the mischiefes commonly done by these, King Philip did prouide the most conuenient remedies: by shutting vp the wayes, whereby the Dardanians might enter into his Kingdome; and by occupying Lysimachia, with some other Townes in Thrace, which he fortified, as Bulwarkes of his owne Countrey, against the Barbarians. Now, although it behoued him thus to doe, for the defence of his owne estate: yet forasmuch as these Townes were, in a manner, at absolute libertie, his possession of them was thought to partake more of violence than of justice. And in this respect he was formerly accused by the Ae∣tolians, of wrongfull vsurpation and oppression, in his hauing occupied Lysimachia. Hereto he made a good answere, That his Garrison did only saue it from the Thra∣cians: who, as soone as hee thence withdrew his men, did seize vpon the Towne, and ruine it. The like perhaps he might haue said, touching Aenus and Maronea; That they were places vnable to defend themselues, and Gates, by which the Barba∣rians might haue entrance into his Kingdome. But this Plea had not auayled him, in the disputation about Lysimachia: and in the present question, the Romans were not without their owne title; since Antiochus had gotten all the Countrie therea∣bout, whilest Philip was busied in his former warre and since they, by their victorie had gotten vnto themselues all the title, which Antiochus thereto could pretend. Wherefore he onely submitted his right vnto the good pleasure of the Senate: re∣ferring it vnto their disposition, Whether Aenus and Maronea should be set at liber∣tie, whether left in his hand, or whether bestowed vpon Eumenes; who begged them, as an appendix to Lysimachia and Chersonnesus, that were alreadie his by their gift. What they would determine, he might easily perceiue, by the demeanour of their Embassadors towards him: who sitting as Iudges betweene him and all that made complaint vpon him, gaue sentence against him in euery controuersie. Ne∣uerthelesse, he sent Embassadours to Rome, there to maintaine his right vnto these Townes; wherein he thought, that equitie (if it might preuaile) was wholly on his side. For he had holpen their Consuls in the warre against Antiochus and the Aeto∣lians: wherein whatsoeuer he had gotten for himselfe, was now taken from him by their Embassadours: and would they now depriue him of those two Townes, ly∣ing so fitly for the guard of his Kingdome, which he had gotten to himselfe out of the ruines of Antiochus, like as out of his owne ruines Antiochus had gotten in those quarters a great deale more? By such allegations either hee was likely to preuaile, or at leastwise to gaine , wherein he might bethinke himselfe what hee had to . It was not long ere he had word from Rome, That the Senate were no more equall to him, than had beene their Embassadours. Wherefore, considering how insolently the Maronites had behaued themselues, in pleading against him for their libertie, hee tooke counsell of his owne passions; and (as by nature hee was verie cruell) gaue order to Onomastus, that was Warden of the Sea-coasts, to handle these Maronites in such sort, as they might haue little joy of the libertie by them so earnestly desired. employed Cassander, one of the Kings men dwel∣ling in Maronea, and willed him to let in the Thracians by night, that they might sacke the Towne, and vse all cruelties of warre. This was , but so ill taken by the Roman Embassadours, who had better notice, than could haue beene feared, of these proceedings; that the King was by them directly charged with the crime, and called more strictly, than became his Majestie, to an accompt. He would haue remooued the blame from himselfe, and layed it euen vpon the Maronites; affirming, That they, in heat of their Factions, being some inclinable to him, other some to Eumenes, had fallen into such outrage, that they had cut one anothers throates. And hereof he willed the Embassadours to enquire, among the Maronites themselues: as well knowing, that they who suruiued, were his owne friends; or so terrified and amazed by the late of his vengeance a∣mong them, that they durst not an offensiue word. But he found the Romans more seuere, and more throughly informed in the businesse, than to rest contented with such an answere. He was plainely told, that if he would discharge himselfe of the crime obiected; he must send Onomastus and Cassander to Rome, there to bee examined as the Senate should thinke fit. This did not a little trouble him. Yet he collected his spirits, and said, that Cassander should bee at their disposition: but concerning Onomastus, who had not at Maronea, nor neere to it, he requested them not to presse him; since it stood not with his honour, so lightly to giue a∣way his friends. As for Cassander, because he should tell no tales; tooke order to haue him poisoned by the way. By this we see, that the doctrine, which Ma∣chiauel taught vnto Caesar Borgia, to employ men in mischieuous actions, and after∣wards to destroy them when they haue performed the mischiefe; was not of his owne inuention. All ages giuen vs examples of this goodly policie, the later hauing apt schollers in this lesson to the more ancient: as the reigne of Hen∣ry the here in England, can beare good witnesse; and therein especially the Lord Cromwell, who perished by the same vniust Law that himselfe had deuised, for the taking away of another mans life. Such actions of Philip made an vnpleasant noise at Rome, and were like to haue brought vpon him the warre which he feared, before he was ready to entertaine it. Wherefore he employed his yonger sonne Demetrius as vnto the Senate: giuing him instructions, how to make answere to all complaints; and with∣all to deliuer his owne grieuances, in such wise that if ought were amisse, yet might it appeare that he had beene strongly vrged to take such courses. The summe of his Embassage was, to pacifie the Romans, and make all euen for the present. Deme∣trius himselfe was knowne to be very acceptable vnto the Senate; as hauing well approued by them, when he was hostage in Rome: and therefore seemed the more likely, to somewhat; were it onely in regard that would bee borne vnto his person. Whilest this businesse with the Macedonian hung in suspense, and whilest he, by his readinesse to make submission, seemed likely to diuert from himselfe some o∣ther way the Roman armes: the same Embassadours, that had beene Iudges be∣tweene him and his neighbours, made their through the rest of Greece; and tooke notice of the controuersies, which they found betweene some Estates in the Countrey. The greatest cause that was heard before them, was the complaint of the banished Laccdaemonians against the Achaeans. It was obiected vnto the Achae∣ins, That they had committed a gricuous slaughter vpon many Citizens of Lace∣daemon: That vnto this cruelty they had added a greater, in throwing downe the walles of the Citie: as also further, in changing the Lawes, and abrogating the fa∣mous Institutions of Lysurgus. Hereto Lycortas, then Praetor of the Achaeans, made answere, That these banished Lacedaemonians who now tooke vpon them to accuse the Nation that had once protected them, were notoriously knowne to bee the men, who had themselues committed that murder, whereof shamelesly they laid the blame vpon others: the Achaeans hauing onely called those vnto iudgement, that were supposed to be chiefe authors of a Rebellion against both them and the Romans; and these plaintifes hauing slaine them, vpon priuate, though iust hatred, as they were comming to make answere for themselues. Concerning their throw∣ing downe the walles of Lacedaemon, hee said it was most agreeable to Lyeurgus his ordinance: who, hauing perswaded his Citizens to their Towne and liber∣tie by their proper vertue, did inhibite vnto them all kindes of fortifications; as the Retraits and Nests either of Cowards, or (whereof Lacedaemon had wofull experi∣ence) of Tyrants and Vsurpers. Further he shewed, how the same Tyrants that had built these wals, and hemmed in the Spartans, had also quite abolished Lycur∣gus his ordinances; and gouerned the Citie by their owne law will. As for the Achaeans; they communicated their owne Lawes, which they held for the best, or else would soone change them and take better, vnto the Lacedaemonians; whom they found without Lawes, or any tolerable forme of policie. For conclusion, Ly∣cortas plainly told App. Claudius the chiefe of the Embassadours, That hee and his Countrimen held it strange, being friends and faithfull of the Romans, to see themselues thus constrained, to answere and giue account of their actions; as vassals and slaues vnto the People of Rome. For if they were indeed at libertie: why might not the Achaeans as well require to bee satisfied aboue that which the Romans had done at Capua, as the Romans did busie themselues, to take account how things went at Lacedaemon? For if the Romans would stand vpon their greatnesse, and in∣timate, as they began, that the libertie of their friends was nothing worth, longer than should please themselues to ratifie it: then must the Achaeans haue recourse vnto those Agreements, that were confirmed by oath, and which without periu∣rie could not be violated; as reuerencing, and indeede the Romans, but much more, the immortall gods. To this bold answere of Lycortas, Appius found little to reply. Yet taking state vpon him, he pronounced more like a Master than a Iudge, That if the Achaeans would not be ruled by faire meanes, and earne thanks whilest they might; they should be compelled with a mischiefe, to doe what was required at their hands, whether they would or no. This altercation was in the Parliament of the Achaeans; which groned to heare the Lordly words of . Yet Feare preuailed aboue Indignation: and it was permitted vnto the Romans to doe as they listed. Hereupon the Embassadours restored some banished and condemned men: but the Roman Senate, very so one after, did make void all Iudgements of death or banishment, that had beene laid by the Achaeans vpon any Citizen of Lacedaemon; as likewise they made it a matter of disputation, whether or no the Citie and Territory of Lacedaemon, should bee suffered to continue a member of the Achaean Common-wealth; or taken from them, and made as it had beene an Estate by it selfe. By bringing such a matter into question, the Romans well declared, That they held it to depend vpon their owne will, how much or how little any of their confederates should be suffered to enioy: though by con∣tributing Sparta to the Councell of Achaia, they discouered no lesse, as to them see∣med, the loue which they bare vnto the Achaians, than the power which they had ouer them. Into such slaucrie had the Greekes, and all Kings and Common-weales whatso∣euer, bordering vpon any part of the Mediterran Seas, reduced themselues; by cal∣ling in the Romans to their succour. They wanted not the good counsaile and per∣swasions of many wise and temperate men among them; They had also the ex∣amples of the Italians, Spaniards, Gaules, and Africans, all subdued by the Romans, and, by seeking Patronage, made meere vassals; to instruct them, what in the like case they should expect: yet could not the true reasons of Estate and Policie so preuaile with them, but their priuate passions, and neighbouring hatred, which hath euermore bought reuenge at the price of selfe-ruine, brought them from the honour which they enioyed, of being free Princes and Cities, into most base and fearefull seruilitie. All this made well for Philip of Macedon: who though he saw the Greekes very farre from daring to stirre against those, by whom both hee and they were kept in awe; yet was he not without hope, that (few of them excepted, whom the Ro∣mans by from his subiection had made his implacable enemies) in heartie affection all the Countrie would be his, whensoeuer he should take armes, as short∣ly he was like to doe. Young Demetrius, comming home from Rome, brought with him the desired ratification of peace; though qualified with much indignitie soone following. Hee had beene louingly vsed at Rome, and heard with great fa∣uour in the Senate. There being confounded with the multitude of obiections, whereto his youth, vnskilfull in the Art of wrangling, could not readily make an∣swere: it was permitted vnto him, to reade such briefe notes as hee had receiued from his Father, and out of those the Senate were contented to gather satisfaction; more for Demetrius his owne sake, as they then said and wrote into Macedon, than for any goodnesse in the defence. Such pride of theirs, in remitting his faults at the of his sonne, together with some insolence of his sonne, growing (as appeared) from this fauour of the Romans; did increase in Philip his hatred vnto Rome, and breed in him a iealousie of his too forward sonne. To set him forward in these passions, there came daily new Embassadours from Rome; some bringing one commandement; some another; and some, requiring him to fulfill those things, which had beene imposed vpon him by their -goers. Neither were there wanting that obserued his countenance: and when hee had fulfilled all that was required at his hands; yet laid it to his charge that hee had done things vn∣willingly, and would be obedient, no longer than he needs must. With these Em∣bassadours young Demetrius was conuersant: rather perhaps out of simplicitie, and for that they made much of him, than for any ambitious respect; yet a great deale more than was pleasing to his father. So the rumour grew current through all Ma∣cedon, That Perseus, the elder sonne of the King, should not succeed vnto his fa∣ther; but that the Diademe should bee conferred vpon Demetrius, if not by some other pretence, yet by meere fauour of the Romans. This offended not onely Per∣seus, but Philip himselfe: who suspected his yonger sonne, as more Roman than his owne; and accordingly misconstrued all his doings. But ere we proceed vnto the bitter fruits of this iealousie; it will not be amisse, to speake of some memora∣ble accidents that were in the time. §. II. The death of PHILOPOEMEN, HANNIBAL, and SCIPIO. That the militarie profession is of all other the most vnhappie: notwithstanding some examples, which may seeme to prooue the contrarie. THe Romans, wanting other matter of quarrell in the Continent of Greece, had of late beene so peremptorie with the Achaeans; that they seemed not vnlikely to take part against them, in any controuersie that should be moued. Hereupon the Messenians, who against their will were annexed vnto the Achaean Common-wealth, hauing long beene of a contrarie Faction thereto; grew bold to withdraw themselues from that Societie, with purpose to set vp againe an Estate of their owne, seuered from communion with any other. This was the deuice of some that were powerfull in their Citie: who finding the multitude onely inclinable to their purpose, and not ouer-strongly affected in the businesse; were carefull to seeke occasion of reducing things to such passe, that all their Citizens might be entangled in a necessitie of stan∣ding out, and of not returning to the Achaean . And hereupon they began to doe some acts of hostilitie; whereby it was probable that bloud should bee drawne, and either side so farre exasperated, that little hope of agreement would be left. Vpon the fame of their commotion and proceedings; Philopoemen, then Praetor of the Achaeans, leuied such forces as hee could in haste, and went against them. Many principall Gentlemen of the Achaeans, especially of the Megalopolitans, were soone in a readinesse to wait vpon him. Besides these, which were all, or for the most part, Horse; he had some Auxiliaries out of Thrace and Crete, that vsually were kept in pay. Thus accompanied, he met with Dinocrates, Captaine of the Messenians; whom hee charged, and forced to runne. But whilest his horsemen were too earnest in following the chacc; there arriued, by chance, a supplie of fiue hundred from Messene, which gaue new courage vnto those that fled. So the Ene∣mies began to make head againe; and with the helpe of those, who very seasonably came to their aide, compelled Philopoemens Horsemen to turne backe. Philopoemen himselfe had long beene sicke of an Ague, and was then very weake: yet the great∣nesse of his courage would not suffer him, to bee negligent of their safetie, which had so willingly aduentured themselues vnder his conduct. He tooke vpon him to make the Retrait: and suffering his horsemen to passe along by him in a narrow lane, he often about against the Messenians; whom his reputation, and the knowledge of his great worth, did terrifie from approaching ouer-neere to him. But it fell out vnhappily, that being cast to ground by a fall of his horse, and being withall in very weake plight of bodie, he was vnable to get vp againe. So the Ene∣mies came vpon him, and tooke him; yet scarce beleeued their fortune to bee so good, although their eyes were witnesses. The first messenger that brought these newes to Messene, was so farre from being beleeued, that he was hardly thought to be in his right wits. But when the truth was affirmed by many reports, all the Citie ran forth to meet him, and behold the spectacle seeming so incredible. They caused him to be brought into the Theater, that there they might satisfie them∣sclues with beholding him. The greatest part of them had compassion on his mis∣fortune: and in commemoration both of his vertue, and of the singular benefits by him done vnto them, especially in deliuering them from Nabis the Tyrant; began to manifest their good will for his . Contrarywise, Dinocrates and his Fa∣ction were desirous hastily to take away his life: because they held him a man im∣placable, and one that would neuer leaue any disgrace, or iniurie, done to him, vn∣reuenged. They durst not one trust another with the keeping of him: but com∣mitted him into a strong vault vnder ground, that had beene made for the custodie of their Treasure. So thither they let him downe fast bound, and with an engine laid an heauie stone vpon the mouth of the vault. There hee had not staied long, ere his enemies had concluded his present death. The Hangman of the Citie was let downe vnto him, with a cup of poison, which Philopoemen tooke in his hand: and asking no more than whether the Horsemen were escaped, and particularly whe∣ther Lycortas was safe, when he heard an answere to his minde, he said it was well: and so with a cheerefull countenance, dranke his last draught. He was seuentie yeeres old, and weakned with long sicknesse, whereby the poison wrought the soo∣ner, and easily tooke away his life. The Achaeans, when they missed him in their flight, were maruellously offended with themselues, for that they had beene more mindfull to preserue their owne liues, than to looke vnto the safetie of so excellent a Commander. Whilest they were deuising what to doe in such a case: they got aduertisement of his being taken. All Achaia was by this report vehemently affli∣cted: so as Embassadours were forthwith dispatched vnto Messene, crauing his en∣largement: and yet preparation made withall, to obtaine it by force, in case that faire meanes would not serue. Lycortas was chosen Generall of the Armie against Messene: who comming thither, and laying siege to the Towne, enforced it in short space to yeeld. Then Dinocrates, knowing what he was to expect, laid hands vpon himselfe, and made an end of his owne life. The rest of those that had beene par∣takers in the murder, were compelled to wait in bonds vpon the ashes of Philopoe∣men that were carried home in solemne pompe to Megalopolis; where they were all of them slaine at his funerall, as sacrifices to his Ghost whom they had offended. Q. Martius, a Roman Embassador, was then in Greece; whence, vpon one occasion or other, the Roman Embassadors were seldome absent. He would haue entermedled in this busines of Messene, had not Lycortas made short worke, and left him nothing to doe. About the same time was T. Quintius Flaminius sent Embassador to Prusias King of Bithynia: not so much to withdraw him from prosecuting the warre against Eu∣menes, as to entreat him, that he would deliuer , the most spightfull enemie in all the world vnto the Senate and People of Rome, into his hands. Prusias (there∣in vnworthie of the Crowne he ware) did readily condiscend: or rather (as Liuie thinkes) to gratifie the Romans, he determined either to kill Hannibal, or to deliuer him aliue to . For vpon the first conference betweene the King and Fla∣minius, a troupe of Souldiors were directed to guard and enuiron the lodging where Hannibal lay. That famous Captaine hauing found cause before this to su∣spect the faith of Prusias, had deuised some secret sallies vnder ground to saue him∣selfe from any treasonable and sudden assault. But finding now that all parts about him were fore-closed, he had recourse to his last remedie: which he then was con∣strayned to practise, as well to frustrate his enemies of their triumphing ouer him, as to saue himselfe from their torture and mercilesse hands; who, as he well knew, would neither respect his famous enterprises, his honour, nor his age. When there∣fore he saw no way of escape, nor counsell to resort vnto, he tooke the poyson into his hand, which he alwayes preserued for a sure Antidote against the sharpest disea∣ses of aduerse fortune; which being readie to swallow downe, hee vttered these wordes: I will now (said he) deliuer the Romans of that feare, which hath so many yeeres possest them; that feare, which makes them impatient to attend the death of an oldman. This victorie of FLAMINIVS ouer me, which am disarmed, and betrayed into his hands, shall neuer bee numbred among the rest of his heroicall deedes: No; it shall make it manifest to all the Nations of the world, how farre the Roman vertue is degenerate and corrupted. For such was the noblenesse of their forefathers; as, when PYRRHVS inuaded them in Italie, and was readie to giue them battaile at their owne dores, they gaue him know∣ledge of the treason intended against him by poyson: whereas these of a later race haue em∣ployed FLAMINIVS, a man who hath heretofore beene one of their Consuls, to practise with PRVSIAS, contrarie to the King, contrarie to his Faith giuen, and con∣trarie to the Lawes of Hospitalitie, to slaughter or deliuer vp his owne Ghest. He then cur∣sing the person of Prusias, and all his, and desiring the immortall gods to reuenge his infi∣delitie, dranke off the poyson, and died. In this yeere also (as good Authors haue reported) to accompanie Philopoemen and Hannibal, died the African: these being, all of them, as great Captaines as euer the world had; but not more famous, than vnfortunate. Certainely, for Hannibal, whose Tragedie we haue now finished, had he beene Prince of the Car∣thaginians, and one who by his authoritie might haue commaunded such supplyes, as the Warre which he vndertooke, required; it is probable, that he had torne vp the Roman Empire by the roots. But he was so strongly crost by a cowardly and en∣uious Faction at home; as his proper vertue, wanting publike force to sustaine it, did lastly dissolue it selfe in his owne, and in the common miserie of his Countrey and Commonweale. Hence it comes, to wit, from the enuie of our equals, and jealousie of our Masters, be they Kings, or Commonweales, That there is no Profession more vnprosperous than that of Men of Warre, and great Captaines, being no Kings. For besides the enuie and jealousie of men; the spoyles, rapes, famine, slaughter of the innocent, , and burnings, with a world of miseries layed on the labouring man, are so hatefull to God, as with good reason did the Marshall of France confesse, That were not the mercies of GOD infinite, and without restriction, it were in vaine for those of his profession to hope for any portion of them: seeing the cruelties, by them per∣mitted and commited, were also infinite. Howsoeuer, this is true, That the victories, which are obtayned by many of the greatest Commanders, are commonly either ascribed to those that serue vnder them, to Fortune, or to the cowardise ofthe Na∣tion against whom they serue. For the most of others, whose vertues haue raysed them aboue the leuell of their inferiours, and haue surmounted their enuie: yet haue they been rewarded in the end, either with disgrace, banishment, or death. Among the Romans we finde many examples hereof; as Coriolanus, M. Liuius, L. Aemylius, and this our Scipio, whom we haue lately buried. Among the Greekes we reade of not many, that escaped these rewards. Yea, long before these times, it was a Legacie that Dauid bequeathed vnto his victorious Captaine Ioab. With this fare Alexander feasted Parmenio, Philotas, and others; and prepared it for Anti∣pater and Cassander. Hereto Valentinian the Emperour inuited Aetius: who, after many other victories, ouerthrew Attila of the Hunnes, in the greatest battaile, for the well fighting and resolution of both Armies, that euer was strucken in the world; for there fell of those that fought beside runne-awaies, an hundred and fourescore thousand. Hereupon it was well and boldly told vnto the Emperour by Proximus, That in killing of Aetius, he had cut off his owne right hand with his left: for it was not long after that Maximus (by whose perswasion Valentinian slue Aetius ) murdered the Emperour, which hee neuer durst attempt, Aetius liuing. And, besides the losse of that Emperour, it is true, That with Aetius, the glory of the Westerne Empire was rather dissolued then obscured. The same destinie, or a farre worse, had Bellisarius; whose vndertakings and victories were so difficult and glorious, as after-ages suspected them for fabulous. For he had his eyes torne out of his head by Iustinian: and he died a blinde begger. Narses also, to the great of Christian Religion, was disgrac'd by Iustine. That Rule of Cato against Scipio, hath been well obserued in euery age since then; to wit, That the Common-weale cannot bee accounted free, which standeth in awe of any one man. And hence hath the Turkes drawne another Principle, and in deed a Turkish one, That euery warlike Prince should rather destroy his greatest men of Warre, than suffer his owne glory to be obscured by them. For this cause did Baiaret the second dispatch Bassa Acomat; Selim strangle Bassa Mustapha; and most of those Prin∣ces bring to ruine the most of their Visiers. Of the Spanish Nation, the great , who draue the French out of Naples: Ferdinando Cortese, who conquered Mexico; were crowned with nettles, not with Lawrell. The Earles of Egmond and Horn, had no heads left them to weare garlands on. And that the great Captaines of all Nations haue been payd with this copper Coine; there are examples more than too many. On the contrary it may bee said, That many haue acquired the State of Princes, Kings, and Emperours, by their great abilitie in matter of warre. This I confesse. Yet must it be had withall in consideration, that these high places haue been giuen, or offered, vnto very few, rewards of their militarie vertue; though many haue vsurped them, by the helpe and fauour of those Armies which they commanded. Neither is it vnregardable, That the Tyrants which haue op∣pressed the liberty of free Cities: and the Lieutenants of Kings or Emperours, which haue traiterously cast downe their Masters, and stepped vp into their seats; were not all of them good men of warre: but haue vsed the aduantage of some commotion, or many of them by base and cowardly practices, haue obtained those dignities, which vndeseruedly were ascribed to their personall worth. So that the number of those, that haue purchased absolute greatnesse by the greatnesse of their warlike vertue; is farre more in seeming, than in deed. was a Souldi∣our, and by helpe of the Souldiours he got the Empire from his Lord Mauritius: but he was a coward; and with a barbarous cruelty, seldome found in any other than cowards, hee slue first the children of Mauritius, a Prince that neuer had done him wrong, before his face, and after them Mauritius himselfe. This his bloudy aspiring was but as a debt, which was paid vnto him again by Heraclius: who tooke from him the Imperiall Crowne, vniustly gotten; and set it on his owne head. Le∣ontius laid hold vpon the Emperour Iustine, cut off his nose and eares, and sent him into banishment: But Gods vengeance rewarded him with the same punishment, by the hands of Tiberius; to whose charge hee had left his owne men of warre. , hauing recouered forces, lighted on Tiberius, and barbed him after the same fashion. Philippicus, commanding the forces of Iustine, murdered both the Emperour and his sonne. Anastasius, the vassall of this new Tyrant, surprised his Master Philippicus, and thrust out both his . But with Anastasius, Theodosius dealt more gently: for hauing wrested the out of his hands, hee enforced him to become a Priest. It were an endlesse, and a needlesse worke to tell, how Leo rewarded this Theodosius; how many others haue beene repayed with their owne crueltie, by men alike ambitious and cruell; or how many hundreds, or rather thou∣sands, hoping of Captaines to make themselues Kings, haue by Gods justice mise∣rably perished in the attempt. The ordinarie, and perhaps the best way of thriuing, by the practice of Armes, is to take what may bee gotten by the spoile of Enemies, and the liberalitie of those Princes and Cities, in whose seruice one hath well deser∣ued. But scarce one of a thousand haue prospered by this course. For that obserua∣tion, made by Salomon, of in this kinde, hath beene found belong∣ing to all Countries and Ages: A little Citie, and few men in it, and a great King came Eccles. c. 9. 14. & 15. against it, and compassed it about, and builded Forts against it: And there was found a poore and wiseman therein, and hee deliuered the Citie by his wisedome: but none remembred this poore man. Great Monarchs are vnwilling to pay great thankes, lest thereby they should acknowledge themselues to haue beene indebted for great benefits: which the vnwiser sort of them thinke to sauour of some impotency in them∣selues. But in this respect they are oftentimes coozened and abused: which proues that weakenesse to be in them indeede, whereof they so gladly shunne the opinion. Contrariwise, free Estates are bountifull in giuing thankes; yet so, as those thankes are not of long endurance. But concerning other profit which their Captaines haue made, by enriching themselues with the spoile of the enemie, they are very inquisitiue to search into it, and to strip the wel-deseruers out of their gettings: yea most iniuriously to rob them of their owne, vpon a false supposition: that euen they whose hands are most cleane from such offences, haue purloyned somewhat from the common Treasurie. Hereof I neede not to produce examples: that of the two Scipioes being so lately recited. In my late Soueraignes time, although for the warres, which for her owne safe∣tie she was constrained to vndertake, her Majestie had no lesse cause to vse the ser∣uice of Martiall men both by Sea and Land, than any of her Predecessors for ma∣ny yeeres had, yet, according to the destiny of that profession, I do not remember, that any of hers, the Lord Admiral excepted, her eldest and most prosperous Com∣mander, were either enriched, or otherwise honoured, for any seruice by them per∣formed. And that her Majestie had many aduised, valiant, and faithfull men, the prosperitie of her affaires did well witnesse, who in all her daies neuer receiued dis∣honour, by the cowardise or infidelitie of any Commander, by her selfe chosen and imployed. For as all her old by Land died poore men, as Malbey, Randol, Drew∣rie, Reade, Wilford, Layton, Pellam, Gilbert, Cunstable, Bourchier, Barkeley, Bingham, and others: so those of a later and more dangerous imploiment, whereof Norice and Vere were the most famous, and who haue done as great honor to our Nation (for the meanes they had) as euer any did: those (I say) with many other braue Collo∣nels, haue left behinde them (besides the reputation which they purchased with many and wounds) title nor estate to their posteritie. As for the L. Thomas Burrough, and Peregrine Berty L. Willoughby of Eresby, two very worthy and exceeding valiant Commanders, they brought with them into the world their Titles and . That her Majestie in the aduancement of her Men of warre did sooner beleeue other men than her selfe, a disease vnto which many wise Princes, besides her selfe, beene subiect, I say that such a confidence, although it may seeme altogether to excuse her Noble Nature, yet can it not but in some sort accuse her of weake∣nesse. And exceeding strange it were, were not the cause manifest enough, that where the prosperous actions are so exceedingly prized, the Actors are so vnpros∣perous and so generally neglected. The cause, I say, which hath wrought one and the same effect in all times, and among all Nations, is this, that those which are nee∣rest the person of Princes (which Martial men seldome are) can with no good grace commend, or at least magnifie a Profession farre more noble than their own, seeing therein they should onely mind their Masters of the wrong they did vnto others, in giuing lesse honour and reward to men of farre greater deseruing, and of far greater vse than themselues. But his Maiestie hath already payed the greatest part of that debt. For besides the relieuing by Pensions all the poorer sort, hee hath honored more Martial men, than all the Kings of England haue done for this hundred yeeres. He hath giuen a Coronet to the Lord Thomas Haward for his chargeable and re∣markeable seruice, as well in the yeere 1588, as at Caliz, the Ilands, and in our owne Seas; hauing first commanded as a Captaine, twice Admirall of a Squadron, and twice Admirall in chiefe. His Maiestie hath changed the Baronies of Montioy and Burley into Earledomes, and created Sidney Vicount, , Russel, Carew, Danuers, Arundel of Warder, Gerald, and Chichester, Barons, for their gouernments and ser∣uices in the Netherlands, France, Ireland, and elsewhere. §. III. PHILIP making prouision for warre against the Romans, deales hardly with many of his owne subiects. His negotiation with the Bastarnae. His crueltie. He suspecteth his sonne DEMETRIVS. DEMETRIVS accused by his brother PER∣SEVS; and shortly after slaine, by his fathers appointment. PHI∣LIP repenteth him of his sonnes death; whom he findeth to haue beene innocent: and intending to reuenge it on PERSEVS, he dieth. QVINTVS MARTIVS the Roman Embassador, who trauailed vp and downe, seeking what worke might be found about Greece, had recei∣ued instruction from the Senate, to vse the most of his diligence in looking into the Estate of Macedon. At his returne home, that hee might not seeme to haue discouered nothing, hee told the Fathers, That Philip had done whatsoeuer they enjoyned him; yet so, as it might appeare, that such his obedience would last no longer, than meere necessitie should enforce him thereunto. Hee added further, That all the doings and sayings of that King did wholly tend vnto rebellion, about which he was deuising. Now it was so in∣deed, that Philip much repented him of his faithfull obsequiousnes to the Romans, and foresaw their intent, which was, to get his Kingdome into their owne hands, with safety of their honour, if they could finde conuenient meanes; or otherwise (as to him seemed apparant) by what meanes soeuer. He was in an ill case: as ha∣uing beene already vanquished by them; hauing lost exceedingly both in strength and reputation; hauing subiects that abhorred to heare of Warre with Rome; and hauing neither neighbour nor friend, that, if he were thereto vrged, would aduen∣ture to take his part: yet hee prouided as well as hee could deuise, against the ne∣cessitie which hee daily feared. Such of his owne people as dwelt in the maritime Townes, and gaue him cause to suspect, that they would doe but bad seruice a∣gainst the Romans, he compelled to forsake their dwellings, and remoued them all into Emathia. The Cities and Countrey, whence these were transplanted, hee filled with a multitude of Thracians, whose faith he thought a great deale more assured, against those enemies that were terrible to the Macedonians. Further, hee deuised vpon alluring the Bastarnae, a strong and hardie Nation, that dwelt beyond the riuer of Danubius, to abandon their seat, and come to him with all their multitude: who, besides other great rewards, would helpe them to roote out the Dardanians, and take possession of their Countrey. These were like to doe him notable seruice a∣gainst the Romans: being not onely stout fighting men; but such as being planted in those quarters by him, would beare respect vnto him alone. The least benefit that could be hoped by their arriuall, must be the vtter extirpation of the Dardani∣ans; a People alwaies troublesome to the Kingdome of Macedon, whensoeuer they found aduantage. Neither was it iudged any hard matter, to perswade those Ba∣starnae, by hope of spoile, and other incitements, vnto a more desperate Expediti∣on, through Illyria, and the Countries vpon the Adriaticke Sea, into it selfe. It was not knowne who should withstand them vpon the way: Rather it was thought, that the Scordisci, and peraduenture some others, through whose Coun∣tries they were to passe, would accompanie them against the Romans, were it onely in hope of spoyle. Now to facilitate the remoue of these Bastarnae from their owne habitations, into the Land of the Dardanians, vpon the border of Macedon; along and tedious journey vnto them, that carried with them their wiues and children: Philip with gifts did purchase the good will of some Thracian Princes, Lords of the Countries through which they were to passe. And thus hee sought meanes to strengthen himselfe, with helpe of the wilde Nations, which neither knew the Ro∣mans, nor were knowne vnto them; since he was not like to finde assistance from a∣nie Nation, about the whole compasse of the Mediterranean Seas. But deuices were long ere they tooke effect: so as the Bastarnae came not before such time as he was dead; his death being the ouerthrow of that purpose. In the meane time he neglected not the training of his men to warre, and the exercise of them in some small Expeditions, against those wilde people that bordered vpon him, and stood worst affected toward him. But these his counsailes and proceedings were miserably disturbed by the cala∣mities that fell vpon him, both in his Kingdome, and in his owne house. The Fami∣lies and whole Townships, which he had caused much against their wils to forsake their ancient dwellings, and betake themselues to such new habitations, as hee in his discretion thought meeter for them, were vehemently offended at the Yet their anger at first contained it selfe within words: hee hauing done them no great wrong in that alteration, otherwise then by neglecting their affection to the places wherein they had long liued: which also he did vnwillingly, being himselfe ouer-ruled by necessitie, that seemed apparent. This cuill therefore would soone haue been determined, had not his cruell and vindicatiue nature made it worse. He could not pardon words proceeding from just sorrow: but all to trai∣terous malice; and accordingly sought reuenge where it was needlesse. In his rage he caused many to die: among whom were some eminent men; and few or none of them deseruedly. This encreased the hatred of the people, and turned their former exclamations into bitter curses. Which grew the more generall; when the King in a barbarous and base fury, mistrusting all alike whom he had iniuried, thought himselfe vnlike to be safe, vntill he should haue massacred all the children of those parents, whom tyrannically he had put to death. In the execution of this his vnmanly pleasure, some accidents, more tragicall then perhaps he could haue desired, gaue men cause to thinke (as they could not in reason thinke otherwise) that, not without powred on him from Heauen, hee felt the like miserie in his children. It is hard to say what the Romans intended, in the extraordi∣nary fauour which they shewed vnto Demetrius, the Kings yonger sonne. It may well be (though it may be also suspected) that they had no purpose to make and nourish dissention betweene the brethren, but onely to cherish the vertue and to∣wardlinesse of Demetrius; like as we finde it in their Histories. But their fauour towards this yong Prince, and his mutuall respect of them, bred extreme jealousie in the fathers head. If any custome of the Romanes, the manner of their life, the fashion of their apparell, or the vnsightly contriuing and building (as then it was) of the Towne of Rome, were jested at in ordinarie discourse and table-talke, Demetrius was sure to be presently on fire, defending and praysing them, euen in such points as rather needed excuse. This, and his dayly conuersation with their Embassadours, as often as they came, gaue his father cause to thinke, that he was no fit partaker of any counsaile held against them. Wherefore he communicated all his deuices with his elder sonne Perseus: who fearing so much lest his brother should step betweene him and the succession, conuerted wholly vnto his destructi∣on, that grace which he with his father. Perseus was then thirty yeeres old; of astirring spirit, though much defectiue in valour. Demetrius was yonger by fiue yeeres, more open and vnwarie in his actions, yet thought old and crafty enough, to entertaine more dangerous practices, than his free speeches discouered. The jea∣lous head of the King hauing entertained such suspitions, that were much increa∣sed by the cunning practice of his elder sonne, a slight occasion made the fire breake out, that had long layne smothered. A Muster, and ceremonious lustration of the Armie, was wont to be made at certaine times with great solemnitie. The manner of it at the present was thus: They cleft in twaine a bitch; and threw the head and fore-part, with the entrailes, on the right hand, and the hinder part on the left hand of the way which the Armie was to passe. This done, the Armes of all the Kings of Macedon, from the very first originall, were borne before the Armie. Then fol∣lowed the King between his two sonnes: after him came his owne band, and they of his guard; whom all the rest of the Macedonians followed. Hauing performed other ceremonies, the Armie was diuided into two parts: which, vnder the Kings two sonnes, charged each other in manner of a true fight, vsing poles, and the like, in stead of their pikes and accustomed weapons. But in this present skirmish there appeared some extraordinary contention for the victorie: whether happening by chance, or whether the two Captaines did ouer-earnestly seeke each to get the vp∣per hand, as a betokening of their good successe in a greater triall. Some small hurt there was done, and wounds giuen, euen those stakes, vntill Perseus his side at length recoyled. Perseus himselfe was this, as it had been some bad pre∣sage: but his friends were glad, and , that hereof might be made good vse. They were of the craftier sort: who which way the Kings fauour bent, and how all the courses of Demetrius led vnto his owne ruine, addressed their serui∣ces to the more malicious and crafty head. And now they said, that this victory of Demetrius would affoord matter of complaint against him; as if the heat of his am∣bition had carried him beyond the rules of that solemne pastime. Each of the bre∣thren was that day to feast his owne companions, and each of them had spies in the others lodging, to obserue what was said and done. One of Perseus his Intel∣ligencers behaued himselfe so indiscreetly, that hee was taken and well beaten by three or foure of Demetrius his men, who turned him out of dores. After some store of wine, Demetrius told his companions, that he would goe visit his brother, and see what cheare he kept. They agreed to his motion, excepting such of them as had ill handled his brothers man: yet he would leaue none of his traine behinde, but for∣ced them also to beare him company. They, fearing to be ill rewarded for their late diligence, armed themselues secretly to preuent all danger. Yet was there such good espiall kept, that this their comming armed was made knowne to Perseus: who thereupon tumultuously locked vp his doores, as if he stood in feare to be assaulted in his house. Demetrius wondred to see himselfe excluded, and fa∣red very angerly with his brother. But Perseus, bidding him be gone as an enemie, and one whose murderous purpose was detected, sent him away with entertaine∣ment no better than defiance. The next day the matter was brought the King. The elder brother accused the yonger vnto the father of them both. Much there was alledged, and in effect the same that hath been here recited, saue that by misconstruction all was made worse. But the maine point of the accusation, and which did aggrauate all the rest, was, That Demetrius had vndertaken this murder, and would perhaps also dare to vndertake a greater, vpon confidence of the Ro∣mans; by whom hee knew that he should be defended and borne out. For Perseus made shew, as if the Romans did hate him; because hee bore a due respect vnto his father, and was sorie to see him spoiled, and daily robbed of somewhat by them. And for this cause he said it was, that they did his brother against him: as also that they sought how to vnto Demetrius the of the Macedonians. For proofe hereof he cited a letter, sent of late from T. Quintius to the King him∣selfe: whereof the contents were, That he had done wisely in sending Demetrius to Rome; and that he should yet further doe well to send him thither againe, ac∣companied with a greater and more honorable traine of Macedonian Lords. Hence he enforced, That this counsell was giuen by Titus, of purpose to shake the alle∣geance of those, that should wait vpon his brother to Rome; and make them, for∣getting their dueties to their old King, become seruants to this yong Traytor De∣metrius. Hereto Demetrius made answere, by rehearsing all passages of the day and night foregoing, in such manner as hee remembred them, and had conceiued of them: bitterly reprehending Perseus, that conuerted matters of Pastime, and what was done or spoken in wine, to such an , whereby he sought his brothers death. As for the loue which the Romans did him; Hee said that it grew, if not from his owne vertue, at leastwise from their opinion thereof: so as by any impious practice, Hee were more like to lose it wholly, than to encrease it. In this wretched pleading there wanted not such passions, as are incident to fathers, children, and brethren; besides those that are common to all Plaintiffes and De∣fendants, before ordinarie Iudges. The King pronounced like a father, though aicalous father, That he would conclude nothing vpon the or error, what∣soeuer it were, of one day and night, nor vpon one houres audience of the matter, but vpon better obseruation of their liues, manners, and whole carriage of them∣selues both in word and deed. And herein hee may seeme to haue dealt both iustly and compassionately. But from this time forward, hee gaue himselfe ouer wholly to Perseus: vsing so little conference with his yonger sonne, that when he had mat∣ters of weight in hand, such especially as concerned the Romans, He liked neither to haue him present, nor neere vnto him. Aboue all, he had especiall care, to learne out what had passed betweene Demetrius and T. , or any other of the Ro∣man great ones. And to this purpose he sent Embassadours to Rome, Philocles and Apelles; men whom hee thought no way interessed in the quarrels betweene the brethren; though indeed they altogether depended on the elder, whom they saw the more in grace. These brought home with them a letter, said to be written by Titus (whose seale they had counterfetted) vnto the King. The contents wher∣of were, A deprecation for the yong Prince; with an intimation, as by way of granting it, That his youthfull and ambitious desires had caused him to enter into practices vniustifiable, against his elder brother; which yet should neuer take effect, for that Titus himselfe would not be author, or abettor, of any impious deuice. This manner of excuse did forcibly perswade the King, to thinke his sonne a dangerous traytor. To strengthen him in this opinion, one Didas, to whom he gaue Demetrius in custodie, made shew as if he had pittied the estate of the vnhappy Prince; and so wrung out of him his secret intentions, which he shortly discouered vnto Philip. It was the purpose of Demetrius to flye secretly to Rome; where he might hope not onely to liue in safety, from his father and brother, but in greater likelihood, than hee could finde at home, of bettering such claime as he had in reuersion vnto the Crowne of Macedon. Whatsoeuer his hopes and meanings were, al came to nought through the falshood of Didas; who playing on both , offered vnto the Prince his helpe for making the escape, and in the meane while reuealed the whole mat∣ter to the King. So Philip resolued to put his sonne to death, without further ex∣pence of time. It was thought behouefull to make him away priuily, for feare lest the Romans should take the matter to heart, and held it as proofe sufficient, at least, of the Kings despight against them, if not of his meaning to renew the warre. Di∣das therefore was to rid the vnhappy Prince out of his life. This ac∣cursed Minister of his Kings vnaduised sentence, first gaue poyson to Demetrius: which wrought neither so hastily, nor so secretly, as was desired. Hereupon he sent a couple of Ruffians, to finish the tragedie: who villanously accomplished their worke by smothering that Prince, in whose life the greatest hope of Macedon. In all the race of Antigonus there had not beene found a King, that had thus cruelly dealt with any Prince of his owne bloud. The houses of Lysimachus and Cassander fell either with themselues, or euen vpon their heeles; by intestine dis∣cord and iealousies, grounded on desire of soueraigne rule, or feare of losing it. By the like vnnaturall hatred, had almost beene cut off the lines of Ptolemie and of Se∣leucus: which though narrowly they escaped the danger, yet were their kingdomes thereby grieuously distempered. Contrariwise, it was worthy of extraordinarie note, how that vpstart family of the Kings of Pergamus had raised it selfe to mar∣uellous greatnesse, in very short space, from the condition of meere slauery: where∣of a principall cause was, the brotherly loue maintained by them, with singular commendation of their pietie. Neither was Philip ignorant of these examples; but is said to haue propounded the last of them, to his owne children, as a patterne for them to imitate. Certainly he had reason so to doe: not more in regard of the benefit which his enemies reaped by their concord, than in remembrance of the tender fosterage, wherewith King Antigonus his Tutor had faithfully cherished him in his minoritie. But Hee was himselfe of an vnmercifull nature; and there∣fore vnmeet to bee a good perswader vnto kindely affection. The murders by him done vpon many of his friends, together with the barbarous outrages, which for the satiating of his bloud-thirsty appetite he delightfully had committed vpon ma∣ny innocents, both strangers, and subiects of his owne; did now procure vengeance downe from Heauen, that rewarded Him with a draught of his owne Poyson. After the death of his sonne, He too late began to examine the crimes that had bin obiected; and to weigh them in a more equal ballance. Then found he nothing that could giue him satisfaction, or by good probabilitie induce him to thinke, that ma∣lice had not beene contriuer of the whole processe. His only remaining Son Per∣seus could so ill dissemble the pleasure which hee tooke, in being freed from all danger of competition; as there might easily be perceiued in him a notable change, proceeding fromsome other cause, than the remoue of those dangers, which he had lately pretended. The Romans were now no lesse to be feared than at other times, when he, as hauing accomplished the most of his desires, left off his vsuall trouble of minde, and carefulnesse of making prouision against them. He was more diligent∣ly courted, than in former times; by those that well vnderstood the difference, be∣tweene a rising and a setting Sunne. As for old Philip, hee was left in a manner de∣solate, some expecting his death; and some scarce enduring the tediousnesse of such expectation. This bred in the King a deep melancholy; and filled his head with suspitious imaginations; the like whereof hee had neuer beene slow to appre∣hend. Hee was much vexed: and so much the more, for that he knew, neither well to whom, nor perfectly whereof to complaine. One honourable man, a Cousin of his, named Antigonus, continued so true to Philip, that hee grew thereby hatefull to Perseus: and thus becomming subiect vnto the same iealous impressions which troubled the King, became also partaker of his secrets. This counsailour, when he found that the anger conceiued against Perseus would not vent it selfe, and giue to the King, vntill the truth were knowne whether Demetrius were guilty or no of the treason obiected; as also that Philocles and Apelles, (the Embassadours which had brought from Rome that Epistle of Flaminius, that serued as the greatest euidence against Demetrius ) were suspected of forgery in the busines: made diligent inquirie after the truth. In thus doing, hee found one Xychus, a man most likely to haue vnderstood what false dealing was vsed by those Embassadors. Him hee ap∣prehended, brought to the Court, and presented vnto the King: saying that this fellow knew all, and must therefore bee made to vtter what hee knew. Xychus for feare of torture, vttered as much as was before suspected: confessing against him∣selfe, that hee had beene employed by the Embassadors in that wicked piece of bu∣sinesse. No maruell, if the Fathers passions were extreme, when hee vnderstood, that by the vnnaturall practice of one son, he had so wretchedly cast away another, farre more vertuous, and innocent. Hee raged exceedingly against himselfe, and withal against the authors of the mischiefe. Vpon the first newes of this discouerie, Apelles fled away, and got into Italie, Philocles was taken: and either forasmuch as hee could not deny it when Xychus confronted him, yeelded himselfe guilty, or else was put to torture. Perseus was now growne stronger, than that hee should neede to flie the Countrie: yet not so stout as to aduenture himselfe into his fa∣thers presence. He kept on the borders of the Kingdome, towards Thrace, whilest his father wintered at Demetrias. Philip therefore, not hoping to get into his power this his vngracious sonne; tooke a resolution, to aliene the Kingdome from him, and confer it vpon Antigonus. But his weake body, and excessiue griefe of minde, so disabled him in the trauell hereto belonging; that , hee could bring his pur∣pose to effect, hee was constrained to yeeld to nature: Hee had raigned about two and forty yeeres: alwayes full of trouble; as vexed by others, and vexed himselfe, with continuall warres; of which that with the Romans was most vnhappy, and few or none of the rest found the conclusion, which a wise Prince would haue desi∣red, of bringing forth together, both honour and profit. But for all the euill that befell him, he might thanke his owne peruerse condition: since his vncle, King An∣tigonus, had left vnto him estate, so great, and so well settled, as made it easie for him, to accomplish any moderate desires, if hee had not abhorred all good counsell. Wherefore he was iustly punished: by feeling the difference betweene the imagi∣narie happinesse of a Tyrant, which he affected; and the life of a King, whereof he little cared to performe the dutie. His death, euen whilest yet it was only drawing neere, was foresignified vnto Perseus, by Calligenes the Physician; who also concea∣led it a while from those that were about the Court. So Perseus came thither on the suddaine, and tooke possession of the kingdome: which in fine he no lesse improui∣dently lost, than he had wickedly gotten. §. IIII. How the Bastarnae fell vpon Dardania. The behauiour of PERSEVS in the beginning of his Reigne. Some warres of the Romans: and how they suffered MASANISSA, cruelly to oppresse the Carthaginians. They quarrell with PERSEVS. They allow not their Confederates to make warre without their leaue obtained. The Treason of CAL∣LICRATES; whereby all Greece became more obnoxious to Rome, than in former times. Further quarrels to PERSEVS. Hee seekes friendship of the Achaeans, and is withstood by CALLICRATES. The Romans their intent of warring vpon him. IMmediately vpon the death of Philip, came the Bastarnae into Thrace: where order had been taken, long before, both for their free passage, and for the indemnitie of the Countrie. This compact was friendly obserued, as long as none other was knowne than that Philip did liue, to recompence all that should be done, or sustained, for his ser∣uice. But when it was heard, that a new King raigned in Macedon; and not heard withall, that he tooke any care what became of the enterprize: then was all dasht and confounded. The Thracians would no longer afford so good markets vnto these strangers, as formerly they had done. On the other side, the Bastarnae would not be contented with reason, but became their owne caruers. Thus each part hauing lost the rich hopes reposed in Philip, grew carefull of thriuing in the present; with little regard of right or wrong. Within awhile they fell to blowes; and the Bastar∣nae had the vpper hand, so as they chased the Thracians out of the plaine Countries. But the victors made little vse of their good fortune. For whether by reason of some ouerthrow, receiued by them in assaulting a place of strength; or whether because of extreme bad weather, which is said to haue them as it were mi∣raculously: all of them returned home, saue thirtie thousand, which pierced on into Dardania. How these thirtie thousand sped in their voyage, I doe not finde. It seemes that by the carelesse vsing of some victories, they drew losse vpon them∣selues: and finally tooke that occasion, to follow their companions back in to their owne Countrey. As for Perseus he thought it not expedient, in the noueltie of his Reigne, to embroyle himselfe in a warre so dangerous, as that with the Romans was likely to proue. Wherefore hee wholly gaue his minde to the settling of his Estate: which well done, he might afterwards accommodate himselfe, as the condition of his af∣faires should require, either for warre or peace. To preuent all danger of rebelli∣on: he quickly tooke away the life of Antigonus. To winne loue of his people; he sate personally to heare their causes in iudgement (though herein hee was so ouer∣diligent and curious, that one might haue perceiued this his vertue of iustice to be no better than fained) as also he gratified them with many delightfull spectacles, magnificently by him set forth. Aboue all, he had care to auoide all necessitie of war with Rome: and therefore made it his first worke, to send Embassadors thither, to renue the league; which he obtained, and was by the Senate saluted King, and friend vnto the State. Neither was he negligent in seeking to purchase good will of the Greekes, and other his neighbours: but was rather herein so excessiuely boun∣tifull, that it may seeme a wonder, how in few yeeres, to his vtter ruine, he became so griping and tenacious. His feare was indeed the mastring passion, which ouer∣ruled him, and changed him into so many shapes, as made it hard to discerne which of his other qualities were naturally his owne. For proofe of this, there is requisite no more, than the relation of his actions past and following. The Romans continued, as they had long, busie in warres against the Spaniards and Ligurians; people often vanquished, and as often breaking forth into new rebel∣lion. They also conquered Istria; subdued the rebelling Sardinians; and had some quarrels, though to little effect, with the Illyrians and others. Ouer the Carthagini∣ans they bore (as euer since the victory) a heauy hand: and suffered Masanissa to take from them what he listed. The Carthaginians, like obedient vassals to Rome, were afraid, though in defence of their owne, to take Armes: from which they were bound by an Article of peace, except it were with leaue of the Romans. Masa∣nissa therefore had great aduantage ouer them: and was not ignorant how to vse it. He could get possession by force, of whatsoeuer he desired, ere their complaining Embassadours could be at Rome: and then were the Romans not hardly entreated, to leaue things as they found them. So had Hee once dealt before, in taking from them the Countrie of : and so did hee vse them againe and againe; with pretence of title, where hee had any; otherwise, without it. Gala the Father of Masanissa had wonne some land from the Carthaginians; which afterward Syphax wanne from Gala, and within a while, restored to the right owners, for loue of his Wife Sophonisba, and of Asdrubal his Father-in-law. This did Masanissa take from them by force: and by the Romans, to whose judgement the case was referred, was permitted quietly to hold it. The Carthaginians had now good experience, how beneficiall it was for their Estate, to vse all maner of submissiue obedience to Rome. They had scarcely digested his iniury, when Masanissa came vpon them againe, and tooke from them aboue seuentie townes and Castles, without any colour of right. Hereof by their Embassadors they made lamentable complaint vnto the Roman Senate. They shewed how grieuously they were oppressed by reason of two ar∣ticles in their League: That they should not make warre, out of their own lands, nor with any Confederates of the Romans. Now although it were so, that they might lawfully withstand the violence of Masanissa, inuading their Country, how∣soeuer he was pleased to call it his: yet since he was confederate with the Romans, they durst not presume to beare defensiue armes against him, but suffered them∣selues to be eaten vp, for feare of incurring the Romans indignation. Wherfore they entreated, that either they might haue fairer iustice; or be suffered to defend their owne by strong hand; or at least, if right must wholly giue place to fauor, That the Romans yet would be pleased to determine, how farre forth Masanissa should bee allowed, to proceed in these outrages. If none of these petitions could be obtained, then desired they, that the Romans would let them vnderstand, wherein they had offended since the time that Scipio gaue them peace; and vouchsafe to inflict on them such punishment, as they themselues in honour should thinke meere: for that better and more to their comfort it were, to suffer at once what should be ap∣pointed by such Iudges; than continually to liue in feare, and none otherwise draw breath than at the mercie of this Numidian Hangman. And herewithall the Em∣bassadours threw themselues prostrate on the ground, weeping in hope to moue compassion. Here may wee behold, the fruits of their enuy to that valiant house of the Barchines; of their irresolution, in prosecuting a war so important, as Hanni∣bal made for them in Italy; and of their halfe penny worthing, in matter of expence, when they had aduentured their whole estate, in the purchase of a great Empire. Now are they seruants, euen to the seruants of those men, whose fathers they haue often chased, slaine, taken, and sold as bondslaues in the streets of Carthage, and in all Cities of Africke and Greece. Now haue they enough of that Roman peace, which Hanno so often and so earnestly desired. Onely they want peace with Ma∣sanissa, once their mercinarie, and now their master, or rather their tormentor; out of whose cruell hands, they beseech their masters to take the office of correct∣ing them. In such case are they, and adore the Romans, whom they see flourishing in such prosperitie as might haue beene their owne. But the Romans had farre bet∣ter entreated Varro, who lost the battell at Cannae; then Hannibal that wanne it was vsed by the Carthaginians: they had freely bestowed, euery man of them, all his priuate riches, vpon the Common-wealth; and employed their labours for the publike, without crauing recompence: as also they had not thought it much, though being in extreme want, to set out an armie into Spaine, at what time the e∣nemie lay vnder their owne wals. These were no Carthaginian vertues: and there∣fore the Carthaginians hauing fought against their betters, must patiently endure the miseries belonging to the vanquished. Their pittifull behauiour bred perad∣uenture some commiseration; yet their teares may seeme to haue beene mistrusted, as proceeding no lesse from enuie to the Romans, than from any feeling of their own calamitie. They thought themselues able to fight with Masanissa: which estima∣tion of their forces was able to make them, after a little while, enter into compari∣sons with Rome. Wherefore they obtained no such leaue as they sought, of defen∣ding their owne right by armes: but contrariwise, when without leaue obtained they presumed so far, the destruction of Carthage was thought an easie punishment of that offence. At the present, they receiued a gentle answere; though they had o∣therwise little amends. Gulussa the sonne of Masanissa was then in Rome; and had not as yet craued audience. He was therefore called before the Senate; where hee was demanded the reason of his comming; and had related vnto him the com∣plaint made the against his Father. Hee answered, That his Father not being throughly aware of any Embassadours thither sent from Carthage, had therefore not giuen him instructions, how to deale in that businesse. Onely it was knowne, that the Carthaginians had held counsell diuers nights, in the Tem∣ple of Aesculapius: whereupon he himselfe was dispatched away to Rome, there to entreat the Senate, that these common enemies of the Romans and of his Father might not be ouermuch trusted; especially against his Father, whom they hated most maliciously, for his constant faith to the People of Rome. This answere gaue little satisfaction. Wherefore the Senate replyed, that for Masanissa his sake, they had done, and would doe, whatsoeuer was reasonable; but that it stood not with their iustice, to allow of this his violence, in taking from the Carthaginians those lands, which by the couenants of the league, were granted vnto them freely to enioy. With this milde rebuke they dismissed Gulussa; bestowing on him friend∣ly presents (as also they did on the Carthaginians ) and willing him to tell his father, that he should doe well to send Embassadors, more fully instructed in this matter. This happened when the Macedonian warre was euen ready to begin: at which time the Romans were not willing, too much to offend, either the Carthaginians, (for feare of vrging them vnseasonably to rebellion) or Masanissa, at whose hands they expected no little helpe. So were they aided both by the Carthaginians, and Masanissa: by the Carthaginians, partly for feare, partly for hope of better vsage in the future; by Masanissa, in way of thankfulnesse; though if it had happened (which was vnlikely) that they should bee vanquished; hee made none other ac∣count, than that all Africke round about him and Carthage therewithall should bee his owne. In the midst of all these cares, the Romans had not beene vnmindfull of Perseus. They visited him daily with Embassadours; that is, with honourable spies to ob∣serue his behauiour. These Hee entertaind kindly at first, vntill (which fell out ere long) he perceiued whereto their diligence tended. First they quarrelled with him about the troubles in Dardania: neither would they take any satisfaction, vntill the Bastarnae were thence gone; though he protested, that hee had not sent for them. Afterward they pried narrowly into his doings; and were no lesse ill contented with good offices, by him done to sundry of his neighbours, than with those wrongs, which they said (that he did vnto other some. Where he did harme to any; they called it, making warre vpon their friends: Where hee did good; they called such his bounty, seeking friends to take his part against them. The Dolopians, his subiects, vpon what occasion it is vncertaine) rebelled, and with exquisite torments slue Euphranor, whom he had appointed their gouernour. It seemes that Euphra∣nor had played the Tyrant among them. For they were a people without strength to resist the Macedonian: and therefore vnlikely to haue presumed so farre, vnlesse either they had beene extremely prouoked; or else were secretly animated by the Romans. Whatsoeuer it was that bred this courage in them: Perseus did soone allay it, and reclaime them by strong hand. But the Romans tooke very angerly this pre∣sumption of the King: euen as if hee had inuaded some Countrie of their Italian confederates, and not corrected his owne Rebels at home. Faine they would haue had him to draw in the same yoke with the Carthaginians; wherto had he humbled once his necke, they could themselues haue done the part of Masanissa; though Eumenes, or some other fit for that purpose, had beene wanting. And to this effect, they told him, That conditions of the league betweene them were such, as made it vnlawfull, both to his father heretofore, and now to him, to take armes without their licence first obtained. To the same passe they would also faine haue reduced the Greekes, and generally all their adherents, euen such as had entred into league with them vpon equall termes: whom vsually they rewarded with a frowne, when soeuer they presumed to right themselues by force of Armes, without seeking first the Oracle at Rome. Hereof the Achaeans had good experience: whose cofidence in their proper strength made them otherwhiles bold to be their owne caruers, and whose hope of extraor∣dinarie fauour at Rome caused them the more willingly to referre their causes to ar∣bitrement. For when they went about to haue chastised the Messenians by warre; T. Quintius rebuked them, as too arrogant, in taking such a worke in hand, without his authoritie: yet by his authoritie he ended the matter, wholly to their good li∣king. Semblably at other times were they reprehended, euen with Lordly threats, when they tooke vpon them to carry any businesse of importance, by their owne power, without standing vnto the good grace of the Romans. Who neuerthelesse, vpon submission, were apt enough to doe them right. Thus were they tamed by little and little, and taught to forget their absolute liberty, as by which they were not like to thriue; especially in vsurping the practice of armes, which belonged on∣ly to the Imperiall Citie. In learning this hard lesson, they were such vntoward Polyb. legar. 51. & 53. schollers, that they needed, and not long after felt, very sharp correction. Yet was there no small part of blame to be imputed vnto their Masters. For the Roman Se∣nate, being desirous to humble the Achaeans; refused not onely to giue them such aide as they requested, and as they challenged by the tenour of the League be∣tweeue them; but further, with a carelesse insolencie, reiected this honest and rea∣sonable petition, That the Enemie might not be supplied from Italie, with victuals or armes. Here with not content, The Fathers, as wearied with dealing in the af∣faires of Greece, pronounced openly, That if the Argiues, Lacedaemonians, or Co∣rinthians, would reuolt from the Achaeans; they themselues would thinke it a busi∣nesse no way concerning them. This was presently after the death of Philopoemen: at what time it was belecued, that the Common-wealth of Achaia was like to fall into much distresse; were it not vpheld by countenance of the Romans. All this notwithstanding; when Lycortas Praetor of the Achaeans had vtterly subdued the Messenians far sooner than was expected; and when as not onely no Towne rebel∣led from the Achaeans, but many entred into their corporation: then did the Ro∣mans with an ill-fauored grace, tell the same Embassadours, to whose petition they had made such bad answere (and who as yet were not gone out of the Citie) That they had streightly forbidden all manner of succour to be carried to Messene. Thus thinking, by a fained grauitie, to haue serued their owne turnes; they manifested their condition; both to set on the weaker, against the stronger and more sus∣pected; and also to assume vnto themselues a Soueraigne power, in directing all matters of warre, which dissemblingly they would haue seemed to neglect. In like manner dealt they with all their confederates: not permitting any of them to make warre, whether offensiue or defensiue; though it were against meere strangers; without interposing the authoritie of the Senate and People of Rome: vnlesse per∣aduenture sometimes they winked at such violence, as did helpe towards the ac∣complishment of their owne secret malice. Now these Roman arts how soeuer ma∣ny (for gainfull or timerous respects) would seeme to vnderstand them; yet were generally displeasing vnto all men endued with free spirits. Onely the Athenians, once the most turbulent Citie in Greece, hauing neither subiects of their own that might rebell, nor power wherewith to bring any into subiection; for want of more noble argument wherein to practise their eloquence that was become the whole remainder of their ancient commendations, were much delighted in flat∣tering the most mighty. So they kept themselues in grace with the Romans, re∣mained free from all trouble, vntill the warre of Mithridates: being men vnfit for action, and thereby innocent; yet bearing a part in many great actions, as Gratu∣lators of the Roman victories, and Pardon-crauers for the vanquished Such were the Athenians become. As for those other Common-weales and Kingdomes, that with ouer-nice diligence stroue to preserue their liberties and lands, from consu∣ming by piece-meale: they were to be deuoured whole, and swallowed vp at once. Especially the Macedonian, as the most vnpliant, and wherein many of the Greekes began to haue affiance, was necessarily to be made an example, how much better it were better to bow than to breake. Neither Perseus nor the Romans were ignorant, how the Greekes at this time stood affected. Perseus, by reason of his neere neighbourhood, and of the daily com∣merce betweene them and his subiects, could not want good information, of all that might concerne him, in their affaires. He well knew, that all of them now ap∣prehended the danger which Philopoemen had long since foretold; of the miserable subiection, Whereinto Greece was likely to be reduced, by the Roman patronage. Indeed they not onely perceiued the approching danger: but as being tenderly sensible of their liberty, felt themselues grieued with the present subiection, wherto already they were become obnoxious: Wherefore though none of them had the courage, in matters of the publike to fall out with the Romans: yet all of them had the care, to choose among themselues none other Magistrates, than such as affected the good of their Countrie, and would for no ambition, or other seruile respect, bee flatterers of the greatnesse which kept all in feare. Thus it seemed likely, that all domesticall conspiracies would soone bee at an end; when honestie and loue of the Common weale, became the fairest way to preferment. Of this carefull proui∣sion for the safety of Greece, the Romans were not throughly aduertised: eyther be∣cause things were diligently concealed from their Embassadours, whom all men knew to be little better than Spies; or because little account was made of that in∣telligence, which was brought in by such Traytors (of whom euery Citie in Greece had too many) as were men vnregarded among their owne people, and therefore more like to speake maliciously than truely; or perhaps because the Embassadours themselues, being all Senators, and capable of the greatest Office or charge, had no will to finde out other matter of trouble, than was fitting to their owne desires of employment. But it is hard to conceale that which many know, from those that are feared or flattered by many. The Achaeans being to send Embassadours to Rome, that should both excuse them, as touching some point wherein they re∣fused to obey the Senate; and informe the Senate better in the same businesse; chose one Callicrates, among others, to goe in that Embassage. By their making choise of such a man; one may perceiue the aduantage, which mischieuous wret∣ches, who commonly are forward in pursuing their vile desires, haue against the plaine sort of honest men, that least earnestly thrust themselues into the trouble∣some businesse of the weale publike. For this Callicrates was in such wise trans∣ported with ambition; that hee chose much rather to betray his Country, than to let any other bee of more authoritie than himselfe therein. Wherefore in∣stead of well discharging his credence, and alleadging what was meetest in iustifica∣tion of his people: he vttered a quite contrary tale; and strongly encouraged the Romans, to oppresse both the Achaeans, and all the rest of Greece, with a farre more heauy hand. He told the Senate, that it was high time for them, to looke vnto the settling of their authority, among his froward Countrimen; if they meant not wholly to forgoe it. For now there was taken vp a custome, to stand vpon points of confederacie, and lawes: as if these were principally to bee had in regard; any in∣iunction from Rome notwithstanding. Hence grew it, that the Achaeans both now, and at other times, did what best pleased themselues, and answered the Romans with excuses: as if it were enough to say, That by some condition of League, or by force of some Law, they were discharged, or hindred, from obeying the decrees of the Senate. This would not be so, if He, and some other of his opinion, might haue their wils: who ceased not to affirme, That no Columes or Monuments crected, nor no solemne oath of the whole Nation, to ratifie the obseruance of Confedera∣cie or statute, ought to be of force, when the Romans willed the contrarie. But it was euen the fault of the Romans themselues, That the multitude refused to giue eare vnto such perswasions. For howsoeuer in popular Estates, the sound of li∣bertie vsed to be more plausible, than any discourse tending against it: yet if they which vndertooke the maintenance of an argument, seeming neuer so bad, were sure by their so doing, to procure their owne good; the number of them would in∣crease apace, and they became the preualent faction. It was therfore strange, how the Fathers could so neglect the aduancement of those, that sought wholly to en∣large the amplitude of the Roman maiesty. More wisely, though with seditious and rebellious purpose, did the Greekes: who many times, yea and ordinarily, conferred great honours, vpon men otherwise of little account or desert; onely for hauing vttered some braue words against the Romans. The Fathers, hearing these and the like reasons, where with he exhorted them to handle roughly those that were ob∣stinate, and by cherishing their friends, to make their partie strong; resolued to fol∣low this good counsaile, in euery point; yea to depresse all those that held with the right, and to set vp their owne followers, were it by right or by wrong. And to Polyb. Legat. 58. this end, they not onely dealt thenceforth more peremptorily with the Achaeans, than had bin their maner in former times; but wrote at the present vnto all Cities of Greece; requiring them to see that their mandate (which was concerning the resti∣tution of those that were banished out of Lacedaemon ) should bee fulfilled. Particu∣larly in behalfe of Callicrates; they aduised all men, to be such, and so affected, as hee was, in their seueral common-weales. With this dispatch, Callicrates returned home a ioyfull man: hauing brought his Country into the way of ruine, but himselfe into the way of preferment. Neuerthelesse he forbore to vant himselfe, of his eloquence vsed in the Senate. Onely he so reported his Embassage, that all men became feare∣full of the danger, where with hee threatned those that should presume to oppose the Romans. By such arts hee obtained to be made Pretor of the Achaeans: in which Magistracie, as in all his courses following, he omitted nothing, that might serue to manifest his ready obsequiousnes vnto those whom he had made his Patrons. Now as the Romans by threatning termes wan many flatterers, and lost as many true friends: so Perseus on the other side, thinking by liberall gifts, and hopefull pro∣mises, to assure vnto himselfe those that ill could brooke his enemies; got indeed a multitude of partakers, though little honester than his enemies had. Thus were all the Cities of Greece distracted with factions: some holding with the Romans; some with the Macedonian; and some few, respecting only the good of the Estates, where∣in they liued. Hereat the Lords of the Senate were highly offended; and thought it an indignitie not sufferable, That a King, no better than their vassall, should dare to become head of a faction against them. This therefore must be reckoned in the number of his trespasses: wherof if not any one alone, yet all of them together, shall affoord them iust occasion to make war vpon him. Perseus hauing finished his busi∣nessc among the Dolopians, made a journey to Apollo his temple at Delphi. He tooke his armie along with him; yet went, and returned, in such peaceable and friendly wise, that no place was the worse for his journey, but the good affection towards him generally increased therby. With those that were in his way, he dealt himselfe; to such as lay further off, he sent Embassadors or letters: praying them, That the memory of al wrongs whatsoeuer, done by his father, might be buried with his fa∣ther; since his own meaning was to hold friendship sincerely with all his neighbors. The Romans perhaps could haue beene pleased better, if he had behaued himselfe after a contrary fashion, and done some acts of hostilitie in his passage. Yet as if he ought not to haue taken such a journey, without their licence, this also was made a valuable matter, and cast into the heap of his faults. He laboured greatly to recouer the loue of the Achaeans: which his father had so lost, that by a solemne decrec, they forbade any Macedonian to enter their territories. It was jealousie perhaps, no lesse than hatred, which caused them, at the first, to make such a decree. For howsoeuer Philip had by many vile acts, especially by the death of the two Arati, giuen them cause to abhor him: yet in the publike administration of their estate, he had, for the more part, been to them so beneficiall, that not without much adoe and at length, without any generall consent, they resolued to forsake him. Wherfore it was need∣full, euen for preseruation of concord among them, vse al circumspection; that he might not, by his agents, negotiate, and hold intelligence with any, in a country, to∣wards him so doubtfully affected: especially when by hearkening to his messages, they might make themselues suspected by their new friends. But the continuance of this decree, beyond the time of warre, and when all danger of innouation was past; was vnciuill, if not in humane, as nourishing deadly hatred, without leauing meanes of reconciliation. And hereof the Achaeans reaped no good fruit. For al∣though they were not, in like sort, forbidden the Kingdome of Macedon: yet vn∣derstanding what would be due to them, if they should aduenture thither, none of them durst set foot therein. Hence it came to passe, that their bondmen, knowing a safe harbour, out of which their masters could not fetch them, ran daily away, in great numbers: exceedingly to the losse of such, as made of their slaues very profi∣table vse. But Perseus took hold vpon this occasion: as fitly seruing to pacifie those, whose enmitie faine he would haue changed into loue. He therefore apprehended all these fugitiues, to send them home againe: and wrote vnto the Achaeans, That as for good will vnto them, he had taken paines to restore back their seruants; so should they doe very well to take order for keeping them, that hereafter they might not runne away againe. His meaning was readily vnderstood, and his letters kindely accepted by the greater part; being openly rehearsed by the Pretor, before the Councell. But Callicrates tooke the matter very angerly; and bade them be ad∣uised what they did: for that this was none other, than a plaine deuice, to make them depart from the friendship of the Romans. Herewithall he tooke vpon him, somewhat liberally, to make the Achaeans before-hand acquainted with the warre, that was comming vpon Perseus from Rome. Hee told them, how Philip had made preparations for the same warre; how Demetrius had beene made away, because of his good affection to the Romans; and how Perseus had, since his being King, done many things, tending to the breach of peace. Briefly He rehearsed all those mat∣ters, which were afterwards alleaged by the Romans; the inuasion of the Bastarnae, vpon the Dardanians; the Kings journey against the Dolopians; his voyage to Del∣phi; and finally, his peaceable behauiour, which was (he said) a dangerous temptati∣on of men to his party. Wherefore he aduised them, to expect the of things, and not ouer-hastily to enter into any degree of friendship with the Macedonians. Hereto good answere was made by the Pretors brother: That Callicrates was too earnest, in so light a matter; and that, being neither one of the Kings cabbinet, nor of the Roman Senate, he made himselfe too well acquainted with all that had pas∣sed, or was like to follow. For it was well knowne, that Perseus had renued his league with the Romans; that he was by them saluted King, and friend to the Estate; and that He had louingly entertained their Embassadors. This being so: why might not the Achaeans, as well as the Aetolians, Thessalians, Epirots, and all the Greekes, hold with him such correspondence, as common humanitie required? Neuerthe∣lesse Callicrates was growne a man so terrible, by his Roman acquaintance, that they durst not ouer-stiffely gainesay him. Therefore the matter was referred vnto fur∣ther deliberation: and answere made the whilest, That since the King had onely sent a letter without any Embassadour; they knew not how to resolue. Better it was to say thus, than that they were afraid to doe as they thought most reasonable and conuenient. But when Perseus, herewith not contented, would needs vrge them further, and send Embassadors: then were they faine, without any good pretence, to put on a countenance of anger, & deny to giue audience: which was proofe suffi∣cient (to one that could vnderstand) of the condition wherein they liued. For harkening to this aduice of Callicrates; they were soone after highly commended lib. 42. by a Roman Embassador: whereby it became apparent, that the Romans intended warre vpon the Macedonian; though hitherto no cause of warre was giuen. §. V. How EVMENES King of Pergamus was busied with PHARNACES, the Rhodians and others. His hatred to the Macedonian: whom hee accuseth to the Roman . The Senate honours him greatly, and contemnes his enemies the Rhodians; with the causes thereof. The vnusuall stoutnesse of the Embassadours. PER∣SEVS his attempt vpon EVMENES. The brotherly betweene EVMENES and ATTALVS. PERSEVS his deuice to poyson some of the Roman Senators: where∣vpon they decree warre against him, and send him defiance. Other things, concerning the iustice of this warre. EVMENES King of Pergamus had beene troubled, about these times, by the Kings Pharnaces and Mithridates his neighbours. He had ta∣ken the right course; in making first his complaint to the Romans: by whom he was animated with comfortable words, and promise, That they, by their authoritie, would end the businesse, to his content. But Polyb. Legat. 56. & 59. in conclusion, by the helpe of the Kings Prusias and , he ended the warre himselfe; and brought the Enemies to seeke and accept , on such conditions as pleased him to giue them. After this being at good leisure; hee began to consi∣der, how the affaires of Macedon stood vnder Perseus. His hatred to Perseus was very great: and therefore hee was glad to vnderstand, that the hatred of the Ro∣mans, to the same his Enemy, was as great, and withall notorious. Now besides his ancient and haereditarie quarrell with the Macedonian; it vexed him exceeding∣ly, That his owne honours (whereof the Greekes, prodigal in that kinde, had heaped immoderate store on his father and him) began to wax where stale: whilest Perseus, either by his currying fauour, or by the enuie borne to the Romans, had gotten their best liking and wishes. For despight of this indignitie, Hee stirred vp the Lycians against the Rhodians his old friends: and in helping these rebels was so violent, that he proceeded, in a manner, to open warre. But small pleasure found he, in these poore and indirect courses of reuenge. The Lycians could not be saued by his , from seuere and cruell chastisement, giuen to them by the Rhodi∣ans. This ren him contemptible: as like wise, his acts of hostilitie, little different from , made him hatefull to those which loued him before. As for his Polyb. Legat. 74. honours in the Cities of Greece; they not onely continued falling into neglect; but were abrogated by a decree of the Achaeans, as too vnmeasured, misbeseeming them to giue, and affected by him beyond the proportion of his deseruings. All this (which he needed not to haue regarded, had he not beene too vainely ambiti∣ous) lib. 42. befell him, especially for his being - to the Romans, and for his malice to that noble Kingdome, which if it fell, the libertie of Greece was not like to stand. Now for the redresse hereof; hee thought it vaine to striue any longer with bounty, against such an aduersarie, as by hopefull promises alone, without a∣ny great performance, had ouer-topped him in the generall fauor. And therfore he resolued euen to ouerturne the foundations of this Popularitie, by inducing the Romans vtterly to take away from the eyes of men, this Idol, The Macedonian Kingdome, which all so vainely worshipped. Neither would it proue a difficult matter, to perswade those that were already desirous: rather hee was like to bee highly thanked, for setting forward their wishes; and perhaps to be recompenced with some piece of the Kingdome, as he had beene rewarded, for the like seruice, when Antiochus was . To this end, he made a second to Rome: where though hee had little to say which they knew not before; yet his words were heard with such attention, as if they had contained some strange noueltie, and so pondered by the Fathers, as if the weight of them were to turne the ballance, that before was equall. The death of Demetrius, the expedition of the Bastarnae into Dardania; that of Perseus him∣selfe against the Dolopians, and to Delphi; the great estimation of the Macedonian in Greece; his intermeddling in businesse of neighbours; his riches; and his great pro∣uisions: were all the materiall points of Eumenes his discourse. Only He descended vnto particulars, hauing searched into all (as hee professed) like vnto a Spie. Hee said, That Perseus had thirty thousand foot, and fiue thousand Horse of his owne; money in a readinesse to entertaine ten thousand mercinaries for ten yeeres; armes, to furnish a number thrice as great; The Thracians his friends at hand, rea∣die, at a call, to bring him soldiours as many as he should require; and that he pre∣pared victuals for ten yeeres, because he would not be driuen, either to liue vpon spoile, or to take from his owne subiects. Herewithall Hee prayed them to con∣sider, that King Seleucus the sonne and successor of Antiochus the Great, had giuen his daughter Laodice in marriage to Perseus; Perseus not wooing, but Seleucus offe∣ring the match; That King Prusias of Bithynia, by earnest suite, had gotten to wife the sister of Perseus; and that these mariages were solemnized with great concourse of Embassages from all quarters. Neither spared to tell them, (though see∣ming loth to vtter it plainely) That euen the enuie of their Estate was the cause, why many that could not endure to heare of amitie with Philip, were now growne maruellously well affected to his sonne. All this, and some facts of Perseus, which might either bee denied, or iustified (as that hee had procured the death of some which were friends to the Romans; and that hee had expelled Abrypolis the Illy∣rian, who inuaded Macedon, out of his Kingdome or Lordship) Eumenes failed not to amplifie vnto the most: saying that he thought it his dutie to forewarne them; since it would bee to Himselfe a great shame, if Perseus got the start of him, and were in Italie making warre vpon the Romans, Eumenes could come thither to tell them of the danger. It were too great folly, to that the Romans stood in feare of , lest hee should set vpon them in Italie. Neuerthelesse forasmuch as they loued not to make warre without faire , not only of wrong done to them or their asso∣ciates, but of further hurt intended: great thankes were giuen to Eumenes, who had euery way them with such goodly colour, to beautifie their intendment. Now though it were so, that He told them little else than what they knew before: yet his person, and the manner of his comming, made all seeme greater. For if vpon any relation made by their owne Embassadours, or vpon tales deuised by their flatterers and spies, they had warred against Perseus, Hee had committed any open act of hostilitie against them; their injustice, and oppression, would haue beene most manifest. But when the wrongs to them done were so notorious, and the danger threatning them so terrible; that such a Prince as Eumenes, came out of his owne Kingdome, as farre as from Asia, to bid them looke to themselues: who could blame them, if they tooke the speediest order to obtaine their owne right and securitie? Toward this justification of the warre, and magnifying the necessitie that enforced them thereto; their more then vsuall curiositie, in concealing what Eumenes had vttered in the Senate, when they could not but vnderstand that his errand was well knowne; helped not a little. The Macedonian and Rhodian Embas∣sadors were at Rome, prouided of answeres to the words, which they knew before∣hand that he would speake; and with matter of recrimination. The vanity, ei∣ther of Him, or of some about him, seemes to haue disclosed all: when the wari∣nesse of the Fathers, in hiding that which all men knew, made a notable shew of some fearefull apprehension; against which, it behooued their wisedome to neg∣lect no possible remedy. Wherefore carelesse audience was giuen to the Rhodian Embassadours; who accused Eumenes, as one more troublesome to Asia, than An∣tiochus had euer been, and a prouoker of the Lycians to rebellion. The Rhodians had with great pompe, conueighed by Sea vnto Perseus, his bride Laodice; which friend∣ly office as the Macedonian bountifully requited, so the Romans despightfully ac∣cepted. Hence it grew, that when the Lycians, as alreadie vanquished, were settling Polyb. Legat. 60 & 61. themselues in their obedience to the people of Rhodes: Embassadours came from Rome with strange newes, which gaue new life to the rebellion. For the Senate pro∣nounced, Liu. lib. 41. That it stood not with the manner of the Romans, to aliene quite from their owne protection any people or Nation by them vanquished; and that the Lycians were by them assigned vnto those of Rhodes, not as meere vassals, but as de∣pendants and associates. For proofe hereof, they referred themselues vnto the com∣mentaries of the ten Embassadors, whom they had sent to dispose of things in Asia, after the victorie against King Antiochus. Hereat Eumenes, Masanissa, The Aetolians, and all other Kings or Estates, that were beholding to Rome for increasing the num∣ber of their subiects, had cause to find themselues if they well considered the matter: since by force of this or the like decree, those their subiects might easily be made their fellowes, whensoeuer it should please the Senate: though it were so, that all men knew the present meaning of the Senate, which was only to plague the Rhodians, for their good will to Perseus, by setting them and the Lycians together by the cares. The Fathers could therfore see no reason to dislike Eumenes, vpon this complaint made by the Rhodian Embassadours; which indeed more neerely tou∣ched themselues. Rather they honoured the King so much the more: for that o∣thers (as they would needes take it) conspired against him, because of his loue to Rome. But the Macedonian Embassage they heard not so carelessely as angrily: though peraduenture it well contented them to find cause of anger. For whereas at other times all care had been taken, to pacifie them with gentle words and excuses: now heard they plainer language, and were told, That King Perseus desired much to giue them satisfaction, concerning any deed or word of his, that might sauour of hostilitie; but that, if his trauaile in this kind proued vaine, then would he be ready to defend himselfe by armes, and stand to the chance of warre, which often falles out contrarie to expectation. These big words may seeme to haue proceeded from the vehemencie of Harpalus, that was chiefe of the Embassadors; rather than from instruction giuen by the King, with whose faint heart they agreed not. Yet was there good reason, why Perseus himselfe might, at this time, thinke to speed better by a shew of daring, than he was like to doe by any submission. For the eyes of all Greece being now cast vpon him, as on the greatest hope of deliuerance from the Roman seruitude; it was not expedient, that he should lessen, or perhaps vtterly cut off, the generall expectation, and the good affection borne to him, which thereon depended, by discouering his too much weakenesse of spirit, vnanswerable to a worke of such importance. Wherefore He, or his Embassadour for him, was bold to set a good countenance on a game not very bad, but subiect (in appearance) to Fortune; which might haue beene his, had he knowne how to vse it. Now that this braueric (as better it may bee termed than courage) proceeded from the Kings owne heat; it by his daring to aduenture soone after, on a practice that more iustly might anger the Romans, and giue them fairer shew of reason to make warre vpon him. It was knowne that Eumenes, in returning home, would take Delphi in his way, and there doe sacrifice to Apollo. Perseus hating him, and thirsting after his bloud, resolued to way-lay him, and by making there of him a sacrifice, to rid his owne hands of a most mischieuous enemie. So there were appointed three or foure stout ruffians to do the murder: who placing them∣selues behind a broken mud wall, on the side of a very narrow path leading vp from the Sea to the Temple; did thence assault the King; whom they sorely with great stones, and left for dead. They might haue finished their worke; such was the opportunitie of the place which they had chosen; but feare of being ap∣prehended, made them, without staying to see all sure, flee in such haste, that they killed one of their owne companions, who could not hold pace with them, because he should not discouer them. Eumenes was conueighed away to the little Isle of Ae∣gina, where he was cured: being all the while kept so secretly, that the fame of his death was current in Asia. Hence it came, that his brother Attalus tooke vpon him as king, and either took or would haue taken to wife (supposing it belike a mat∣ter of state) Stratonica the daughter of King Ariarathes, whom hee then thought the widdow of Eumenes. It may well be numbred among the rare examples of bro∣therly loue, That when the King returned aliue home, Attalus going forth to meet him and doe his dutie, as in former times, receiued none other checke, than that Hee should forbeare to marrie with the Queene, vntill Hee were well assured of the Kings death. More than this, Eumenes neuer spake of these matters; but bequeathed at his death, vnto the same brother, both his wife and Kingdome. As likewise At∣talus forbore to attempt any thing to the prejudice of the King his brother: though the Romans (with whom he continued and grew in especiall fauour, when Eumenes fell into their ) were in good readinesse, to haue transferred the Kingdome from his brother to Him. By such concord of brethren was the King∣dome of Pergamus raysed and vpheld: as might also that of Macedon haue beene, if Demetrius had liued and employed his grace with the Romans, to the benefit of Perseus. It is likely that was very glad when he vnderstood, that his ministers had both accomplished his will, and had saued all from discouerie. But as hee was de∣ceiued in the maine point, and heard shortly after, that Eumenes liued: so was He beguiled in that other hope, of the concealement; which hee vainly esteemed the lesse materiall. For He had written to one Praxo a Gentlewoman of Delphi, to en∣tertaine the men whom he sent about this busines: and she; being apprehended by C. Valerius a Roman Embassador then attending vpon the matters of Greece, was car∣ried to Rome. Thus all came to light Velerius also brought with him to Rome, out of Greece, one Rammius a Citizen of Brundusium: who comming newly from the court of Macedon, loaden with a dangerous secret; presently sought out the Embassa∣dor, and thereof discharged himselfe. Brundusium was the ordinary Port, for ships passing betweene Italie and Greece. There had Rammius a faire house; wherein he gaue entertainment, being a wealthie man, to Embassadours, and other honoura∣ble personages, both Romans and Macedonians, iournying to and fro. By occasion of such his hospitalitie, he was commended to Perseus, and inuited into Macedon with friendly letters; as one, whose many courtesies to his Embassadours, the King was studious to requite. At his comming he was much made of; and shortly, with more familiaritie than he expected or desired, made partaker of the Kings secrets. The summe of all was, That he must needs doe a turne, in giuing to such of the Romans as the King should hereafter name, a poyson of rare qualitie, sure in operation, yet not to be perceiued either in the taking or afterward. He durst not refuse to accept this employment: for feare lest the vertue of this medicine should bee tryed vpon himselfe. But being once at libertie; he discouered all. Rammius was but one man, and one whom the King had neuer seene before, nor was like to see againe: and therefore, besides that the Kings deniall ought to be as good as such a fellowes affir∣mation, the accusatiō was improbable. Thus did Perseus, in time shortly following, answer for himselfe; and in like sort concerning the attempt vpon Eumenes: denying to haue had any hand, either in the one or other: yet withall professing, That such obiections were not to bee made vnto a King, to proue the rightfulnesse of making war vpon him; but rather vnto a subiect pleading for his life in judgment. But how∣soeuer the Romans neglected the getting of stronger proofe (which might haue bin easie) than any that we find by them produced: yet the base and cowardly temper of Perseus was very suteable to these practices. Neither did the Senate greatly stand to dispute the matter with him: these his treacheries being held inexcusable. And as for his Royall Estate, wherein he supposed that they ought not to touch him for such priuate offences, it gaue him no priuiledge: they judging him to haue offended in the nature of a King. Herein surely they wanted not good reason. For if hee might not lawfully make warre vpon Eumenes their confederate; that is, if Hee might not send men, to waste the Kingdom of , or to besiege the Towns: might he send Ruffians to murder the King? If it were no lesse breach of the league to destroy the Senators by fire or famine, than by violence of the sword: was it lawfull for him to doe it by Poyson? Wherefore they presently decreed warre a∣gainst him; and sent Embassadours to denounce it vnto him, vnlesse hee would yeeld to make such amends as they should require. He seemes at this time to haue been so confident in the generall fauour of Greece, and other comfortable appea∣rances; that if he desired not warre, yet he did not feare it: or at least he thought by shew of courage, to make his enemies the more calme. He caused the Embassadors to dance attendance, till being weary, they departed without audience. Then cal∣led he them backe; and bade them do their errand. They made a tedious rehearsall of all matters, which they had long been collecting against him, and wherewith Eumenes had charged him: adding therto, that He had entertained long and secret conference in the Ile of Samothrace, with Embassadours sent to him out of Asia, about some ill purpose. In regard of all which they peremptorily required satisfa∣ction; as was their maner when they intended to giue defiance. Better they might haue stood vpon the euidence, brought against him by Rummius and Praxo. For if those accusations could be verified, then wanted they not good ground whereon to build: of which otherwise they were destitute; it being no fault in a King, to bee strong, welbeloued, and well friended. Perseus answered, for the present, in a rage; calling the Romans, Greedy, Proud, Insolent, & vnderminers of him by their daily Embassadors, that were no better then meere spies. Finally, hee promised to giue them in writing their ful answere: which was to this effect; That he would no lon∣ger stand to the league, made betweene them and his father, and renewed by him∣selfe indeed onely for feare: but wished them to descend to more equall conditi∣ons, whereupon he, for his part, would aduise, as they might also doe for theirs. In the forme of the league betweene Philip and the Romans, as it is set downe Polyb. . . by Polybius, we finde no condition, binding the Macedonian to any inconuenience in the future; excepting those which he immediatly performed. But Liuie inserts Liu. lib. 33. a clause, whereby hee was expresly forbidden, to make any warre abroad, with∣out leaue of the Romans. It is most likely, that all the Roman confederats were in∣cluded in this peace: whereby euery one of the neighbours round about Macedon, entring shortly into league with Rome, did so binde the Kings hands, that hee could no more make warre abroad, than if hee had been restrained by plaine couenant. And thus might that seeme an Article of the peace, which neuer was agreed vpon, but onely was inferred by consequence. Now if the Romanes would vrge this point further, and say, that the Macedonian might not beare defensiue armes, with∣out their permission: then had Perseus very iust reason to finde himselfe agrieued. For since they had allowed his father, without controule, to make warre in Thrace, (whilest they themselues were vnacquainted with the Thracians ) and elsewhere a∣broad, though he asked not their licence: why should they now interpret the bar∣gaine after another fashion? Was it now become vnlawfull for him to chastise his owne Rebels, or to repay an Illyrian that inuaded Macedon? By such allegations hee maintained the right of his cause, in very milde sort; when it was too late. At the present, by disclaiming the league as vniust; hee ministred occasion the Em∣bassadours, to giue him defiance. Hauing heard the worst of their message; hee commanded them to be gone out of his kingdome in three dayes. But either hee should haue been lesse vehement, or more constant in his resolution. For if his heart could serue him to vndertake the warre; hee should couragiously haue ma∣naged it, and haue fallen to worke immediatly, whilest the Enemie was vnprepa∣red; not haue lost opportunity, as now and often he did, in hope of obtaining a worse peace than the former. §. VI. The Romans sollicit the Greekes, to ioyne with them in the Warre against PERSEVS. How the Greekes stood affected in that Warre. The timorousnesse of PERSEVS. MAR∣TIVS a Roman Embassadour deludes him with hope of Peace. His forces. Hee takes the field, and winnes part of Thessalie. The forces of LICINIVS the Roman Consul: and what assistants the Romanes had in this Warre. Of Tempe in Thessalie; and what aduantages the Macedonian had, or might haue had; but lost by his feare. PERSEVS braues the Romanes; fights with them; knowes not how to vse his victorie; sues for Peace; and is it by the vanquished. PERSEVS hauing the worse in a skirmish, for sakes all the Countrey lying without Tempe. The Boeotians rebell against the Romans, and are rigorously punished. The Roman Commanders vnfortunate in the warre against PERSEVS. They vexe the Greekes their friends; for whose ease the Senate makes prouision, hauing heard their complaints. The flattering Alabanders. SO long had the Romans beene seeking occasion to take in hand this Macedonian warre, that well they might haue been ready for it, when it came; and not (as they were) behinde-hand in prouisions. But it was on a sudden that they met with a confluence of good pretences to make the warre: whereof, if no one alone had weight enough, yet all of them together seemed more than sufficient. This opportunitie of making their cause honest in common opinion, was not to be neglected: though otherwise they were vnprepared for the action. Wherefore knowing, or hauing reason to be∣leeue, that their owne strength was such as would preuaile in the end; they hastily embraced the faire occasion of beginning, and referred other cares to the diligence of Time. Neither was this their vnreadinesse a small helpe, towards examining the disposition of the Greekes, and others; who must afterwards dearely pay for any backwardnesse found in their good will. There was not indeede any cause to feare, that all of the Greekes or other Easterne people should conspire together, and take part with the Macedonian: such was the dissension betweene their seueral estates; howsoeuer the generalitie of them were inclined the same way. Neuer∣thelesse Embassadours were sent to deale with them all; and to their helpe against Perseus, or rather to demand it, in no lesse ample manner, than heretofore they had yeelded it against Philip and Antiochus, in warres pretending the liberty of Greece. The Embassadours vsed as gentle words for fashions sake, as if they had stood in doubt, that their request might happen to be denied. But the Greekes were now growne well acquainted with such Roman courtesie: and vnderstood, that not onely such as made refusall, but euen they who might seeme to haue granted halfe vnwillingly; were like to heare other manner of words, when once this businesse was ended. Wherefore none of them were scrupulous in promising the best of their helpe to the Romans; Polyb. Legat. 73. 78. & 80. the Achaeans and Rhodians, which were chiefe among them, being rather doubtfull, euen when they had done their best, lest it should be ill taken, as if they had halted in some part of their duetie. It is strange, that men could bee so earnest to set vp the side, whereof they gladly would haue seene the ruine. The vulgar sort was euery where addicted to Perseus; of the No∣bles and Rulers, if some were vehemently Roman, they wanted not opposers, that were wholly Macedonian; yea, the wisest and most honest, who regarded onely the benefit of their Countrey, wished better to Perseus than to the Ro∣mans. And of this number, Polybius the chiefe of Historians was one: who though Hee Polyb. Legat. 77. iudged the of Perseus, like to prooue hurtfull vnto Greece; yet wished hee the Romanes ill to thriue, that so the Greekes might recouer perfect libertie: for his endeuours in which course, hee was at length ty∣rannically handled, as shall bee shewed hereafter. This considered, it appeares, that an extraordinary feare, and not onely reuerence of the Imperiall Cit e, made the Achaeans and other Estates of Greece, thus conformable to the Romans. The oc∣casion of this their feare, may be iustly imputed vnto the timorous demeanour of himselfe. He had vndertaken a warre, whereof the benefit should redound, not only to his own Kingdom, but vnto all that were oppressed by the Romans. Yet no sooner were some few companies brought ouer sea, to make a countenance of meaning somewhat against him, than he began to speake the enemie faire, and sue for peace at Rome. Since therefore it was knowne, that euery small thing would serue to him; and consequently, that it should at all times be in the Romans power, by giuing him any tolerable conditions of peace, to take reuenge at leisure vpon those which had assisted him: little cause was there, why any should aduen∣ture to partake with him. He made indeed a great noise; leading about his armie; taking by force or composition, some few townes; and solliciting all to ioyne with him. But wise men could not be so beguiled. For at the same time, hee sought all meanes of pacification: and to that end, made humble suit vnto the Roman Embas∣sadors. Q. Martius; the chiefe of those Embassadors, and a man of more finenesse in cunning than was vsuall among the Romans; made shew of inclination to the Kings desire: and gaue out such comfortable words, that the King intreated, and obtained a meeting at the Riuer Peneus. There did Martius very gently rebuke the King, and charge him with those crimes that are before mentioned. Whereto though Per∣seus made none other answer; than the same which they could haue made for him; yet the Embassadors, and especially Martius, tooke it in good part, as therewith sa∣tisfied; and aduised him to giue the like satisfaction to the Senate. That this might conueniently bee done; a truce was agreed vpon. Thus had Martius his desire; which was, to make the King lose time. For Perseus had all things then in readines, and might haue done much, ere the Roman army could haue been in Greece. But by the interposition of this truce, he no way increased his forces; he suffred a most con∣uenient season, of winning vpon the enemie, to slip away; and obtained in recom∣pence nothing else, than leisure and vaine hope. Yet was he pleased herewith, as it had bin with some victory: publishing a copie of the disputation between him and the Romans, whereby he gaue men to vnderstand, how much he had the better, and what great hope there was of Peace. He sent Embassadors also to the Rhodians, of whose good will to him he was best perswaded; not onely to let them know how much he was superiour in cause; but to them, that they would take vpon them, as moderators; to compound the differences betweene him and the Romans, if perhaps, notwithstanding the goodnesse of his cause, he should be denied peace. These were poore helps. For hereby it appeared, that his late standing vpon point of Honor, was no better than meere vanity: his owne safety being the vtmost of his ambition. This his fearefulnes might seeme excusable, and the blame therof to ap∣pertaine vnto the Greekes; who deceiued his expectation, by being wanting to him in time of a necessity, that was partly their own: had it not bin his office who tooke vpon him as their Champion, to giue such a manly beginning to the war, as might incourage al others to follow him. But his timorous quality being found, men grew daily more and more auerse from him; and were carefull, not to put their shoulders to a falling wall. The Rhodians, among whom he had many stout partizans, desired him not to craue any thing at their hands, in which they might seeme to do against the good liking of the Romans. The Boeotians also, who had entred of late into a strict societie with the Macedonian; renounced it now, and made the like with the Romans: to whom further, in a sort, they yeelded thēselues as vassals. Neither was Martius contented to accept their submission vnder a generall forme; but caused their seuerall townes to make couenant apart each for itselfe; to the end, that being thus distracted into many little common weales they might not (were they neuer so desirous to rebell) haue such force to do hurt, as when they agreed, and were in∣corporated in one, vnder the Citie of Thebes. This work, of separating the Boeotians from Thebes their head; was more than Agesilaus could effect, or Epaminondas would suffer, than when all Greece followed the Lacedaemonians. So far more auail∣able to Thebes, being destitute of helpe from abroad, was the vertue of Epaminon∣das and a few braue Citizens; than was the societie with King Perseus, against a number not so great as followed the Lacedaemonians. Martius brought this to effect, whilest the King sate still, as being bound by the truce: and hauing done this, he returned to the Citie; where vaunting what hee had wrought by his craft, he was commended, and (though some reprooued it as dishonest) employed againe by the Senate, with commission to deale as hee should thinke expedient. Touching the Embassadours which Perseus had sent, audience was giuen to them, for that they should not plainly see how their Master was delu∣ded: but neither excuse, nor intreatie, would serue their turne; the Senate being resolued before-hand what to doe. It was enough that they were admitted into the Citie, and had thirty dayes respite allowed them to depart out of Italy: where∣as they, who came last on the same errand, did their message without the walles, in the Temple of Bellona (the vsuall place of giuing audience to open Enemies, or to such Commanders, as might not, by reason of some custome, enter the Citie) and had onely the short warning of eleuen dayes, to be gone out of Italy. Neither did this poore courtesie serue alone to hide the craft of Martius, as if hee had meant none other than good earnest: but it was a likely mean, both to keepe a long while from Perseus the knowledge of his businesse, and to stagger his resolution, when hee should need it most firme. And accordingly it fell out. For Licinius, the Roman Consul, was at Apollonia, in a maner as soone, as the Macedonian Embassadors were with their King at Pella. Which, though it were enough to haue rouzed Perseus, and haue made him lay a∣side all cowardly hope of getting pardon: yet was hee content to deliberate a∣while, Whether it were not better to offer himselfe tributary to the Romans, and to redeeme their good will with some part of his Kingdome, that so he might en∣ioy the rest; than to put all at once to hazzard. But finally, the counsel pre∣uailed; which also was the wisest, and so would haue proued, had it been stoutly and wisely followed. He now began, as if the warre had not begunne vntill now, to doe what should haue bin done long afore. He caused all his forces to be drawne together; and appointed their R endeuous at Citium, a towne in Macedon. All being in readines, he did royall sacrifice, with an hundred beasts, to I know not what Mi∣nerua, that was peculiarly honored in his Country: and then with all his Courtiers, and those of his guard, set forward to Citium. His armie he found consisting of nine and thirty thousand foot, and foure thousand horse: whereof about twelue thou∣sand foot, and a thousand horse, were strangers, of sundry Nations, most part Thra∣cians; the rest his owne Macedonians. These hee animated with liuely speeches; laying before them the glory of their ancestors, the insolencie of the Romans, the goodnesse of his cause, the greatnesse of his prouisions, and the many aduantages which they had of the Enemie, especially in numbers. They answered him cheere∣fully, with loud acclamations, and bade him be of good courage. From all Cities of Macedon there came likewise messengers, offering to helpe him with money and victuals, according to their seuerall abilities. He gaue them thanks: but answered, That his owne prouisions would abundantly suffice, willing them only to him with carts, for his engines and munition. Out of his owne kingdome he issued forth into Thessalie: knowing that the Ro∣mans were to passe through that Countrey, in their iourney towards him. Some Townes of Thessalie opened their gates vnto him, without making offer to defend themselues; some he balked, thinking them too strong or well manned; and some he wanne by force. Of these last was Mylae; a towne thought impregnable, and therefore, not more stoutly then proudly defended by the Inhabitants, who gaue contumelious language to the assailants. It was taken by reason of a sally; which the Townesmen rashly made, and being driuen backe, receiued the Macedonians, that entred pell mell with them at the gate. All crueltie of warre was practised heere: to the greater terror of the obstinate. So Velatiae and Connus (towns of much importance, especially Connus, which stood in the streights of Ossa, leading into Tempe ) yeelded at the first. Hauing well fortified this passage, the King marched onwards to Sycurium, a towne seated on the foot of mount Ossa; where hee rested a while, expecting newes of the Enemie. Licinius the Consul brought with him only two Roman Legions: being promi∣sed other strength of auxiliaries, which was thought sufficient. Eumenes, and Atta∣lus his brother came to him in Thessalie, with foure thousand foot, and a thousand horse. Thither also came, from euery part of Greece, such aide as the seuerall E∣states could afford, or thought expedient to send: which from the most of them was very little. Of the kings abroad; Masanissa sent thither his sonne Misagenes, with a thousand foot, as many horse, and two and twentie Elephants. the Cappadocian, by reason of his affinitie with Eumenes, was friend to the Romans, and had sent to Rome his yong sonne, there to bee brought vp: yet hee did little or nothing in this warre; perhaps because Eumenes himselfe began within awhile, but when it was too late, to be otherwise aduised than he had beene in the begin∣ning. Prusias was content to be a looker on: as being allied to Perseus, and yet fea∣ring the Romans. Antiochus and Ptolemie (though Ptolemie was then yong, and vnder Tutors) had busines of their owne; the Syrian meaning to inuade the Ae∣gyptian: yet each of them promised helpe to the Romans, which they cared not to performe. Gentius the Illyrian was inclinable to the Macedonian: yet made good countenance to the Romans, for feare. It was a prettie tricke, where with M. Lucre∣tius, the Roman Admirals brother, serued him, for this his counterfeit good will. This king had foure and fiftie shippes, riding in the hauen of Dyrrachium, vncer∣taine to what purpose: all which Lucretius tooke away, after a very kind sort; ma∣king shew to beleeue, That for none other ende than to serue the Romans, their good friend Gentius had sent thither this fleet. But whatsoeuer Gentius thought in the beginning; hee foolishly lost both his kingdome and himselfe, in the ende of this warre; by offering, rather then giuing, his helpe to Perseus. With none other company than what hee brought ouer the sea, Licinius came into Thessalie: so tyred with a painfull iourney, through the mountainous country of Athamania, which stood in his way from Epirus; that if Perseus had beene ready, attending his descent into the Plaines, the Romans must needs haue taken a great o∣uerthrow. He refreshed himselfe and his wearied armie, by the riuer Peneus; where he encamped, attending his auxiliaries, that came in as fast as they could. It was not any slender helpe, that could enable him to deale with Perseus. Therefore he resolued, to abide where he then was, and keepe his trenches, vntill his numbers were sufficiently increased: contenting himselfe in the meane while, to haue got∣ten quiet entrance into the Country. The land of Thessalie, in which these two ar∣mies lay, was better affected to the Romans, than any part of Greece besides: as ha∣uing beene freed by them from a more heauie yoke of bondage to the Macedoni∣an, when there was little hope or expectation of such a benefit. It was generally rich, fruitfull, and abounding in all things needfull to mans life. In the midst of it, but some what more to the East, was that beautifull valley of Tempe, so exceeding∣ly ful of all delights, that the name was often vsed at large, to signifie the most plea∣sant and goodly places. This valley of it selfe was not great: but adding to it those huge mountaines, Ossa and Olympus (famous in Poesie) with their Spurres or bran∣ches, by which it was on all sides enclosed; it occupied the better part of Thessalie. And this way were the Romans to enter into Macedon; vnlesse they would make an hungrie iourney, thorow the countrey of the Dassaretians, as in the former warre with Philip, they had long, in vaine, attempted to doe. Perseus therefore had no small aduantage, by being master of the streights leading into Tempe: though farre greater he might haue had, if by misspending of time he had not lost it. For if in defending the ragged passages of these mountaines, he were able to put the Romans often to the worse; yea to winne vpon them (for a while) euery yeere more than other, both in strength and reputation: questionlesse he might haue done far grea∣ter things, had hee seized vpon the streights of Aous, which his father once kept, and defended all the countrie behinde the Mountaines of Pindus. Surely not with∣out extreme difficultie, must the Romans haue either trauelled by land, with all their carriages and impediments, through places wherein was no reliefe to bee found; or else haue committed their armies, and all things thereto needefull, vnto the mercie of seas that were very dangerous; if they would haue sought other way into Macedon, than through the heart of Greece: vpon neither of which courses they once deuised, notwithstanding any trouble which they found in this present warre. It may perhaps be said, that the Greekes, and others, whom the King must haue left on his backe, would haue made him vnable to defend any places too farre from his owne home. But they were all, excepting the Thessalians, better affected now to him, than they had bin to his father in the former warre. The Aetolians. vpon whom the Athamanians depended, grew into suspition with the Romans (as we shall finde anon) euen as soone as they met with Perseus. The Boeotians, how poli∣tikely soeuer Martius had wrought with them, aduentured themselues desperately in the Macedonians quarrell: what would they haue done, if hee at first had done his best? The Rhodians, Illyrians, yea and Eumenes himselfe, after awhile began to wauer, when they saw things goe better with Perseus, then they had expected. So that if in stead of discouraging his friends, by suing basely for peace; he had raised their hopes, by any braue performance in the beginning; and encreased the num∣ber of his well-willers, yea and bought downe with money (as hee might haue done) some of his enemies, and among them Eumenes, who offered for good recom∣pence, to forget his broken head then might the Romans perhaps haue bin compel∣led to forsake their imperious patronage ouer Greece; and to render the libertie, by them giuen, entire; which otherwise was but imaginarie. Such benefit of this warre, since it was hoped for afterwards, might with greater reason haue beene ex∣pected at first, from greater aduantages. But as a fearefull companie running from their enemies, till some riuer stay their flight; are there compelled by meere de∣speration to doe such actes, as done, while the battell lasted, would haue wonne the victorie: so fell it out with Perseus. In seeking to auoid the danger of that war, whereof hee should haue sought the honour; hee left his friends that would haue stood by him, and gaue them cause to prouide for their owne safetie: yet being ouertaken by necessitie, he chose rather to set his back to the mountaines of Tempe, and defend himselfe with his proper forces; than to bee driuen into such miserie, as was ineuitable, if he gaue a little further ground. What was performed by him or the Romans, all the while that he kept his footing in Thessalie, it is hard to shew particularly; for that the historie of those things is much perished. Wherefore we must be contented with the summe. The Consul hauing no desire to fight, vntill such time as all his forces were ar∣riued; kept within his trenches, and lay still encamped by the Riuer of Peneus, a∣bout three miles from Larissa. That which perswaded the Consul to protract the time; did contrariwise incite the King, to put the matter vnto a hasty triall. Where∣fore hee inuited the Romans into the field; by wasting the land of the Pheraeans their confederates. Finding them patient of this indignitie; he grew bold to aduenture euen vnto their trenches: out of which if they issued, it was likely, that his aduan∣tage in horse would make the victorie his owne. At his comming they were trou∣bled; for that it was sudden: yet no way terrified; as knowing themselues to bee safely lodged. They sent out a few of King Eumenes his horse, and with them some light armed foot, to entertaine skirmish. The Captaine, and some other of these were slaine: but no matter of importance done; for that neither Licinius, nor , found it reasonable to hazzard battell. Thus day after day, awhile toge∣ther, Perseus continued offring battaile: which they still refused. Hereby his bold∣nesse much increased; and much more, his reputation: to the griefe of those, who being so farre come to make a Conquest, could ill digest the shame, that fell vpon them by their enduring these brauadoes. The towne of Sycurium, where Perseus then lay, was twelue miles from the Romanes: neither was there any conuenient watering in that long march, which vsed to take vp foure houres of the morning; but he was faine to bring water along with him in carts, that his men might not be both weary and thirstie when they came to fight. For remedie of these inconue∣niences, he found out a lodging, seuen miles neerer to the enemie: whom he visited the next day by the Sunne rising. His comming at such an vnusuall houre, filled the Campe with tumult: in so much as though hee brought with him onely his horse and light armature, that were vnfit to assaile the trenches, yet the Consull thought it necessary, and resolued to giue checke to his pride. Wherefore he sent foorth his brother C. Licinius, King Eumenes, Attalus, and many braue Captaines, with all his power of horse, his Velites, and all the rest of his light armature to trie their fortune: he himselfe remaining in the Campe, with his Legions in readinesse. The honor of this morning, was the Macedonian Kings; for he obtained the victo∣rie in a manner entire, (though the Thessalians made a good retrait) with little losse of his owne. But he discouered his weaknesse ere night, by hearkening, as Princes commonly doe, to counsaile giuen by one of his owne temper. For whereas the Romans were in great feare lest he should assault their Campe; and to that purpose, vpon the first newes of his successe, his Phalanx was brought vnto him by the Cap∣taines, though vnsent for: he neuerthelesse tooke it for sound aduice, which indeed was timorous and base, To worke warily, and moderate his victorie; by which meanes it was said, that either he should get honest conditions of peace, or at least∣wise many companions of his fortune. Certainly it was like, that his good fortune would exalt the hope and courage of his friends. Yet had it been greater, and had he wonne the Roman Campe, his friends would haue been the more, and the bol∣der. But ouer-great was his folly, in hoping then for peace: and in suing for it, e∣uen when he had the victory, what else did he, than proclaim vnto all which would become his partakers, that neither good nor bad fortune should keepe him from yeelding to the Romans, whensoeuer they would be pleased to accept him? At this time the ioy of his victory would admit none of these considerations. Hee had slaine of the Roman horse two hundred, and taken of them prisoners the like num∣ber. Of their foot he had about two thousand: losing of his owne no more than twenty horse and fortie foot. The Roman Campe, after this disaster, was full of heauinesse and feare: it being much doubted that the enemie would set vpon it. Eumenes gaue counsaile to dislodge by night, and remooue to a surer place beyond the Riuer Peneus. The Consul, though ashamed to professe, by so doing, in what feare he stood; yet thought it better to acknowledge the losse past, than by stan∣ding on proud tearmes, to drawe vpon himselfe a greater calamitie. So he passed the Riuer in the dead of the night, and encamped more strongly on the further side. The Aetolians were sorely blamed for this losse: if rather a trayterous meaning, than any true feare, had occasioned their flight, wherein the rest of the Greekes followed them. Fiue of them, that were men of especiall marke, had been obserued to be the first which turned their backes: an obseruation likely to cost them deare, at a time of better leisure. As for the , their vertue was ho∣noured with reward: so as the Greekes might learne, by examples of either kinde, that if they should shunne indignation, or incurre fauour, then must they aduen∣ture no lesse for their Lords the Romans, than gladly they would doe for their owne libertie. Thus fared it with the Consul and his armie. Perseus came the next day to correct the former dayes errour; which how great it was, hee not vntill then found. The Romans were gotten into a place of safety; whither they could neuer haue attained, if the King had either pressed his victory, or giuen better heed to them that night: his light armature alone being sufficient to haue rowted them, whilest they were conueying themselues to the other side of Peneus. But it was vaine to tell what might haue been done, since there was no remedie. The Ro∣mans were beaten, euen the flower of their Citie, the Gentlemen of Rome; out of whom were chosen their Senators, and consequently the Generals themselues, Pre∣tors, Consuls, and all that bore office or command among them; yea, they were beaten so shamefully, that they stole away by night, and suffered him to gather vp the spoyles of them without resistance, as yeelding themselues ouercome. With such braue words did the King set out the glory of his action; diuiding the spoiles among his followers. But there was much wanting within him, to haue made his honor sound. He came neerer to the Romans, and encamped at Mopselus, a place in the mid-way betweene Tempe and Larissa: as if it were his meaning to presse them somewhat harder. Neuerthelesse hee was perswaded to vse the occasion, which he seemed to haue, of obtaining peace. Therefore he sent vnto the Con∣sul, and offered to yeeld vnto the same Conditions, wherein his father had beene bound to the Romans; if the war might so take end. It were needlesse here againe to shew the folly of this his course. Towards the accomplishment of this desired peace, there was in the Consul no greater power than to grant a truce, whilest Em∣bassadours might goe to Rome: it resting in the Senate and People to approue the conditions, and ratifie the league. And of such a truce granted by Martius, he had lately found no smal discommodity redounding. But Licinius dealt plainly, and re∣turned answere, That other hope of peace there was none; saue that Perseus would yeeld both his Kingdome and person, simply and absolutely, to discretion of the Senate. A manly part it was of Licinius, to be so resolute in aduersitie. On the o∣ther side, it argued a very faint heart in Perseus, that hauing receiued an answere so peremptory, hee still persisted, making vaine offers of great tribute. Finding that the peace, which he so much desired, could not be purchased with money, the King withdrew himselfe backe to Sycurium. There he lay hearkening what the Enemie did; whose forces were well repaired by the comming of Misagenes the sonne of Masanissa, with the aid before mentioned. This distance betweene the King and them, caused the Romans to waxe the more bold in making their : about which businesse they ranged ouer all the fields. Their carelesse demeanour gaue him hope to some notable exploit: which hee attempted, both vpon their Campe, and vpon those that were abroad. The Campe he thought to haue fired on the sudden: but the alarme being taken in good season, hee failed in the enter∣prize. As for the forragers; he had a good hand vpon them, if he could haue with∣drawne it, and giuen ouer in time. But whilest he stroue to force a guard, he was vi∣sited by the Consul; by whom either in a skirmish of horse, or (for the report is diuers) in a great battell, he was ouercome. This misaduenture, whether great or small, caused Perseus, after a few daies, to fall backe into Macedon; as being na∣turally giuen to feare danger, euen where none was; whereby what losse he felt, will appeare hereafter. He left all behinde him, saue onely Tempe, weakly guarded: and consequently an prey to the Romans. After the Kings departure, Licinius went straight vnto Connus; hoping to haue taken it, and so to haue gotten entrance into Tempe. But finding the work too hard, he returned backe vpon the and others; from whom he wanne some townes, and among the rest, Larissa. There were sundry townes thereabout, bea∣ring the same name of : so that this which the Consull tooke, may seeme not to haue belonged vnto the Thessalians; vnlesse, perhaps, after his victory, Per∣seus did greater Acts than we finde recorded, and got some part of Thessalie. Of matters happening in Greece at this time, it is hard to giue a precise account; for that the histories of them are greatly defectiue. One may thinke it strange, that the , whom a Roman Embassador could , and bring altogether to his owne will, should not be afraid of a Roman armie, then on foot in , and a Na∣uie on their coast. But more strange it is, that the Thebans, from whom their de∣pendants were taken by the art of Martius; were more true to Rome, than other pet∣tie townes, which by that same distraction of the Boeotians, became within them∣selues more absolute, than formerly they had beene. The causes hereof were to haue beene sought among the changes happening in their variable factions: wher∣of the knowledge is now lost. Some of rebelled, and were throughly punish∣ed by Lucretius the Roman Admirall: who got so much by spoiling them, that he would haue brought others to rebell in like sort, if by extreme oppression hee could haue driuen them so farre. Neither was Licinius the Consul vndiligent in the same kinde. What his doings were, after such time as he was at leisure from Perse∣us, I finde no where mentioned. Onely this is said in generall; That in the warre which he made he Liu. lib. 43. cruelly and couetously demeaned himselfe. After the same fashion dealt they, that commanded in the following; Ho∣stilius the Consul, and Hortensius the Admirall, or Praetor of the Fleet. Hostilius shewed more of his industrie, in picking quarrels with the confederats of Rome, than in prosecuting the warre against the Macedonian. For concerning the Roman warre vpon his kingdome, after that the Consul had sought passage in vaine ouer certaine mountaines, Perseus seemed, in a manner, Polyb. Legat. 70. free from it. He was troubled indeed on that side which looked towards Illyria, by Ap. Claudius, whom the Consul sent thither with an armie of foure thousand, and who, by leauies made vpon the Con∣federates, doubled this his armie. But Claudius thinking to haue taken Vscana, a bor∣der towne of Illyria, by treason, came thither in such carelesse order, that the inha∣bitants which had made shew of treason, with purpose onely to traine him in∣to danger; salied foorth vpon him, ouerthrew him, and chased him so farre, that hardly hee escaped with a fourth part of his company. Yet this towne of Vscana shortly after became Roman: which howsoeuer it happened, Perseus very soone re∣couered it, and many other places therewithall: Cotys, a Thracian king, securing him on the one side of Macedon; and Cephalus an Epirote, reuolted from the Romans, on the other. Perseus likewise made a painefull iourney into Aetolia: where hee was promised to be admitted into Stratus, that was the strongest Citie in that Region. Of this hope though he were disappointed by those of the Roman faction; yet in his returne home, hee tooke in Aperantia; and shortly heard good newes, That Ap. Claudius was againe throughly beaten by Cleuas, one of his Lieutenants. Such successe had the Macedonian war vnder . The same Consul offended much the Greekes, by the strict inquisition which his Embassadours made into mens affe∣ction towards Rome. For these Embassadors trauelling thorow all the Cities of Pe∣loponnesus, gaue out speeches tending to shew, That they liked no better of those who sought not by might and maine to aduance their busines, than of those which were of the Macedonian faction. Their meaning was, to haue accused by name, in Polyb. Legat. 74. the Parliament of Achaia, Lycortas that worthy Commander, who nobly followed the steps of Philopoemen; and together with him, his sonne Polybius, who soone af∣ter was Generall of the Achaean horse, but more notable by that excellent historie which he wrote, than by his great employments, which hee well and honourably discharged. The summe of the accusation should haue beene; That these were not heartie friends vnto the Romans, but such as abstained from raising troubles, more for lacke of opportunitie, than for any loue to the common quiet. But since no colour of truth could bee found, that might giue countenance to such a tale; it was thought better, for the present, to let it alone, and giue gentle words, as if all were well. In like manner dealt they among the Aetolians: They demanded ho∣stages; and found some in the Councell that approoued the motion: as also among the Acarnanians, there were that entreated to haue Roman garrisons bestowed in their townes. But neither the one nor the other of these propositions tooke effect. They of the Roman faction; accused not only such as were inclinable to the Mace∣donian, but also the good Patriotes; making it no lesse than a matter of treason, to be a Grecian in Greece. On the contrary side, there wanted not some, who roundly told these pick-thankes of their base flatterie; rating them openly in such sort, that one of them hardly escaped being stoned, euen in presence of the Embassadours. Thus was all full of accusations and excuses: among which the Embassadors carri∣ed themselues, as men that could belecue none ill; though it were well enough knowne what they thought. The best was, that an order from the Senate was brought into Greece, and published, to this effect: That it should bee free for all men, to refuse obedience to any Roman Magistrate, imposing any burthen for the present warre, vnlesse it were such, as the Senate had likewise thought meete. Of this decree the whole countrie was glad: for it was, or seemed, a good reme∣die of many inconueniences. But they that standing on priuiledge hereof, re∣fused to fulfill euery commandement, were numbered among the Patriotes; which in the end of this warre, prooued little better, if not worse, than to haue been Traytours. The Senate was driuen to set downe this order; by reason of the many and vehement complaints brought to Rome, concerning the wrongs done by Roman Magistrates, and especially by the Admiralls, Lucretius and Hortensius. Lucretius was condemned in a great summe of money, for the wrongs by him done: highly to the commendation of the Romans, in that they loued not to haue their subiects oppressed. Hortensius being still in office, had warning to amend. Among the great number of Embassages that came to Rome about this time, ei∣ther to seeke redresse of iniuries, or to offer their seruices: it is note-worthy, that from Alabanda, a towne of the lesser Asia, there was presented vnto the Senate, and well accepted, a most base piece of flatterie. These Alabanders brought three hun∣dred horsemens targets; and a crowne of gold, to bestow vpon Iupiter in the Capi∣tol. But hauing a desire to gratifie the Romans with some exquisite token of their dutifull obedience, wherein they would bee singular; and being not able to reach vnto any great performance: they built a Temple, vnto the Towne Rome, and appointed anniuersarie games to bee celebrated among them, in honour of that Goddesse. Now who can wonder at the arrogant folly of Alexander, Antigo∣nus, Ptolemie, and the like vaine men, that would bee thought gods; or at the shamelesse flatterie of such as bestowed vpon men, and not the most vertuous of men, diuine honours; when hee sees a Towne of houses, wherein powerfull men dwell, worshipped as a Goddesse, and receiuing (without scorne of the gi∣uers, or shame of the present) the title of Deitie, at the gift of such a rascall Citie as Alabanda? §. VII. Q. MARTIVS the Roman Consul, with extreame difficultie and danger, enters into Tempe. The cowardize of PERSEVS in abandoning Tempe. The towne of quitted by MARTIVS; repaired and fortified by the King. The Romans attempt ma∣ny places, with ill successe. Their affaires in estate. MARTIVS a cunning and a bad man. POLYBIVS sent Embassador to MARTIVS from the Achaeans. POLY∣BIVS his honest wisdome beneficiall to the Achaeans. King EVMENES growes from the Romans. PERSEVS negotiates with ANTIOCHVS and EVMENES, His false dealing with GENTIVS King of Illyria; hee drawes into the Roman warre. He sends Embassadors to the Rhodians; who vainely take vpon them to be arbi∣trators betweene him and the Romans. PERSEVS loseth a mightie succour of the Ba∣starnae, by his wretched parsimonie. AFter two yeares of the Macedonian warre, things were further out of tune in Greece, than when the warre began; which had been thought likely to reforme all those Countries, and bring them to what passe the Romans desired; as it did in the end. Perseus had the better, and was stronger now, than when he liued in peace. He had enlarged his borders on the Illyrian side; his friends, in all parts of Greece, took cou∣rage daily; and his reputation grew such, as caused those that were before wholly Roman, to suspect what the issue of the war might proue, and therupon to become wise for themselues. Contrariwise, Licinius and Hostilins the Consuls, had one af∣ter the other spent their time in vaine, seeking way into Macedon; and defaced the glorious enterprize of conquest, by many losses receiued. The Roman Admiralls had so demeaned themselues, that many towns, euē of the best affected to Rome, kept them out by force. Generally, the feare was great on the side; and the armie much lessened, not only by casualties of warre, but by the facilitie of the Tribunes or Colonels, or else of the Consul himselfe (for they laid the blame one vpon the other) in licencing the souldiers to depart. Quintus Martius the new Con∣sul, who succeeded vnto Hostilius, was to amend all this: which neuerthelesse was more then he knew how to doe: though he brought with him a strong supply of men. He began hotly to set the warre on foot, which a long time had slept. And he began the right way: not seeking to force the streights that were surely garded, but taking paines to clime the mountaines which were thought able to forbid all passage ouer them, without helpe or need of any custodie. The King heard of his approch; and being vncertaine what way he meant to take, distributed his owne forces, to the defence of all places which might giue entrance, or . But the Consul proceeded in his iourney: with hope, either not to be by the Enemie, or to breake through all opposition, or at least wise, to fight on as con∣uenient ground, as they should haue that lay to stop him, and at length if all failed, to make a safe retreat. He sent before him foure thousand of his most expedit foot, to discouer the wayes. Two dayes was this company troubled, in ouer comming the difficultie of no more than fifteene miles: after which they had sight of the E∣nemie, that lay to deny their passage. They occupied therefore a safe of ground; and sent backe word to the Consul, where they were; intreating him to vnto them: which he did. The Macedonians were not a whit dismayed at his arriuall; but met him, and fought with him, two or three daies together; each returning to their owne Campe at night, with little losse on either side. This was on the narrow ridge of a mountaine, which gaue roome vnto three to march in front. So that very few hands came to be employed; all the rest were . In this case, it was impossible to get forwards: yet a shame to re∣turne. Wherefore Martius tooke the onely course remaining; and indeed the best: Part of his men he left with Popilius, to attend vpon the Macedonians: whilest he, with the rest, fetcht a compasse about, and sought out wayes that neuer had beene troden. Herein he found extreame difficultie: which notwithstanding he ouer∣came. Besides the troubles commonly incident to such iourneyes, through places vnfit for habitation: he was compelled, by labour of hand, to make pathes where none were, yea where Nature might seeme to haue intended, that none should be. So steepe he found the discent of the mountaines, in this way which he took: that of seuen miles, which they trauelled the first day, his men were compelled, for the more part, to rowle themselues downe; as not daring to trust their feet. Neither was this the worst. For they met with rockes, that stood one ouer another, so vp∣right, and cumbersome to get downe; that their Elephants were afraid of the gid∣die prospect, and casting their gouernours, made a terrible noise, which affrighted the horses, and bred great confusion. Hauing therefore gone, or wallowed, foure miles of this grieuous iourney; there was nothing more desired by the souldiours, then that they might be suffered to creepe backe againe, the same way which they had come. But shift was made to let downe the Elephants, by a kinde of bridges, like vnto falling draw-bridges: whereof the one end was ioyned to the edge of the cliffe; the other sustained by two long postes, fastened in the ground below. Vpon these two postes, or poles, which indeed (not being very strong, since it was inten∣ded that they should be either cut or broken) were fastned two rafters, answerable in length to the distance, between the higher & the lower fall: so as the end of one bridge might reach to the beginning of another. These were couered with plankes and turfe; that they might seeme continent with the ground; so to make the beasts aduenturous, to goe vpon them. If there were a Plaine of any good extent from the foot of a rocke, to the next downfall; then might the bridge be shorter. When an Elephant was gone a pretic way, vpon one of these; the postes vpholding the frame were cut asunder; therby causing him to sincke down vnto the next bridge; whence he was conueyed, in like manner, to the third, and onward still, to the ve∣ry bottome. Thus went they downe sliding, some on their feet, others on their buttockes, till they came to an euen valley. By this it appeares, how throughly prouided the Romans vsed to be in their iourneyes, of things needfull in all occasi∣ons: as also what inestimable paines they tooke in this descent, about the con∣ueyance of themselues and all their carriages downe the mountaines. The next day they rested; staying for Popilius and his company, who hardly or perhaps ne∣uer, should haue ouertaken them, if the Enemie had followed, and set vpon him from . The third and fourth daies iourneyes were like vnto the first: saue that custome, and the nearenesse to their wayes end without meeting enemie, caused them the better to endure the labour. Perseus could not be ignorant of the Romans comming towards him: since they fought with his men vpon the passage, three daies together; he lying so nigh, that he might welneare haue heard the noise. Yet was he so possessed with feare; that he neither stirred to helpe his owne men, or to hinder the Consul, nor made any pro∣uision for that which might fall out; but as one void of counsaile, sate hearkening after the euent. Foure onely passages there were, leading into Tempe: the first by Connus; which the Romans were vnable to force: the second and third were the same which Martius had attempted in vaine, and another like vnto it: the last, by the Citie of Dium out of Macedon. All these were sufficiently guarded: and who∣soeuer would seeke any other way, must be faine to take such paines as Martius had vndergone. The entrance by Dium was fairer then any of the rest: whereof only the King had benefit; for that his enemies could not get thither, saue through the valley it selfe, into which they must first pierce another way. Dium stood vpon the foot of the huge mountaiue Olympus, about a mile from the sea: of which mile, the riuer Helicon becomming there a lake, and called Baphyras, tooke vp the one halfe; the rest being such as might easily haue beene fortified. Besides all these, there was in the middest of Tempe, a passage which ten men might easily keepe: where the spurres of the mountaines, reaching farre into the valley, drew to the verie banks of Peneus, a goodly and deepe riuer which ran thorow it. Wherefore nothing had beene more easie, than to make the Consul repent him of his trouble∣some iourney: if Perseus could haue seene his owne aduantages. For the Roman ar∣mie was not only in ill case to fight, after the vexation of that miserable : but must needs haue either perished for want of victuals, or bin enforced to returne the same way that it came, if the King had made good the streight of Dium. To haue returned, and climbed vp with their Elephants and carriages, against those rockes, from which, with extreame labour, they could hardly get downe, it seemes a mat∣ter of impossibilitie: especially considering, how the enemy from aboue their heads, would haue beaten vpon them; being now aware of the path which they had taken, though he knew it not when they stole away from him. It may there∣fore be thought strange, that the Romans did not rather take their iourney into Macedon, from the side of Illyria, whence that kingdome had often bin inuaded, as lying open on that part: than put themselues to the trouble of breaking into Tempe; whence, after that they were there arriued, there was no meanes to escape, with∣out forcing one of those passages, which they despaired to winne. But the cowar∣dize of Perseus, did commend the counsaile by them followed, as wise. For he no sooner heard that the Enemie was come ouer the mountaines into Tempe; then he fared like one out of his wits; saying, That he was vanquished, and had lost all with∣out battaile. Herewithall he began to take out of Dium, what he could carry away in haste; and straightwayes abandoned the Towne. In the same vehemencie of amazement, he sent a strait commandement to Thessalonica, that the Arsenall there should be set on fire; and to Pella, that his treasures there should be cast into the sea: as if the Romans were like presently to be masters of these two Cities. Nicias, who was appointed to drowne the treasure, performed it hastily as wel as he could: though soone after, his master grew sorie for the losse; and it was all, in a manner, recouered by Diuers from vnder the water. But Andronicus, who had charge to set fire on the Kings Arsenall, deferred the execution; foreseeing that repentance might follow: and so he preuented the dammage. Whether Niceas, for his absolute and blinde obedience, or Andronicus, for his carefull prouidence, merited the grea∣ter commendation, or more easie pardon; it rested in the King to interpret. The reward of their seruice was this. Perseus growing ashamed of his mad cowardize, that appeared in this hastie direction; caused them both to be slaine. Also those poore men, which had fetcht his treasure out of the sea by their diuing, were payd their wages after the same sort: that so there might be no witnes of the Kings base folly. Such end must they feare, who are priuie to dishonourable actions of great Princes. If Perseus would haue gone surely to worke, for the hiding of his fault; then must he so royally haue behaued himselfe, that no man might him to be the author of any vnworthy act or counsaile. But his vertue was of no such ca∣pacitie. He thought it enough to lay the blame vpon others. And therefore, ha∣uing called Hippias away (the Captaine which had stopped the Consul on the top of the mountaine) and Asclepiodatus, from defence of the passages, whereto they were by him appointed: he rated them openly; saying, that they had betraied vnto the Enemie the gates and barres of Macedon. Of this reproch, if they would discharge themselues, by laying it vpon him, to whom of right it belonged: then might they haue sped as did Nicias and Andronicus. The Consul Martius had great cause to reioyce, for that the King so hastily relin∣quished his possession of Tempe, and all the passages leading thereinto: since the Roman armie, this notwithstanding was hardly able to subsist, for want of victuals, He tooke Dium without resistance; & thence went forward into Macedon: wherein hauing trauelled about a dayes iourney, and gotten one towne that yeeled, he was compelled, by meere lacke of food for his men, to returne backe towards Thessalie. His fleet came to him, in this time of necessitie, well appointed to haue holpen him in the war: but hauing left behinde, at Magnesia, the ships of burthen, which carried the prouisions. Wherefore it fell out happily, that one of his Lieutenants had been carefull to occupy the Castles about Tempe, which were forsaken by the Macedoni∣ans: for by those waies onely might corne be brought into the army. To meet the sooner with this corne, which was desirously expected; he for sooke Dium, and went to Phila; by which foolish iourney (if not worse then foolish) he lost more, than a little the longer fasting had bin worth. It is probable that his carts, with all or the most of his store, were lost among the mountaines: for otherwise it had bin madnes to put himself on such an enterprise, so slenderly prouided, as that without enforce∣ment, or sight of the Enemie, he should be faine to quite it. Howsoeuer it was: men thought him a coward, or at least a bad man of warre; since he thus recoyled and gaue off, when it most behoued him to haue prosecuted the action. By vnderstanding the folly, or cowardize of Martius; the King recollected him∣selfe; vnderstood his owne error; sought to hide it by such poore means as haue bin shewed; and laboured to make what amends he could. He quickly repossessed the town of Dium, which he hastily repaired, finding it dismantled by the Romans. This ; he encamped strongly by the riuer Enipeus: meaning there to stop the Ene∣mies proceeding all that Summer. Lesse diligence, more timely vsed, would haue bin enough, not onely to haue deliuered Martius into his hand, who had beguiled him with an idle hope of peace: but to haue giuen him such a noble victory, as might cause the Romans to seeke a good end of the war vpon faire conditions, & not to be∣gin againe in haste. Yet this recouery and fortification of Dium, was to the Consul an exceeding hindrance. For little or nothing could afterward be done toward the conquest in hand, in all the continuance of his office. Only the towne of Heraclea, standing on the riuer of Peneus, fiue miles from Dium, was taken by force, or rather by a trick of climing vpon mens heads, somewhat after the maner of our tumblers. But it made such defence as it could; and was not giuen vp for feare. After this Martius did set a bold face towards Dium; as if he would haue taken it againe, and haue driuen the King further off: though his intent or hope was nothing like so great: his chiefe care being to prouide for his wintering. He sent the Admirall to make attempt vpon the sea-townes, Thessalonica, Cassandrea, Demetrias and others. All these were assayed: but in vaine. The fields about Thessalonica were wasted; and some companies, that sundrie times aduentured forth of the towne, were still put to the worse. As for the towne itselfe; there was danger in comming neere it, ei∣ther by land or sea; by reason of the engins, which shot from the wals, and reached vnto the fleet. Wherfore the Admiral setting saile from thence, ranne along by Ae∣nia, and Antigonea, (landing neare to each of them, and both doing and receiuing hurt) vntill he came to Pallene in the territory of Cassandrea. There King Eumenes ioyned with him, bringing twentie ships of warre: and fiue other were sent thither from King Prusias. With this accesse of strength the Admirall was bold to trie his fortune at Cassandrea: which was bad. There was a new ditch lately cast by Perseus, before the town: which while the Romans were filling vp, question was made, what became of the earth taken , for that it lay not vpon the bank. By this occasion, it was learned, that there were arches in the town wal filled vp with that earth, and couered with one single row of brick. Hence the Admiral gathered hope of making way into the towne, by sapping the wals. To this worke he appointed such as hee thought meetest: giuing an alarme to the other side of the town, therby to shadow his attempt, the breach was soon made. But whilest the Romans were shouting for ioy, & ordering themselues for the assault: the Captaines within the towne percei∣ued what was done; & salying forth vnexpected, gaue a fierce charge on the com∣panies that were between the ditch & the wall; of whom they slew about six hun∣dred & suffred few to escape vnwoūded. This disaster, & the want of good successe on that part of the towne which king Eumenes assailed (a supply in the meane while entring the towne by sea) caused the siege to breake vp. Torone was the next place which the Admirall thought meet to attempt: and thence likewise he was repel∣led. Finding this too well manned; he made way towards Demetrias: whereinto Euphranor, a Macedonian Captaine, was gotten before his comming, with such for∣ces, as were not only sufficient to haue defended the Towne, if the Admirall had layed siege to it, but to keepe the land about it from spoyle; or at least (as they did) to the enemie pay deare for all that he there got. This Euphranor had taken his iourney to Demetrias, by Melibaea; whether the Consul (that he might not be without worke) had sent his Lieutenant to besiege it: and by the terrour of his appearing suddenly ouer their heads, caused the besiegers to dislodge in all haste, setting their Campe on fire. Such fortune attended on the Romans; or rather, so farre was their abilitie short of their Enterprises; euer since their Consul (whether dastardly, or carelesly) most vnlike a good Commander had let goe his hold of Macedon, by for saking Dium: Yea, it is to be suspected, that some greater harme befell them, or at least, that they were in some greater danger, then is expressed in the broken remaining Hi∣storie of this Warre. For Martius perswaded the Rhodians by their . Legat. 80. Embassador, who came to him at Heraclea about other businesse of lesse impor∣tance, That they should doe well to interpose themselues as mediators, and to finish the Warre. Now, although Polybius doe most probably coniecture, that this was rather a malicious of Martius, craftily seeking to bring the Rhodians in danger (as anon it fell out) by their opposing the resolution of the Senate; then that it proceeded from any true feare in him, either of Perseus, or of Antiochus, who then an army on foot: yet since he made shew of feare, it is like withall, that somewhat had happened, which might make his feare seeme not counterfeit. And so were the Rhodians moued to thinke of him; not only for that the extraordinary courtesie, both of him and of the Admirall, towards their Embassador, comming from proud natures, did argue , where there was no ambition to cause it; but much more, for that shortly after the Embassadors of Perseus, & of Gentius the Illyrian did set out their businesse at Rhodes, not more with the strength of a good fleet, which the Macedonian had gotten, than with the honor of some victory, wher in he had lately slaine great numbers of the Roman horse. Thus much we find inti∣mated: Polyp. Legat. . though the time place, or other circumstances of the fight, be not specified. And hereto may be referred, the report of those that were sent from Rome to view the estate of Martius his army. For they found the Consul wanting meat; the Ad∣miral wanting men; & for those few that he had, wanting both mony and clothes: and Ap. Claudius the Pretor, who lay on the frontier of Illyria, so vnable to inuade Macedon, that contrariwise, he was in extreame danger, so as either he must quickly be sent for thence, or a new army be sent thither to him. Wherefore it may seeme, that some blow had bin taken on the Illyrian side, which made all to halt; or at lest, that the Romans with greater losse, than is before spoken of, had been driuen from some of the Townes which they besieged. Now although it were so, that Martius in very few of his actions, behaued him∣selfe like a man of war: yet in exercise of Cunning, which one hath most aptly ter∣med, a crooked or kind of wisdome, he dealt as a craftesmaster, with a restlesse working diligence. This indeed neither proued his sufficiencie, nor commended his honestie: since thereby he effected nothing to his owne benefit; and neuerthelesse, out of enuie, vaine-glory, or such delight as weake and busie-headed men take, in creating inexplicable troubles, he directly made opposition to the good of his coun∣try. At such time as Perseus, by the successe of his doings against Hostilius, had got∣ten much reputation, and was thought likely to inuade Thessalie; Archo, Lycortas, and other good Patriotes among the Achaeans, iudged it expedient for their Na∣tion to helpe the Romans, as in a time of aduersitie, whom in prosperity they lo∣ued not to flatter. Wherefore Archo proposed a decree which passed. That the Achaeans should send their whole power into Thessalie, and participate with the in all danger. So the armie was leuied; and Polybius, with others, sent . . 78. Embassadors vnto Martius, to certifie him therof, and know his pleasure. Polybi∣us found the Consul busied in seeking passage through Tempe into Macedon. Hee went along with the armie; and awaited the Consuls leisure till they came to He∣raclea; where finding the time conuenient, hee presented the Decree, and offered the seruice of his Nation, wherein socuer it should be commanded. Martius tooke this very kindly; but said, that he needed now no maner of helpe. Forthwith Po∣lybius dispatched home his companions, to signifie thus much: tarrying himselfe behind in the Campe. After a while, word was brought to Martius, that Ap. Clau∣dius desired, or rather imperiously required, of the Achaeans, fiue thousand men, to be sent him into Epirus. It was manifest, that Appius had need of these men; and that if he were strong in field, he might do notable seruice, by distracting the forces of Perseus. But the Labarynthian head of Martius could not allow of such plaine reason. He called vnto him Polybius, to whom hee declared, that Appius had no need of such aide: and therefore willed him to returne home, and in any wise take order that the men might not be sent, nor the Achaeans bee put to such needlesse charges. Away went Polybius; musing and vnable to resolue, whether it were for loue to the Achaeans, that the Consul was so carnest in this busines; or rather for enuie, and to hinder App. Claudius from doing any thing, since himselfe could nothing. But when Polybius was to deliuer his opinion in the Councell, touching this matter: then found he a new doubt, that more neerely concerned his owne selfe, and those of his partie. For as he was sure to incurre the great indignation of the Consul, if he should neglect what was giuen him in charge; so was it manifest on the other side, that the words by Martius vttered to him in priuat, would proue no good warrant for him and his friends, if openly they should refuse to helpe Claudius, alleaging that he had no need: In this case therefore, he had recourse vn∣to the decree of the Senate: which exempted men from necessitie of doing what the Roman Commanders should require, vnlesse by special order from the Senate, the same were likewise appointed. So for lacke of warrant from the Senate, this demand of Appius was referred vnto the aduice of the Consul: by whom it was sure to be made frustrate. Hereby the Achaeans were sauers, of more then an hun∣dred and twenty talents: though Polybius himselfe ranne into danger of Appius his displeasure; and for such honest dealing in his Countries behalfe, was afterwards rewarded by the Romans with many a long yeares imprisonment. Whether it were by the like policie of Martius, that King Eumenes grew cold in his affection to the Romans; or whether this King began when it was too late, to stand in feare, lest the fire, which he himselfe had helped to kindle, would shortly take hold on his owne lodging; or whether the regard of money were able to o∣uersway al other passions; it is hard to determine: since they that had better means to know the truth, haue not precisely affirmed any certaintie. One report is, that Eumenes did not so much as giue any helpe to Martius: but comming to haue ioy∣ned with him, in such friendly manner as he did with the former Consuls, was not entertained according to his liking; and thereupon returned home in such anger, that he refused to leaue behind him certaine horse of the Gallogreekes, being reque∣sted to haue done it. If this were true; and that his brother Attalus tarrying be∣hinde with the Consul, did the Romans good seruice: then is the reason apparant, of the hatred, borne afterwards by the Senate to Eumenes, and the loue to Atta∣lus. But it is more generally receiued; that Eumenes gaue a willing care to Perseus his desire of accord, for meere desire of gaine. And it might well bee, that coue∣tousnesse drew him on, in the course, whereinto indignation first led him. How∣soeuer it befell; Perseus caused Eumenes to be sounded, and found him so tractable, that he was bold to solicite him by an Embassage. The tenour of his aduertise∣ments, both to Eumenes, and to Antiochus, was: That there could be no perfect loue betweene a King and a free Citie: That the Romans had quarrell alike to all Kings, though they dealt with no more than one at a time, and vsed the helpe of one a∣gainst another; That Philip was oppressed by them, with the helpe of Attalus; Antiochus, with the helpe of Philip and Eumenes; and now Perseus assailed, with helpe of Eumenes and . Herewith he willed Eumenes to consider, that when Macedon was taken out of their way, they would be doing with him in Asia, which lay next at hand; yea, that already they began to thinke better of , than of him. In like sort he admonished Antiochus, not to looke for any good conclusion of his warre with the Aegyptian, so long as the Romans could make him giue ouer, by denouncing their will and pleasure. Finally, he requested both of them, either to compell the Romans, to surcease from their war vpon Macedon; or else to hold them as common enemies vnto all Kings. Antiochus lay farre out of the Romans way: and therefore was little troubled with such remonstrances. Eumenes was more nearely toucht; and as hee felt part of this to be true, so had he reason to stand in doubt of the rest. Yet when he should giue answere; hee began to offer a bargaine of peace for money. He thought the Romans to be no lesse weary, than Perseus was afraid. Wherefore he promised, for his owne part, That if he might haue fifteene hundred Talents for withdrawing his hand from this Warre, then would he remaine a Neuter therein: and that for some greater quantitie of money (how much I finde not) he would also bring the Romans to vnto peace: and for assurance of his true meaning herein, he offered to giue hostages. Perseus liked well to receiue the hostages: but not to lay out the money; especially be∣fore hand, as was required. He would faine haue peace with Rome, and not with Eumenes only. For procuring of this, he promised to be at any reasonable cost: but hee would lay downe the money in the Temple at Samothrace: whence it should be deliuered vnto Eumenes, after that the peace was fully concluded and ratified. The of Samothrace was Perseus his owne: and therefore Eumenes thought the money no nearer to him, being there, than if it remained in Pella. Besides, his la∣bour deserued somewhat, howsoeuer the businesse might happen to succeed: so that needes hee would haue part of his wages in prest. Thus the two Kings did no more, than loose time; and Eumenes grew suspected of the Romans, as a Traytor. After the same manner dealt with King Gentius the Illyrian. He had at∣tempted this before; who dealt plainely, and said, That without money he could not stirre. Hereunto Perseus loued, not to hearken; thinking, that his Treasures would serue at the last cast, to deliuer him from all his feares. But when the Romans had gotten within Tempe, then did his feare vrge him to prodi∣galitie; so as he agreed to pay three hundred Talents, which Gentius demanded for a recompence. So the bargaine was soone made, and pledges on both sides de∣liuered for performance. This was openly done by Perseus; to the end that all his armie might haue comfort, by such accesse of strength to their partie. Pre∣sently vpon the bargaine made, Embassadors were sent to Rhodes, from both Per∣seus and Gentius: who desired the Rhodians, to take vpon them, as arbitrators, be∣tweene Perseus and the Romans, and to bring the Warre to an end. The Rhodians thinking that Martius the Consul was no lesse desirous of peace than the Mace∣donian, arrogantly promised, that they, by their authoritie, would make peace; wishing the Kings to shew themselues consormable. But the Roman Senate, hea∣ring prowd words to the same effect, from the Rhodian Embassadours; gaue an answere, as disdainefull, angrie, and menacing, as they could deuise: so as this vaine glorie of the was throughly chastised; and more throughly should haue beene, if their submission had not beene as humble, as their follie was proud. Such vse of his friendship, made Perseus; without laying out one ounce of Siluer. Now faine he would haue hastened this young and rash Illyrian to en∣ter with all into the Warre: but then must the money be hastened away. Pantauchus, the Macedonian Embassadour, who remained with Gentius, exhorted him daily to begin the Warre by land and sea, whilest the Romans were . But finding what it was that made all to stay; he sent word to Perseus. Here∣upon tenne Talents were sent to Pantauchus: who deliuered it to the yong King, as earnest of that which followed. More followed indeed; and sealed vp with the seale of the Illyrians; but carried by Macedonians, and not too fast. Before this mo∣ney came into Illyria, Gentius had layed hands vpon two Roman Embassadors, and cast them into prison. Which Perseus no sooner heard, than he recalled his Trea∣sure-bearers, and sent them with their loade to Pella; for that now the Illyrian was of necessitie to make warre with the Romans, whether hee were hyred thereto, or not. There came about the same time, through Illyria, to the aide of Perseus, vnder Liu. lib. 44. Plutarch. in vit. . one Clondicus a pettie King, tenne thousand horse and tenne thousand foot, of the Gaules, which were (as Plutarch hath it) the Bastarnae. These had before hand made their bargaine, and were to receiue present pay at the first. At their into the Kingdome, Perseus sent one to them; desiring their Captaines to come visit him, whome he promised to gratifie with goodly rewards; hoping that the multitude would take good words for payment. But the first question that their Generall as∣ked, was, Whether the King had sent money to giue the souldiors their pay in hand, according to his bargaine? Hereto the messenger had not what to answere. Why then ( Clondicus ) tell thy master, That the Gaules will not stirre one foot further, vntill haue gold, as was agreed, and hostages. Perseus hereupon tooke counsaile: if to vtter his owne opinion, before men so wise that they would not contradict him, were to take counsaile. He made an inuectiue against the inciuilitie and auarice of the Bastarnae: who came with such numbers, as could not but be dangerous to him and to his Kingdome. Fiue thousand horse of them hee said would be as manie as he should need to vse; and not so manie, that he should need to feare them. It had well done, if of his counsailors would haue told him, That there wanted not employment for the whole armie of them, since without anie danger to the Kingdome, they might be let out, by the way of Perrae∣bia, into Thessalie: where wasting the Countrey, and filling themselues with spoile, they should make the Romans glad to for sake Tempe, euen for hunger and all man∣ner of want; therein doing the King notable seruice, whether they wonne anie vi∣ctorie, or not. This, and a great deale more, might haue beene alledged, if anie man had dared to giue aduice freely. In conclusion, Antigonus, the same messenger that had beene with them before, was fent againe, to let them know the Kings minde. He did his errand: vpon which followed a great murmure of those many thou∣sands that had beene drawne so farre to no purpose. But asked him now againe, Whether hee had brought the money along with him, to pay those fiue thousand, whome the King would entertaine. Hereto, when it was perceiued, that Antigonus could make no better answere, than shifting excuses; the Bastarnae retur∣ned presently towards Danubius, wasting the neighbours parts of Thrace; yet suffe∣ring this craftie messenger to escape vnhurt: which was more than he could haue well expected. Thus dealt Perseus, like a carefull Treasurer, and one that would preserue his money for the Romans, without diminishing the summe. But of this painefull Of∣fice he was verie soone discharged by L. Aemylius Paulus the new Consul: who in fifteene dayes after his setting forth from Italie, brought the Kingdome of Mace∣don to that end, for which GOD had appointed ouer it a King so foolish and so cowardly. §. VIII. Of L. AEMYLIVS PAVLVS the Consul. His iourney. He forceth PERSEVS to discampe. He will not hazard battaile with anie disaduantage. Of an Eclypse of the Moone. AEMYLIVS his superstition. The of Pydna. PERSEVS his flight. He for sakes his Kingdome: which hastily yeelds to AEMYLIVS. PERSEVS at Samothrace. He yeelds himselfe to the Roman Admirall; and is sent prisoner to AEMYLIVS. BY the Warre of Macedon, the Romans hitherto had gotten much dishonour. Which, though it were not accompanied with anie dan∣ger, yet the indignitie so moued them, that either * they decreed Plutarchin . Aemyl. that Prouince to L. Aemylius Paulus, without putting it, as was o∣therwise their manner, to the chance of lot, betweene him and his fellow Consul; or at least were gladder that the lot had cast it vpon him, than that so worthy a man was aduanced to the dignitie of a second Consulship. Hee refused to propound vnto the Senate anie thing that concerned his Prouince; vn∣till by Embassadours, thither sent to view the estate of the Warre, it was perfectly vnderstood, in what condition both the Roman forces, and the Macedonian, at the present remained. This being throughly knowne to be such, as hath beene alrea∣die told; the Senate appointed a strong supplie, not onely to the Consul, but vnto the Nauie, and likewise to the Armie that lay betweene Illyria and ; from which App. Claudius was remoued, and L. Anicius sent thither in his place. Aemy∣lius, before his departure from Rome, making an Oration to the People, as was the custome, spake with much grauitie and authoritie. Hee requested those that thought themselues wise enough to manage this Warre, either to accompanie him into Macedon, and there assist him with their aduice; or else to gouerne their tongues at home, and not take vpon them to giue directions by hearesay, and by idle reports: for he told them plainely, That he would frame his doings to occasions; not to the expectation of the multitude. The like speech of his father L. Aemylius, who died valiantly in the Battaile of Cannae, might well be li∣uing in some of their memories: which was enough to make them conforme themselues the more gladly vnto the instructions giuen by a wise and resolute Consul. All his businesse within the Citie being dispatched, Aemylius was honourably attended, at his setting forth on his iourney; with an especiall hope of men, that he should finish the Warre: though that he should finish it so soone and happily, was more then could haue beene hoped or imagined. He came to : whence, when the winde came faire, he set sayle at breake of day, and arriued safe∣ly at the Isle of before night. Thence passed he to : where, hauing done sacrifice to Apollo, after the fift day he set forwards to the Campe; and was there in fiue dayes more. So are there but fiue of the fifteene dayes remaining, in which he finished the Warre. Perseus lay strongly encamped at Dium; hauing spared no labour of men and of women to fortifie the bankes of Enipeus, where it was fordeable in drie weather: So as there was little hope, or none, to force him; and consequently, as little pos∣sibilitie to enter that way into Macedon. One great troubling the Romans, and much disabling them to make attempt vpon Dium; was lacke of fresh water. For there were tenne myles betweene Dium and Tempe; all the way lying betweene the Sea shoarc and the foot of Olympus, without any Brooke or Spring breaking forth on that side. But Aemylius found present remedie for this, by dig∣ging Wells on the shoare; where hee found sweet Springs: as commonly there is no shoare that wants them, though they rise not aboue the ground. Want of this knowledge was enough to hinder Martius from taking vp his lodging anie nearer to the enemie, than the Twone of Heraclea, on the Riuer of Peneus; where he had watering at pleasure, but could performe no seruice of anie worth. Yet when the Roman Campe had such meanes to lye close to the Macedonian, as it presently did; the passage onward, being defended as hath beene shewed, seemed no lesse diffi∣cult than before. Wherefore it was necessarie to search another way: which by enquirie was soone found out. There was a narrow passage ouer Olympus, leading into Perraebia; hard of ascent, but slenderly guarded, and therefore promising a faire journey. Martius either had not been informed hereof; or durst not attempt it: or perhaps could not get his souldiors to make the aduenture; they fearing least it would proue such a piece of worke, as had beene their march ouer Ossa into Tempe. But Paulus was a man of greater industrie, courage, and abilitie, to com∣mand. He had reformed, euen at his first comming, many disorders in the Roman Campe: teaching the souldiors, among other good lessons, to be obedient and rea∣die in execution; without troubling themselues, as had beene their manner, to examine the doings and purposes of their Generall. And now he appointed about fiue thousand men to this Enterprise: whereof he committed the charge vnto Sci∣pio Aemylianus and Q. Fabius Maximus, his owne sonnes by nature, but adopted; the one of them, by a sonne of Scipio the African; the other, by one of the Fabij. Scipio tooke with him some light-armed Thracians and Cretans; but his maine strength was of Legionaries. For the Kings guard, vpon the mountaine, consisted in a manner wholly of Archers and Slingers: who, though, at some distance, they might doe notable seruice against those that should climbe vp vnto them; yet when the darknesse tooke away their ayme, they were like to make a bad nights worke, being to deale with those that were armed to fight at hand. To conceale the businesse about which they went, Scipio and Fabius tooke a wrong way, to∣wards the ; where victuals were prouided for their journey: it being noysed, that they were to runne along the coast of Macedon by sea, and wast the Coun∣trey. All the while that they were passing the Mountaines (which was about three dayes) the Consul made shew of a meaning to set vpon Perseus where hee lay, rather to diuert the Kings attention from that which was his maine Enter∣prise, than vpon any hope to doe good, in seeking to get ouer Enipeus. The Cha∣nell of Enipeus, which receiued in Winter time a greatfall of waters from the Mountaines, was exceeding deepe and broad; and the ground of it was such, as though at the present it lay welneare all drie, yet it serued not for those that were weightily armed to fight vpon. Wherefore Aemylius employed none saue his Velites; of whom the Kings light armature had aduantage at farre distance, though the Romans were better appointed for the close. The Engines from off the Tow∣ers which Perseus had raysed on his owne banke, did also beat vpon the Romans, and gaue them to vnderstand, that their labour was in vaine. Yet Aemylius as he had begun; and continued his assault, such as it could be, the second day. This might haue serued to teach the Macedonian, that some greater worke was in hand: since otherwise a good Captaine, as Aemylius was knowne to be, would not haue troubled himselfe with making such brauadoes, that were some∣what costly. But Perseus looked onely vnto that which was before his eyes: vntill his men, that came running fearefully downe the Mountaine, brought word into the Campe, That the Romans were following at their backes. Then was all full of tumult; and the King himselfe no lesse (if not more) amazed than anie of the rest. Order was forthwith giuen to dislodge: or rather without order, in all tu∣multuous hast, the Campe was broken vp, and a speedie retreat made to Pydna. Whether it were so, that they which had custodie of the passage were taken slee∣ping, or whether they were beaten by plaine force; Scipio and Fabius had very good successe in their journey. It may well be, that they slept vntill the Romans came somewhat neare to them; and then taking alarme, when their arrowes and slings could doe little seruice, were beaten at handie stroakes: so as the different re∣lations that are cited by Plutarch out of Polybius, and an Epistle of Scipio, may each of them haue beene true. Thus was an open way into Macedon: which had beene effected by Martius in the yeare fore-going; but was closed vp againe, through his not prosecuting so rich an opportunitie. Perseus was in extreame doubt what course to take, after this vnhappy beginning. Some gaue aduice, to manne his Townes, and so to linger out the Warre: hauing beene taught by the last yeares example, how resolute the people were in making defence. But farre worse counsaile preuailed: as generally it doth in turbulent and fearefull deliberations. The King resolued to put all at once to hazard of battaile: fearing belike to put himselfe into anie one Towne, least that should be first of all besieged; and he therein (as cowardly natures alwayes are jealous) not ouer-care∣fully relieued. This was euen the same that Aemylius, or anie inuador, should haue desired. So a place was chosen neare vnto Pydna, that serued well for the Phalanx, and had likewise on the sides of it some peeces of higher ground, fit for the archers and light armature. There he abode the comming of the enemie; who stayed not long behind him. As soone as the Romans had sight of the Kings Armie; which, with greater feare than discretion, had hasted away from them, forsaking the Campe that was so notably well fortified: they desired more, than to giue battaile immediately; doubting least otherwise the King should change his minde, and get further off. And to this effect Scipio brake with the Consul; pray∣ing him not to loose occasion by delay. But Aemylius told him, That hee spake like a young man; and therefore willed him to haue patience. The Romans were tyred with their journey; had no Campe wherein to rest themselues; nor anie thing there, saue onely the bare ground whereon they trode. For these and the like respects, the Consul made a stand: and shewing himselfe vnto the Macedoni∣an, who did the like, in order of battaile; gaue charge to haue the Campe measu∣red out and entrenched behinde the Armie; whereinto, at good leysure, hee fell backe, without anie manner of trouble. After a nights rest, it was hoped, both by the Romans, and by the Macedonians, that the matter should be determined; each part thinking their owne Generall too blame, for that they had not the same day. As for the King, he excused himselfe by the backwardnesse of the ene∣mie; who aduanced no further, but kept vpon ground seruing ill for the Phalanx: as on the other side the Consul had the reasons before shewed, which he commu∣nicated to those about him the next day. That euening (which followed the third of September, by the Roman account) C. Sulpicius Gallus, a Colonel, or Tribune of a Legion, who had the former yeare beene Praetor, foretold vnto the Consul, and (with his good liking) vnto the armie, an Eclipse of the Moone, which was to be the same night: willing the souldiors not to be troubled therewith, for that it was naturall, and might be knowne long before it was seene. It was the manner of the Romans, in such Eclipses, to beat Pannes of Brasse and Basons, as wee doe in following a swarme of Bees; thinking, that thereby they did the Moone great ease, and helped her in her labour. But this prognostication of Sulpicius conuerted their superstition into admiration of his deepe skill, when they saw it verified. Contrariwise, the Macedonians howled and made a great noyse as long as the Eclipse lasted: rather perhaps because it was their fashion, than for that they were terrified therewith, as with a prodigie betokening their losse; since their desire to fight was no whit lessened by it. I will not here stand to dispute, Whether such Eclipses doe signifie, or cause anie alteration in ci∣uile affaires, and matters that haue small dependance on naturall complexion: for the argument is too large. More worthie of obseruation it is, how superstition captiuates the wisdome of the wisest, where the helpe of true Religion is wanting. Aemylius, though hee were sufficiently instructed concerning this defect of the Moone, that it was no supernaturall thing, nor aboue the reach of humane vnder∣standing, so as he should need to trouble himselfe with anie deuout regard thereof: yet could he not refraine from doing his dutie to this Moone, and congratulating with sacrifice her , as soone as she shone out bright againe: for which, hee is commended euen by Plutarch, a sage Philosopher, as a godly and religious man. If Sulpicius perhaps did not assist him in this foolish deuotion; yet is it like, that he, being a Senatour, and one of the Councell for Warre, was partaker the next mor∣ning in a Sacrifice done to Hercules; which was no lesse foolish. For a great part of the day was vainely consumed, ere Hercules could be pleased with anie Sacrifice, and to shew tokens of good lucke in the entrailes of the beasts. At length, in the bellie of the one and twentieth Sacrifice, was a promise of victorie to Aemylius; but with condition, That hee should not giue the onset. Hercules was a Greeke, and partiall, as nearer in alliance to the Macedonian than to the Roman. Wherefore it had beene better to call vpon the new Goddesse, lately cano∣nized at Alabanda; or vpon Romulus, founder of their Citie, on whom the Romans had bestowed his Deitie; or (if a God of elder date were more authenticall) vpon Mars the Father of Romulus, to whome belonged the guidance of militarie affaires; and who therefore would haue limited his fauour, with no iniunctions contrarie to the rules of Warre. Now concerning the Battaile; Aemylius was throughly persuaded, that the King meant to abide it: for that otherwise hee would not haue stayed at Pydna, when, as a little before, his leysure serued to retyre whither hee listed, the Romans being further off. In regard of this, and perhaps of the tokens appearing in the Sacrifices, the Consul thought that hee might wait vpon aduantage, without making anie great haste. Neither was it to bee neglected, that the morning Sunne was full in the Romans faces: which would be much to their hinderance all the forenoone. Since therefore Perseus kept his ground, that was commo∣dious for the Phalanx, and Aemylius sent forth part of his men to bring in Wood and Fodder; there was no likelyhood of fighting that day. But about tenne of the clocke in the morning, a small occasion brought to passe that, which whereto neither of the Generalls had ouer earnest desire. A horse brake loose at watering; which two or three of the Roman souldiers followed into the riuer, wa∣ding after him vp to the knees. The Kings men lay on the further banke; whence a couple of Thracians ranne into the water, to draw this horse ouer to their owne side. These fell to blowes, as in a priuate quarrell; and one of the Thracians was . His countrimen seeing this, hasted to reuenge their fellowes death, and followed those that had slaine him ouer the riuer. Hereupon company came in, to helpe on each part, vntill the number grew such, as made it past a fray, and caused both the armies to be carefull of the euent. In fine, each of the Generalls placed his men in order of battaile, accordly as the maner of his Countrie, and the armes, wherewith they serued, did require. The ground was a flat leuell, saue that on the sides a few hillocks were raised here and there; whereof each part might take what aduantage it could. The Macedonians were the greater number, the Romans the better , and better appointed. Both the King and the Consul encou∣raged their men with liuely words: which the present condition could bountifully afford. But the King hauing finished his Oration, and sent on his men, withdrew himselfe into Pydna: there to doe sacrifice, as hee pretended, vnto . It is the lesse maruaile, that hee durst aduenture battaile, since hee had bethought himselfe of such a stratageme, whereby to saue his owne person. As for Hercules, hee liked not the sacrifice of a coward: whose vnseasonable deuotion could be no better than hypocrisie. For hee that will pray for a good Haruest, ought also to Plow, Sowe, and Weede his Ground. When therefore the King re∣turned to the battaile, hee found it no better than lost: and he, in looking to his owne safetie, caused it to be lost altogether, by beginning the flight. The acts of this day, such as we finde recorded, are, That the Roman Elephants could doe no manner of good; That the Macedonian Phalanx did so presse onwards, and beat off all which came before it, as Amylius was thereat much asto∣nished; That the Peligni rushing desperately on the Phalanx, were ouer-borne, ma∣ny of them slaine, and the squadrons following them so discouraged herewith, as they retired apace towards an hill. These were the things that fell out aduerse to the Romans; and which the Consul beholding, is said to haue rent his coat-armor for griefe. If the King with all his power of horse, had in like manner done his deuoyre; the victorie might haue bin his owne. That which turned the fortune of the battaile, was the same which doubtlesse the Consul expected, euen from the beginning: the difficultie, or almost impossibilitie, of holding the long in order. For whilest some of the Romanes small battallions hard vpon one part of it, and others recoyled from it; it was necessarie (if the Macedontans would follow vpon those which were put to the worse) that some files hauing open way before them, should aduance themselues beyond the rest that were held at a stand. This comming so to passe, admonished the Consul, what was to bee done. The long pikes of the Macedonians were of little vse, when they were charged in flanke by the Roman Targettiers; according to direction giuen by Aemylius, when hee saw the front of the Enemies great battaile become vnequall, and the rankes in some places open, by reason of the vnequall resistance which they found. Thus was the vse of the Phalanx prooued vnauaileable against many small squadrons, as it had beene formerly in the battaile of Cynoscephalae: yea, this forme of embattailing was found vnseruiceable against the other, by rea∣son, that being not euerie where alike distressed, it would breake of it selfe; though heere were little such inconuenience of ground, as had beene at . 4. § 14. Cyno∣scephalae. Perseus, when he saw his battaile begin to route, turned his bridle presently, and ranne amaine towards . All his horse escaped, in a manner, vntouched, and a great number followed him; the little harme which they had taken, witnessing the little good which they had done. As for the poore foote; they were to the mercie of the Enemie: who slew aboue twentie thousand of them; though hauing little cause to be furious, as hauing lost, in that battaile, onely some , or sixscore men at the most. Some of the foot, escaping from the , ouertook the king & his company in a wood; where they fel to railing at the horse∣men, calling them cowards, traytors, and such other names, till at length they fell to blowes. The King was in doubt lest they had ill meaning to himselfe: and there∣fore turned out of the common way, being followed by such as thought it good. The rest of the company dispersed themselues: euery one as his owne occasions guided him. Of those that kept along with their King, the number began within awhile to lessen. For hee fell to deuising vpon whom hee might lay the blame of that daies misfortune, which was most due to himselfe: thereby causing those that knew his nature, to shrinke away from him, how they could. At his comming to Pella; he found his Pages and houshold seruants, readie to attend him, as they had bin wont. But of his great men that had escaped from the battaile, there was none appearing in the Court. In this melancho like time, there were two of his Treasu∣rers that had the boldnesse to come to him, and tell him roundly of his faults. But in reward of their vnseasonable admonitions, he stabbed them both to death. Af∣ter this, none whom he sent for would come at him. This boded no good. Where∣fore standing in feare, lest they that refused to come at his call, should dare some greater mischiefe; he stole out of Pella by night. Of his friends he had with him onely Euander (who had beene employed to kill Eumenes at Delphi ) and two o∣ther. There followed him likewise about fiue hundred Cretians more for loue of his money, than of him. To these he gaue of his plate, as much as was worth about fiftie talents, though shortly he coozened them of some part thereof; making shew as if hee would haue redeemed it; but neuer paying the money. The third day after the battaile hee came to Amphipolis; where hee exhorted the townesmen to fidelitie, with teares; and his owne speech being hindered by teares, appoin∣ted Euander to speake what himselfe would haue vttered. But the Amphipoli∣tans made it their chiefe care, to looke well to themselues. Vpon the first fame of the ouerthrow, they had emptied their towne of two thousand Thracians that lay there in garrison: sending them foorth vnder colour of a gainefull em∣ployment, and shutting the gates after them. And now to bee ridde of the King; they plainly bade Euander be gone. The King hearing this, had no minde to tarrie: but embarking himselfe and the treasure which hee had there, in cer∣taine vessells that hee found in the riuer Strymon; passed ouer to the Isle of Sa∣mothrace: where he hoped to liue safe, by priuiledge of the religious Sanctuarie therein. These miserable shifts of the King make it the lesse doubtfull, how all the king∣dome fell into the power of Aemylius, within so few dayes after his victorie. Pyd∣na which was at hand, was the last that yeelded. About sixe thousand of the souldiours, that were of sundrie Nations, fled out of the battaile into that Towne; and prepared for defence: the confused rabble of so many strangers hindering all deliberation and consent. Hippius who had kept the passage ouer Ossa against Martius, with Pantauchus, who had beene sent Embassadour to Gentius the Illyrian, were the first that came in: yeelding themselues and the Towne of Beraea, whither they had retired out of the battaile. With the like message came others from Thessalonica, from Pella, and from all the Townes of Macedon, within two dayes: the losse of the head bereauing the whole bodie of all sense and strength. Neither did they of Pydna stand out any longer, when they knew that the King had forsaken his Countrey: but opened their gates vp∣on such tearmes, that the sacke of it was granted to the Roman armie. Ae∣mylius sent abroad into the Countrey, such as hee thought meetest, to take charge of other Cities: hee himselfe marching towards Pella. Hee found in Pella no more than three hundred talents; the same whereof Perseus had lately defrauded the Illyrian. But within a little while hee shall haue more. It was soone vnderstood, that Perseus had taken Sanctuarie, in the Temple at Samothrace: his owne letters to the Consul, confirming the report. He sent these letters by persons of such meane condition; that his case was pittied, for that hee wanted the seruice of better men. The scope of his writing was, to desire fa∣uour: which though hee begged in tearmes ill beseeming a King; yet since the inscription of his Epistle was, King PERSEVS to the Consul PAVLVS; the Con∣sul, who had taken from him his Kingdome, and would not allow him to retaine the Title, refused to make answere thereunto. So there came other letters, as humble as could bee expected: whereby hee craued and obtained, that some might bee sent to conferre with him about matters of his present estate. Neuer∣thelesse in this conference, hee was marueilous earnest, that he might bee allow∣ed to retaine the name of King. And to this ende it was perhaps, that hee had so carefully preserued his treasure, vnto the very last: flattering himselfe with such vaine hopes as these; That the Romans would neither violate a Sanctuarie, nor yet neglect those great riches in his possession; but compound with him for money, letting him haue his desire to liue at ease, and be called King. Yea it seemes that hee had indeede, euen from the beginning, a desire to liue in this Isle of Samothrace: both for that in one of his consultations about the war, he was dehorted by his friends, from seeking to exchange his Kingdome of Macedon, for * such a paltrie Iland; and for that hee offered to lay vp the money which Eume∣nes Liu. lib. 42. demanded, in the holy Temple that was there. But hee findes it otherwise. They vrge him to giue place vnto necessitie, and without more adoe, to yeeld to the discretion and mercie of the people of Rome. This is so farre against his minde, that the conference breakes osf without effect. Presently there arriues at Samo∣thrace Cn. Octauius the Roman Admirall, with his : who assayes, as well by ter∣rible threats, as by faire language, to draw the King out of his lurking hole; where∣in, for feare of imprisonment, he had imprisoned himselfe. When all would not serue, a question was mooued to the ; How they durst pollute their Temple, by receiuing into it one that had violated the like holy priuiledge of Sanctuarie, by attempting the murder of King Eumenes at Delphi? This went to the quicke. The Samothracians, being now in the power of the Romans, take this matter to heart; and send word to the King, That Euander, who liues with him in the Temple, is accused of an impious fact committed at Delphi, whereof vnlesse he can cleare himselfe in judgement, hee must not be suffered to prophane that ho∣ly place, by his abiding in it. The reuerence borne to his , now past, makes them forbeare to say, that Perseus himselfe is charged with the same crime. But what will this auailc, when the minister of the fact being brought into iudgement, shall (as is to be fcared) appeach the author? Perseus therefore willeth Euander to haue consideration of the little fauour that can bee expected at the Romans hand, who are like to bee presidents and ouerseers of this judgement: so as it were better to die valiantly, since none other hope remaines, than hope to make good an ill cause; where, though he had a good plea, yet it could not helpe him. Of this mo∣tion Euander seemes to like well: and either kills himselfe, or hoping to escape thence, by deferring the time as it were to get poyson wherewith to end his life, is killed by the Kings commandement. The death of this man, who had stucke to Perseus in all times of need, makes all the Kings friends that remained hitherto, to forsake him: so as none are left with him, saue his wife and children, with his Pa∣ges. It is much to be suspected, that they which leaue him vpon this occasion, will tell perillous tales, and say, That the King hath lost the priuiledge of this holy Sanctuarie, by murdering Euander therein. Or if the Romans will affirme so much, who shall dare to gaine say them? Since therefore there is nothing but a point of formalitie, and euen that also lyable to dispute, which preserues him from cap∣tiuitie; hee purposeth to make an escape, and flye, with his Treasures, vnto Cotys his good friend, into Thrace. Oroandes, a Cretian, lay at Samothrace with one shippe; who easily was perswaded to waft the King thence. With all secrecie the Kings money, as much as could bee so , was carried aboord by night; and the Plutarch. in vit. King himselfe, with his wise and * children (if rather it were not true, that hee had with him onely * Philip his elder sonne, who was onely by adoption his Liu lib. 45. sonne, being his * brother by nature) with much adoe got out at a window by Liu. lib. 42. a rope, and ouer a mudde wall. At his comming to the Sea side, hee found no Oroandes there: the Cretians had played a Crettan tricke, and he was gone with the money to his owne home. So it began to waxe cleare day, whilest Perseus was searching all along the shoare: who had stayed so long about this, that hee might feare to be intercepted ere hee could recouer the Temple. Hee ranne therefore amaine towards his lodging: and thinking it not safe to enter it the common way, lest hee should bee taken; hee hid himselfe in an obscure corner. His Pa∣ges missing him, ranne vp and downe making enquirie; till Octauius made Pro∣clamation, That all the Kings Pages, and Macedonians whatsoeuer, abiding with their master in Samothrace, should haue their liues and libertie, with all to them belonging, which they had either in that Isle, or at home in Macedon, conditio∣nally, That they should presently yeeld themselues to the Romans. Hereupon they all came in. Likewise Ion, a Thessalonian, to whom the King had giuen the custodie of his children, deliuered them vp to Octauius. Lastly, Perseus himselfe, with his sonne Philip, accusing the gods of Samothrace, that had no better pro∣tected him; rendered himselfe, and made the Roman victorie complete. If hee had not trusted in those gods of Samothrace, but employed his whole care in the defence of Macedon, without other hope of liuing, than of raigning therein; hee might well haue brought this Warre to an happier end. Now, by diuiding his cogitations, and pursuing, at once, those contrarie hopes of sauing his Kingdome by armes, and himselfe by flight; hee is become a spectacle of miserie, and one among the number of those Princes, that haue beene wretched by their owne default. Hee was presently sent away to Aemylius; before whom hee fell to the ground so basely, that hee seemed thereby to dishonour the victorie ouer him∣selfe, as gotten vpon one of abject qualitie, and therefore the lesse to bee . Aemylius vsed to him the language of a gentle Victor: blaming him, though mildly, for hauing, with so hostile a minde, made Warre vpon the Ro∣mans. Hereto good answere might haue beene returned by one of better spi∣rit. As for Perseus, hee answered all with a fearefull silence. Hee was comforted with hope of life, or (as the Consul tearmed it) almost assurance; for that such was the mercie of the People of Rome. After these good words, being inuited to the Consuls Table, and respectiuely entreated, hee was committed prisoner to Q. Aelius. Such end had this Macedonian Warre, after foure yeeres continuance: and such end therewithall had the Kingdome of Macedon; the glorie whereof, that had sometime filled all parts of the World then knowne, was now translated vnto Rome. §. IX. GENTIVS, King of the Illyrians, taken by the Romans. ABout the same time, and with like celeritie, Anicius the Roman Praetor, who succeeded vnto App. Claudius; had the like successe against King Gentius the Illyrian. Gentius had an Armie of fifteene thousand; with which hee was at Lissus, readie to assist King Per∣seus as soone as the money should come, whereof hee had recei∣ued onely tenne Talents. But Anicius arrested him on the way; fought with him; ouercame him; and draue him into Called now . Scodra. This Towne was verie de∣fensible by nature, besides the helpe of fortification; and strongly manned with all the force of Illyria; which, assisted with the Kings presence, made it seeme vnpossible to bee wonne, in any not a very long time. Yet Anicius was confi∣dent in his late victorie; and therefore presented his Armie before the walles, making countenance to giue an assault. The Illyrians, that might easily defended themselues within the Towne, would needes issue foorth and fight. They were, it seemes, rather passionate than couragious: for they were bea∣ten; and thereupon foorthwith began amazedly to treat about yeelding. The King sent Embassadours; by whom, at first, hee desired truce for three dayes, that he might deliberate concerning his estate. It ill became him, who had layed violent hand on the Roman Embassadours, to haue recourse to such mediation. But hee thought his owne fault pardonable, in as much as hitherto there was no greater harme done by him, than the casting of those Embassadours into prison; where they were still aliue. Hauing obtained three dayes respite, hee passed vp a Riuer, within halfe a myle of the Roman Campe, into the Lake of Scodra, as it were to consult the more priuately; though indeede, to hearken whether the report were true, that his brother Carauantius was comming to his rescue. Finding that no such helpe was toward, it is wonder, that he was so foo∣lish as to returne into Scodra. Hee sent messengers crauing accesse vnto the Prae∣tor: before whom hauing lamented his folly past (which, excepting the disho∣nestie, was not so great as his folly present) hee fell downe humbly, and yeelded himselfe to discretion. All the Townes of his Kingdome, together with his wife, children, brother, and friends, were presently giuen vp. So this Warre ended in thirtie dayes: the People of Rome not knowing that it was begun; vntill Perpenna, one of the Embassadors that had beene imprisoned, brought word from Anicius how all had passed. §. X. How the Romans behaued themselues in Greece and Macedon after their victory ouer PERSEVS. NOw began the Romans to swell with the pride of their fortune; and to looke tyrannically vpon those that had beene vnmannerly to∣ward them before, whilest the Warre with Perseus seemed full of danger. The Rhodian Embassadours were still at Rome, when the tidings of these victories were brought thither. Wherefore it was thought good to call them into the Senate, and bid them doe their errand againe. This they performed with bad grace; saying, that they were sent from Rhodes to make an ouerture of peace; forasmuch as it was thought, that this Warre was no lesse grieuous to the Romans themselues, than to the Macedonians and many others: but that now they were very glad, and in behalfe of the Rhodians did con∣gratulate with the Senate and People of Rome, that it was ended much more happily than had beene expected. Hereto the Senate made answere, That the Rhodians had sent this Embassage to Rome, not for loue to Rome, but in fauour of the Macedonian; whose partizans they were, and should so be taken. By these threats, and the desire of some (couetous of the charge) to haue Warre pro∣claimed against Rhodes; the Embassadours were so affrighted, that in mourning apparell, as humble suppliants, they went about the Citie; beseeching all men, especially the great ones, to pardon their indiscretion, and not to pro∣secute them with vengeance for some foolish words. This danger of Warre from Rome being knowne at Rhodes, all that had beene any whit auerse from the Romans in the late Warre of Macedon, were either taken and condemned, or sent prisoners to Rome; excepting some that slue themselues for feare, whose goods also were confiscated. Yet this procured little grace; and lesse would haue done, if olde M. Cato, a man by nature vehement, had not vttered a milde sentence, and aduertised the Senate, That in decreeing Warre against Rhodes, they should much dishonour themselues, and make it thought, that Casar in . apud Salust. de Coniurat. . rather the wealth of that Citie, which they were greedie to ransacke, than any iust cause, had moued them thereto. This consideration, together with their good deserts in the Warres of Philip and Antiochus, helped well the Rhodians: among whome, none of any marke remained aliue, saue those that had beene of the Roman Faction. All which notwithstanding, many yeeres passed, ere by importunate suit, they could bee admitted into the societie of the Romans: a fauour which till now, they had not esteemed, but thought themselues better without it, as equall friends. With the like, or greater seueritie, did the Romans make themselues terrible in all parts of Greece. Aemylius himselfe made progresse through the Countrey; vi∣siting all the famous places therein, as for his pleasure: yet not forgetting to make them vnderstand what power hee had ouer them. More than fiue hundred of the chiefe citizens in were slaine at one time by those of the Roman faction, and with helpe of the Roman souldiers. Others fled, or were banished, and their goods . Of which things, when complaint was made to the Consul; the redresse was such, as requited not the paines of making supplication. His friends, that is to say, those which betrayed vnto the Romans the liberty of their Countrey, hee like a King, with excessiue cheere, yet so, that he had all things very cheape in his Campe: an easie matter, since no man durst be back∣ward in sending prouisions, nor set on them the due price. Embassadours likewise were sent from Rome; some, to giue order for settling the estate of Macedon, towards which they had more particular instruction from the Senate than was vsuall in such cases; and some, to visit the affaires of Greece. The Kingdome of Macedon was set at liberty by Aemylius and the Embassadours, his assistants, who had order therefore from the Senate. But this liberty was such as the Romans vsed to bestow. The best part of it was, That the Tribute which had beene payed vnto the Kings, was lessened by halfe. As for the rest; the Countrey was diuided into foure parts, and they forbidden commerce one with the other. All the Nobilitie were sent captiue into Italy, with their wiues and children, as many as were aboue fifteene yeeres old. The ancient Lawes of the Countrey were abrogated; and new giuen by Aemylius. Such mischiefe the Senate thought it better to doe, at the first alte∣ration of things in this Prouince, and in the time of Conquest, than otherwise to leaue any inconuenience that should bee worse in the . But concerning the Greekes, that were not subiects to Rome; the things done to them could deserue no better name than meere tyrannie, yea and shamelesse periury; were it not so, that the familiar custome, among and great Estates, of violating Leagues, doth make the Oathes of seeme of no validitie. The that were sent to visit the Greekes, called before them all such men of note, from euery quarter, as had any way discouered an vnseruiceable disposition towards the Ro∣mans. These they sent to Rome; where they were made sure enough. Some of these had sent letters to Perseus, which fell at length into the Romans hands: and in that respect, though they were no subiects, yet wanted there no colour, for vsing them as traytors, or at least as enemies. But since onely two men were beheaded, for hauing beene openly on the Macedonian side; and since it is confessed, that the good Patriotes were no lesse afflicted in this inquisition, than they that had sold themselues to the King: this manner of proceeding was inexcusable Tyrannie. With the these Embassadors were to deale more formally: not so much because that Common-wealth was strong (though this were to bee regarded by , hauing no Commission to make or denounce Warre) and to proue vn∣tractable, if manifest wrong were offered; as for that there appeared no manner of signe, by letters, or otherwise, whereby any one of the could be suspi∣tiously charged to haue held correspondence with the Macedonian. It was also so, that neither Callicrates, nor any of his adherents, had beene employed by the Na∣tion, in doing or offering their seruice to the Romans, but onely such as were the best Patriotes. Yet would not therefore the Embassadors neglect to vse the bene∣fit of the time: wherein, all men trembled for feare of Rome, the season ser∣ued to ranke the with the rest. And hereto Callicrates was very vrgent: fearing, and procuring them to feare in behalfe of him and his friends, that if sharpe order were not now taken, hee and his fellowes should bee made to pay for their mischieuous deuices, ere long time passed. So the Embas∣sadours came among the : where one of them, in open assembly of the Nation, spake as Callicrates had before instructed him. Hee said, that some of the chiefe among them, had with money and other meanes befriended Perseus. This being so; he desired that all such men might be condemned, whom, after sen∣tence giuen, he would name vnto them. After sentence giuen (cried out the whole assembly) what iustice were this? name them first, and let them answere; which if they cannot well doe, we will soone condemne them. Then said the Roman bold∣ly, that all their Praetors, as many as had led their armies, were guiltie of this crime. If this were true, said Xenon, a temperate man, and confident in his innocence; then should I like wise haue beene friend to Perseus: whereof, if any man can accuse me, I shall throughly answere him, either here presently, or before the Senate at Rome. Vpon these words of Xenon the Embassador laid hold, and said that euen so it were the best way, for him and the rest to purge themselues before the Senate at Rome. Then began he to name others, and left not vntill he had cited aboue a thousand; willing them to appeare, and answere before the Senate. This might euen be tear∣med the captiuitie of Greece; wherein so many of the and worthiest men were carried from home, for none other cause than their loue vnto their Country; to be punished according to the will of those, who could not endure, that vertue, and regard of the publike libertie, should dwell together in any of the Greekes. At their comming to Rome, they were all cast into prison, as men already condemned by the . Many Embassages were sent from Achaia (where it is to be won∣dred, that any such honest care of these innocent men could bee remaining: since honestie had beene thus punished as a vice, in so many of the worthiest among them) to informe the Senate, that these men were neither condemned by the , nor yet held to bee offendors. But in stead of better answere it was pronoun∣ced; That the Senate thought it not expedient the Countrie, that these men should re∣turne into Achaia. Neither could any sollicitation of the , who neuer cea∣sed to importune the Senate for their libertie, preuaile at all; vntill after seuenteene yeeres, fewer than thirtie of them were enlarged, of whom that wise and vertuous man Polybius, the great Historian was one. All the rest were either dead in prison; hauing made offer to escape, whether vpon the way before they came to Rome, or whether out of jayle, after that they were committed thereto, suffered death as malefactors. This was a gentle correction, in regard of what was done vpon the Epirots. For the Senate being desirous to preserue the Macedonian Treasure whole; yet with∣all, to gratifie the Souldiours, gaue order, That the whole Countrey of Epirus should be put to sacke. This was a barbarous and horrible cruelty; as also it was performed by Aemylius with mischieuous subtiltie. Hauing taken leaue of the Greekes, and of the Macedonians, with bidding them well to vse the libertie be∣stowed vpon them by the people of Rome; he sent vnto the Epirots for tenne of the principall men out of euery Citie. These he commanded to deliuer vp all the Gold and Siluer which they had; and sent along with them, into euery of their Townes, what companies of men he thought conuenient, as it were to fetch the money. But he gaue secret instruction to the Captaines, that vpon a certaine day by him appointed, they should fall to sacke, euery one the Towne whereinto hee was sent. Thus in one day were threescore and tenne Cities, all confederate with the Romans, spoiled by the Roman Souldiors; and besides other acts of hostility in a time of peace, a hundred and fiftie thousand of that Nation made slaues. It may be granted, that some of the Epirots deserued punishment, as hauing fauoured Per∣seus. But since they, among this people, that were thought guilty of this offence, yea, or but coldly affected to the Romanes, had been already sent into Italie, there to receiue their due; and since this Nation, in generall, was not onely at the present in good obedience, but had, euen in this warre, done good seruice to the Romans: I hold this act so wicked, that I should not beleeue it, had any one Writer deliuered the contrarie. But the truth being manifest by consent of all; it is the lesse maruei∣lous, that GOD was pleased to make Aemylius childlesse, euen in the glorie of his triumph, how great soeuer otherwise his vertues were. In such manner dealt the Romans, after their victory, with the Greekes and Mace∣donians. How terrible they were to other Kingdomes abroad; it will appeare by the efficacie of an Embassage sent from them to Antiochus; whereof before wee speake, we must speake somewhat of Antiochus his foregoers, of himselfe, and of his affaires about which these Embassadours came. §. XI. The Warre of ANTIOCHVS vpon Aegypt, brought to end by the Roman Embassadours. ANTIOCHVS the Great, after his peace with the Romans, did nothing that was memorable in the short time following of his raigne and life. He died the six and thirtieth yeere after he had worne a Crowne, and in the seuenteenth or eighteenth of Ptolemie Epiphanes: while hee at∣tempted Strab. lib. 16. Iust. lib. 35. to rob the Temple of Bel, or (according to Iustine ) of Iupi∣ter. Hee left behinde him three sonnes, Seleucus Philopator, Antiochus Epiphanes, Demetrius Soter; and one daughter, Cleopatra, whom hee had giuen in marriage to Ptolemie Epiphanes, King of Aegypt. Seleucus the fourth of that name, and the el∣dest of Antiochus his sonnes; raigned in Syria twelue yeeres, according to Eusebius, Appian, and Sulpitius: though Iosephus giue him but seuen. A Prince, who as hee Euseb. in Cron. App. de bell. Syr. Ant. 12. cap. 5. was slothfull by nature; so the great losse which his father Antiochus had receiued, tooke from him the meanes of managing any great affaire. Of him, about three hundred yeeres before his birth, Daniel gaue this judgement, Et stabit in loco eius Dan. 11. v. 21. vilissimus & indignus decore regio. And in his place (speaking of Antiochus the Fa∣ther of this man) shall start vp a vilde person, vnworthy the honor of a King. Vnder this Seleucus, those things were done which are spoken of Onias the High Priest, in those words, and other to the same effect: What time as the holy Citie was inhabited with all Mac. cap. 3. Peace, because of the godlinesse of ONIAS the Priest, it came to passe, that euen the King did the place, and garnished the Temple with great gifts. And all that is written in the third Chapter of the second of Macchabees, of Simon of Beniamin, who by betrayed the Treasures of the Temple: and of Heliodorus sent by the King to seize them; of his miraculous striking by God, and his recouery at the prayers of Onias; of the Kings death, and of his successor Antiochus Epiphanes. It is there∣fore from the raigne of this King, that the bookes of the Macchabees take begin∣ning. Which bookes seeme not to bee deliuered by one and the same hand. For the first booke, although it touch vpon Alexander the Great, yet it hath nothing else of his storie, nor of the acts of his successors, till the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, the brother and successor of this Seleucus; from whom downward to the death of Simon Macchabeus (who died in the hundred threescore and seuenteenth yeere of the Greekes in Syria ) that first booke treateth. The Author of the second book, although he take the Story somewhat further off, by way of a Proaeme, yet hee endeth with the hundred and one and fiftieth yeere of the Grecian raigne, and with the death of Nicanor, slaine by Iudas: remembring in the fourth Chapter the pra∣ctice of Iason the brother of Onias, who after the death of Seleucus, preuailed with Antiochus Epiphanes, his successor for the Priesthood. It is also held by Iansenius and Mac. 1. 12. other graue Writers, that it was in the time of this Onias, that Arius King of the Super Eccles. c. 5 Spartans sent Embassadors to the Iewes, as to their brothers and kinsmen. Which intelligence betweene them and the Greekes, Ionathan the brother and successor of Iudas, remembreth in the Preamble of that Epistle, which he himselfe directed to the people of Sparta by Numenius and Antipater his Embassadours, whom hee em∣ployed at the same time to the Senate of Rome; repeating also the former Letters word by word, which Arius had sent to Onias the High Priest, whereto Iosephus addes, that the name of the Embassador was Demoteles, and that the Letters had a square Volume, and were sealed with an Eagle holding a Dragon in her clawes. Now to this , the fourth of that name, succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, in the hundred and seuen and thirtieth yeere of the Greekes in Syria. Hee was the se∣cond sonne of the Great Antiochus: and he obtained his Kingdome by procuring the death of the King his brother; which also hee vsurped from his brothers sonne. Ptolemie Philometor, his Nephew by his sister Cleopatra, being then very yong, had been about seuen yeeres King of Aegypt. Epiphanes, the Father of this King Philometor, had raigned in Aegypt foure and twenty yeeres; in great quiet, but doing little or nothing that was me∣morable. Philip of Macedon, and the great Antiochus, had agreed to diuide his King∣dome between them, whilest he was a childe. But they found such other busines, ere long, with the Romans, as made them giue ouer their vniust purpose; especial∣ly Antiochus, who gaue, with his daughter in marriage, vnto this Ptolemie, the Pro∣uinces of Coelosyria, Phoenice, and , which hee had wonne by his victory ouer Scopas, that was Generall of the Aegyptian forces in those parts. Neuerthelesse, adhered to the Romans: whereby hee liued in the greater securitie. Hee behind him two sons; this Ptolemie Philometor, and Ptolemie Phiscon, with a daugh∣ter, Cleopatra. Cleopatra was wife to the elder of her brethren, and after his death to the yonger, by whom shee was cast off, and her daughter taken in her stead. Such were the marriages of these Aegyptian Kings. Ptolemie Philometor, so called (that is, the louer of his mother) by a bitter nick∣name, because he slew her, fell into hatred with his subiects, and was like to be cha∣sed out of his Kingdome, his yonger brother being set vp against him. Physcon ha∣uing a strong party, got possession of Alexandria; and Philometor held himselfe in Memphis, crauing succour of King Antiochus his vncle. Hereof Antiochus was glad: who vnder colour to take vpon him the protection of the young Prince, sought by all meanes possible to possesse himselfe of that Kingdome. He sent Apollonius the sonne of Embassadour into Aegypt, and vnder colour to assist the Kings Coronation, hee gaue him instructions to perswade the Gouernours of the yong King Philometor, to deliuer the King his Nephew with the principall places of that Kingdome into his hands; pretending an extraordinary care and desire of his Ne∣phewes safety and well doing. And the better to answere all argument to the con∣trarie, he prepared a forcible armie to attend him. Thus came he alongst the coast of Syria to Ioppe, and from thence on the sudden he turned himselfe towards Ieru∣salem, where, by Iason the Priest (a Chaplin fit for such a Patron) hee was with all 2. Mac. 4. pompe and solemnitie receiued into the Citie. For though lately, in the time of Se∣leucus, the brother and predecessour of Epiphanes, that impious Traitour Simon of Mac. 2. cap. 3. the Tribe of Beniamin, Ruler of the Temple, when hee would haue deliuered the treasures thereof to Apollonius Gouernor of Coelosyria and Phoenicia, was disappoin∣ted of his wicked purpose by miracle from heauen; the said Apollonius being struc∣ken by the Angel of God, and recouering againe at the prayer of Onias: yet not this example to terrifie others from the like vngodly practices. Presently vpon the death of Seleucus, this Iason, the brother of Onias, seeking to supplant his brother, and to obtaine the Priesthood for himselfe, offered vnto the King three hundred and threescore talents of siluer, with other rents and summes of money. Mac. l. 2. c. 4. So hee got his desire, though he not long inioyed it. This naughty dealing of Iason, and his being ouer-reached by another in the same kinde, calls to minde a by-word taken vp among the , when as that mischieuous Callicrates, who had beene too hard for all worthie and vertuous men, was beaten at his owne weapon, by one of his owne condition. It went thus: One fire than other burnes more forcibly, One Wolfe than other Wolues does bite more sore; One Hawke than other Hawkes more swift doesly. So one most mischieuous of men before, CALLICRATES, false knaue as knaue might be, Met with MENALCIDAS more false than he. And euen thus fell it out with Iason: who within three yeeres after, was , and ouerbidden by Menelaus the brother of Simon, that for three hundred talents more obtained the for himselfe: Iason thereupon being forced to flie from Ierusalem, and to hide himselfe among the Ammonites. From Ierusalem, Antiochus marched into , to augment the numbers of his men of warre, and to prepare a Fleet for his expedition into Aegypt; with which, and with a mighty armie of land-forces, He went about to raigne ouer Aegypt, that Mac. 1. . 1. v. 17 he might haue the dominion of two Realmes, and entred Aegypt with a mighty company, with Chariots and Elephants, with Horsemen, and with a great Nauie, and moued warre a∣gainst PTOLEMAEVS King of Egypt, but PTOLEMAEVS was afraid of him, and fled, and many were wounded to death. He wan many strong Cities, and tooke away the spoyles of the . 18. 19. 20. &c. Land of Egypt. Thus was fulfilled the Prophecie of DANIEL: Hee shall enter into Van. c. 11. v. 24. the quiet and plentifull , and he shall do that which his Fathers haue not , nor his Fathers Fathers. Neuer indeed had any of the Kings of Syria so great a victorie ouer the Aegyptians, nor tooke from them so great riches. For hee gaue a notable ouerthrow to the Captaines of , betweene Pelusium and the hill , af∣ter Hierom. in Dan. which he entred, and sackt the greatest and richest of all the Cities of Aegypt, Alexandria excepted, which he could not force. In conclusion, after that ANTIO∣CHVS Mac l. 1. c. 1. had smitten Egypt, hee turned againe, and went vp towards Israel and Ierusalem with a mighty people, and entred proudly into the Sanctuary, and tooke away the golden Altar, and the Candle sticke for the light, and all the instruments thereof, and the table of the Shew-bread, and the Powring Vessels, and the Bowles, and the golden , and the Vaile, and the Crownes, and the golden Apparell. Hee tooke also the Siluer and the Gold, and the precious Iewels, and the secret Treasures; and when he had taken away all, he departed into his owne Land, after he had murdered many men. It was about the beginning of the Macedonian warre, that Antiochus tooke in Lib. 6. hand this Egyptian businesse. At what time he first layd claime to ; iusti∣fying his title by Cap. . §. 2. the same allegations which his father had made; and stiffely a∣uerring, that this Prouince had not beene consigned ouer to the Egyptian, or giuen in dowrie with . Easie it was to approue his right vnto that which he . Legat. 81. 82. &c. already gotten, when he was in a faire way to get all Egypt. The Achaeans, Rhodi∣ans, Athenians, and other of the Greekes, pressed him, by seuerall Embassages, to some good conclusion. But his answere was; that if the Alexandrians could be con∣tented to their King his Nephew Philometor, the elder brother of the Ptole∣mies, then should the warre be presently at an end; otherwise not. Yet when hee saw, that it was an hard of worke to take Alexandria by force: hee thought it better to let the two brothers consume themselues with intestine warre, than by the terrour of his armes, threatning destruction vnto both of them, to put into them any desire of comming to . He therefore withdrew his forces for the present; leauing the Ptolemies in very weake estate; the yonger, almost ruinated by his inuasion; the elder hated and for saken by his people. But how weake soeuer these Egyptians were, their hatred was thought to bee so strong, that Antiochus might leaue them to the prosecution thereof; and follow, at good leisure, his other businesse at Ierusalem or elsewhere. So after the sacke of Ie∣rusalem, he rested him a while at Antioch; and then made a into Cilicia, to suppresse the Rebellion of the Tharsians and other in those parts who had bin gi∣uen, as it were, by way of dowry, to a Concubine of the Kings, called . For Gouernour of Syria in his absence, he left one Andronicus, a man of great authoritie about him. In the meane while Menelaus the brother of Simon, the same who had thrust Iason out of the Priesthood, and promised the King three hundred talents for an Income, committing the charge of the Priesthood to his brother Lysimachus, stole certaine vessels of gold out of the Temple: wherof he presented a part to An∣dronicus the Kings , and sold the rest at Tyre, and other Cities adioining. This he did, as it seemeth, to aduance the payment of the three hundred talents promised; the same being now by Sostratus eagerly demanded. Hereof when Onias the Priest (formerly dispossessed by Iason ) had certaine knowledge, being mooued with zeale, and detesting the sacriledge of Menelaus, hee him for it; and fearing his reuenge, he withdrew himselfe into a Sanctuary at Daphne. Daphne was a place of delight adioyning as a suburb to Antioch. In compasse it had about ten miles: wherein were the Temples of Apollo and Dians, with a Groue, sweete Springs, places, and the like; which were wholly, in a maner, abused to lust, and other such voluptuousnesse. Whether it were well done of O∣nias, to commit himselfe to the protection of Apollo and Diana, or to claime priui∣ledge, from the holines of a ground consecrated to any of the Heathen gods, I will not stand to discourse. Only I say for mine owne opinion; that the inconuenience is far lesse, to hold this booke as Apocryphall; than to iudge this fearefull shift which Onias (though a vertuous man) made for his life, either commendable, or allow∣able, as the booke seemes to doe. As for this refuge, it could not saue the life of the Mac. li. 2. ca. 4. poore old man: for MENELAVS taking ANDRONICVS apart, prayed him to slay ONIAS. So when he came to ONIAS, he counselled him craftily, giuing him his right hand with an oath, and perswading him to come out of the Sanctuary; so he slew him in∣continently without any regard of righteousnesse. Hereof when complaint was made to Antiochus after his returne out of Cilicia, Hee tooke away ANDRONICVS his garment of purple, and rent his clothes, and commanded him to be led throughout the Citie, and in the same place where hee had committed the against ONIAS, hee was Mac. 2. c. 4. v. 38 slaine as a murderer. In taking of this innocent mans death, I should haue thought that this wicked King had once in his life-time done Iustice. But present∣ly after this, at the suit of one Ptolemie, a traytor to Ptolemie , he condem∣ned innocent men to death; who iustly complained against , and his bro∣ther Lysimachus, for a second robbing of the Temple, and carrying thence the ves∣sels of gold remaining. Hereby it is manifest, that he was guided by his owne out∣ragious will, and not by any regard of justice: since he reuenged the death of Onias, yet slue those that were in the same cause with Onias; Who, had they told their cause, Vers. 47. yea, before the Scythians, they should haue been as . By reason of such his vnsteadinesse, this King was commonly termed Epimanes, that is, madde, in stead of Epiphanes, which signifieth Noble or Illustrious. After this, Antiochus made preparation for a second voyage into Aegypt, and then Mac. 2. c. 5. v. 1, were there seene throughout all the Citie of Ierusalem, forty dayes long, horsemen running in the ayre with robes of gold, and as bands of Spearemen, and as troupes of Horsemen set in aray, encountring and coursing one against another. Of these prodigious signes, or rather fore warnings of GOD, all Histories haue deliuered vs, some more, some . Before the destruction of Ierusalem by Vespasian, a in the forme of a sword ap∣peared in the Heauens directly ouer the City, after which there followed a slaugh∣ter like vnto this of Epiphanes, though farre greater. In the Cymbrian warres, Pliny Plin. lib. 2. c. 57. tells vs, that Armies were seene fighting in the ayre from the morning till the eue∣ning. In the time of Pope Iohn the eleuenth, a fountaine powred out blood in stead of water, in or neare the Citie of Genoa; soone after which the Citie was taken by the Mercur. de Prodig. lib. 8. de & sacro . Saracens, with great slaughter. Of these and the like prodigious signes, Vipera hath collected many, and very remarkable. But this one seemeth to me the most memo∣rable, because the most notorious. All men know, that in the Emperour Nero, the Off-spring of the Caesars, as well naturall as adopted, toke end; whereof this no∣table signe gaue warning. When was first married to Augustus, an Eagle let fal into her armes a white Sueton. . Henne, holding a Lawrell branch in her mouth. Liuia caused this Henne to bee carefully nourished, and the Lawrell branch to be planted: Of the Henne came a faire encrease of white , and from the little branch there sprang vp in time a Groue of Lawrell: so that afterwards, in all Triumphs, the Conquerours did vse to carrie in their hands a branch of Bayes taken out of this Groue, and after the Triumphs ended, to set it againe in the same ground: which branches were ob∣serued, when they happened to wither, to the death of those persons who carried them in triumph. And in the last yeere of Nero, all the broodes of the white Hennes died, and the whole Groue of Bayes withered at once. Moreouer, the heads of all the Caesars Statues, and the Scepter placed in his hand, were stricken downe with lightning. That the Iewes did not thinke such strange signes to bee vnworthy of regard; it appeares by their calling vpon GOD, and praying, that these tokens might to good. Now, as the first voyage of Antiochus into Aegypt was occasioned by discord of the two brethren therein raigning: so was his second Expedition caused by their good agreement. For the elder being left in Memphis, not strong enough to force his brother, who had defended Alexandria against all the power of their vncle; thought it the best way to seeke entrance into that royall Citie, ra∣ther by perswasion than by armes. Physcon had not as yet forgotten the terrour of the former siege: the Alexandrines though they loued not Philometor, yet loued they worse to liue in scarcitie of victuals (which was already great among them, and like to grow extreme) since nothing was brought in from the Countrey; and the friends of the yonger brother saw no likelihood of good issue to bee ho∣ped for without reconconciliation. These good helpes, and aboue all these, the lo∣uing disposition of Cleopatra, who then was in , encouraged Philometor in his purpose. But that which made him earnestly desirous to accomplish it, was the feare wherein hee stood of his vncle. For though Antiochus were gone out of Aegypt with his armie; yet had hee left behinde him a strong garrison in ; retaining that Citie, which was the Key of Aegypt, to his owne vse. This consideration wrought also with Physcon, and with those that were about him; so as by the vehement mediation of Cleopatra their sister, the two brethren made an end of all quarrels. When the newes of this accord was brought to Antiochus, hee was greatly en∣raged: for notwithstanding that hee had pretended no other thing than the esta∣blishment of the King Philometor his nephew, and a meaning to subiect his yonger brother vnto him, which he gaue in answere to all Embassadours; yet he now pre∣pared to make sharpe warre vpon them both. And to that end hee presently fur∣nished and sent out his Nauie towards Cyprus, and drew his land Armie into Coe∣losyria, readie to enter Aegypt the Spring following. When he on his way as farre as Rhinocorura, he met with Embassadours sent from Ptolemie. Their errand was partly to yeeld thankes to Antiochus for the establishing of Philometor in his Kingdome; partly to him, That hee would rather bee pleased to signifie what hee required to haue done in Aegypt, which should bee performed, than to enter it as an enemie with so puissant an Armie But Antiochus returned this short answere, That he would neither call backe his Fleete, nor withdraw his Armie: vp∣on any other condition, than that Ptolemie should surrender into his hands toge∣ther with the of , the whole Territory thereto belonging: and that hee should also abandon and leaue vnto him the Ile of Cyprus, with all the right that he had vnto either of them for euer. For answere vnto these demands, hee set downe a day certaine, and a short one. Which being come and past, without any accord made, the Syrian Fleete entred Nilus, and recouered as well those pla∣ces which appertained to Ptolemie in Arabia, as in Aegypt it selfe; for , and all about it, receiued Antiochus, being vnable to resist him. The King hauing now no stoppe in his way to Alexandria; passed on thitherwards by easie journeyes. Of all these troubles past, as well as of the present danger wherein Aegypt stood, the Romans had long agoe. But they found, or, were contented to finde, little reason for them to intermeddle therein. For it was a ciuill warre: and wherein Antiochus seemed to take part with the juster cause. Yet they gaue signification, that it would be much displeasing vnto them, to haue the Kingdome of Aegypt taken from the rightfull owners. More they could not, or would not doe; being troubled with Perseus; and therefore loth to prouoke Antiochus too farre. Neuerthelesse, the Aegyptian Kings being reconciled, and standing joyntly in neede of helpe against their Vncle, who prepared and made open warre against them both: it was to be , that not onely the Romans, but many of the Greekes, as being thereto obliged by notable benefits, should arme in defence of their Kingdome. Rome had beene sustained with food from Aegypt, in the warre of ; when Italy lying waste, had neither corne, nor money wherewith to buy sufficient store. By helpe of the Aegyptian, had Aratus laide the foundation of that greatnesse, whereto the attained. And by the like helpe, had Rhodes beene defended against Poliorcetes. Neither were these friend∣ly turnes, which that bountifull house of the Ptolemies had done for sundry peo∣ple abroad, ill followed, or seconded, by other as bad in requitall: but with con∣tinuance of sutable beneficence, time to time encreased. Wherefore the two brothers sent abroad confidently for ayde; especially to the Rhodians and A∣chaeans, who seemed most able to giue it effectually. To the Romans, Physcon and Cleopatra had sent, a yeere since: but their Embassadours lay still in . Of the they desired in particular, that Lycortas the braue warriour might bee sent to them, as of all the Auxiliaries, and his sonne , Generall of the Horse. the readily condescended: and would immediatly haue made performance; if Callicrates had not interposed his mischieuous arte. , seeking occasion to vaunt his obsequiousnesse to the Romans; or much rather enuying those Noble Captaines, whose seruice the Kings desired; withstood the common voyce; which was, That their Nation should, not with such small numbers as were , but with all their power, be ayding vnto the . For it was not now (hee saide) conuenient time to themselues in any such businesse, as might make them the lesse able to yeeld vnto the Romans, what helpe soeuer should bee required in the Macedonian warre. And in this sen∣tence, hee with those of his faction, obstinarely persisted; terrifying others with bigge wordes, as it were in behalfe of the Romans. But Polybius affirmed, that Martius the late Consull had signified vnto him, that the Romans were past all neede of helpe: adding further, that a thousand foote, and two hundred horse, might well bee spared, to the ayde of their Benefactours, the Aegyptian Kings, without disabling their Nation to performe any seruice to the ; for as much as the Achaeans could without trouble, raise thirtie or fortie thousand Souldiours. All this notwithstanding, the resolution was deferred from one meeting to another; and finally broken, by the violence of Call crates. For when it was thought that the Decree should haue passed; hee brought into the Theater where the assembly was held, a Messenger with letters from Martius; whereby the Achaeans were de∣sired to conforme themselues to the Senate; and to labour as the Senate had done, by sending Embassadours to Aegypt in peace. This was an aduice against all reason. For the Senate had indeed sent Embassadours to make peace; but as in a time of greater businesse elsewhere, with such milde , that nothing was ef∣fected. Wherefore it was not likely, that the Achaeans should doe any good in the same kinde. Yet Polybius and his friends, durst not gaine-say the Romane Councell; which had force of an injunction. So the Kings were left in much distresse; disap∣pointed of their expectation. But within a while was Perseus ouercome: and then might the Embassador sent from the Romane Senate, performe as much as any Ar∣mie could haue done. Audience had beene lately giuen by the Senate, vnto those Embassadors of Physcon and Cleopatra; which hauing stayed more then a whole yeere in the City, brought nothing of their businesse to effect vntill now. The Embassadours de∣liuered their message in the name of those that had sent them: though it con∣cerned (which perhaps they knew not) Philometor, no lesse than his Brother and Sister. In this Embassage of Ptolemie, now requesting helpe from Rome; appeared a notable change of his fortune, from such as it had beene before three or foure yeeres last past. For in the beginning of these his troubles, which beganne with the Macedo∣nian Warre; either he, or Eulaeus, or Lenaeus (vpon whom the blame was afterwards Polyb. . 72. layd) which had the gouernment of him, thought his affaires in such good estate, that not onely he determined to set vpon Antiochus, for Coelesyria; but would haue interposed himselfe betweene the Romans and Perseus, as a competent ; though it fell out well, that his Embassadour was by a friend perswaded to forget that point of his errand. From these high thoughts, hee fell on the sudden, by the rebellion of his brother and subiects, to liue vnder protection of the same Antiochus. And now at such time as by atonement with his brother and subiects, hee might haue seemed to stand in no neede of such protection, hee hath remaining none other helpe whereby to saue both his Kingdome and life, than what can bee obtained by their intercession which were imployed against him. This miserable condition of him, his brother and sister shewed it selfe, euen in the habit of those Embassadours. They were poorely clad; the haire of their heades and ouer-growne, as was their manner in time of affliction; and they carried in their handes, branches of Oliue. Thus they entred into the Senate; and fell, and prostrate vpon the floore. Their garments were not so meane and mournefull, nor their lookes and Countenances so and dejected, but that their speech was than either of the other farre more lamentable. For hauing told in what danger their King and Countrey stood; they made a pitifull and grieuous complaint vnto the Senate, beseeching them to haue compassion of their estate, and of their Princes, who had alwayes remained friendly and faithfull to the Romans. They saide that the people of Rome had so much fauoured this Antiochus in particular, and were of such account and authority, with all other Kings and Nations; as if they pleased but to send their Embassadours, and let Antiochus know, that the Senate was offended with his vndertaking vpon the King their Confederate; then would he presently raise his siege from before Alexandria, and with-draw his Armie out of Aegypt, into Syria. But that if the Senate protracted any time, or vsed any delay; then should Ptolemie and Cleopatra, be shortly driuen out of their Realmes, and make to Rome, with shamefull dishonour to the Senate, and people thereof, in that, in the dangers of all their fortunes, they had not vouchsafed to relieue them. The Lords of the Senate moued with compassion, sent incontinently C. Popilius Lenus, C. , and A. Hostilius, as Embassadors to determine and end the warre betweene those Kings. In commission they had first to find King Ptolemie, and then , and to let them both vnderstand, that vnlesse they surceased, and gaue o∣uer Armes, they would take that King no more for a friend to the Senate, and peo∣ple of Rome, whom they found obstinate, or vsing delay. So these Romans, together with the Alexandrine Embassadours, tooke their leaue, and went onward their way within three dayes after. Whilest Popilius and his fellowes were on their way toward Aegypt, Antio∣chus had transported his Armie ouer Lusine, some fortie myles from Alexandria. So neere was hee to the end of his journey, when the Roman Embassadors met him. After greeting and salutations at their first encounter, Antiochus offered his right hand to Popilius: but Popilius filled it with a Role of paper; willing him to reade those Mandates of the Senate, before hee did anie thing else. Antiochus did so; and hauing a little while considered of the businesse, hee tolde Popilius, That hee would aduise with his friends, and then giue the Embassadours their answere. But Popilius, according to his ordinarie blunt manner of speech, which hee had by nature, made a Circle about the King with a Rod which he held in his hand, willing him to make him such an answere as hee might report to the Senate, before hee moued out of that Circle. The King astonished at this so rude and violent a Commaundement, after hee had stayed and pawsed awhile, I will be content (quoth he) to doe whatsoeuer the Senate shall ordaine. Then Popilius gaue vnto the King his hand, as to a Friend and of the Romans. Thus Antiochus departed out of Aegypt, without anie good issue of his Expedition; euen in such manner as * Daniel had prophesied long before: Dan. cap. 11. yea, fulfilling euerie particular circumstance, both of returning, and of doing mis∣chiefe vers. 29, 30. &c. to Ierusalem after his returne; like as if these things had rather beene than fore-told by the Prophet. As for the Roman Embassadours, they stay∣ed awhile, and settled the Kingdome of Aegypt, leauing it vnto the elder brother, and appointing the younger to raigne ouer Cyrene. This done, they departed to∣wards Cyprus; which they left, as it had beene, in the power of the Aegyptian, ha∣uing first sent away Antiochus Fleet, which had giuen an ouerthrow to the Aegyptian ships. §. XII. How the Romans were dreadfull to all Kings. Their demeanour towards EVMENES, PRVSIAS, MASANISSA, and COTYS. The end of PERSEVS and his children. The instabilitie of Kingly Estates. The Triumphs of PAVLVS, ANICIVS, and OCTAVIVS. With the Conclusion of the Worke. BY this peremptorie demeanour of Popilius, in doing his Message, and by the readie obedience of King Antiochus to the will of the Senate; wee may perceiue how terrible the Romans were growne, through their conquest of Macedon. The same Popilius had beene well contented, a yeare before this, to lay aside the roughnesse of his naturall condition, and to giue good language to the Achaeans and Aetolians, when hee went Embassadour to those people of Greece, that were of farre lesse power than the King Antiochus. Likewise, Antiochus had with good words, and no more than good words, dismissed other Embassadours which came from Rome, in such sort, as they complained not, much lesse vsed anie menacing tearmes, though hee performed nothing of their request. But now the case was altered. So found other Kings as well as Antiochus. Eumenes sent to Rome his brother Attalus, to gratulate the victorie ouer Per∣seus, and to craue helpe or countenance of the Senate against the Gallogreekes, which molested him. Verie welcome was Attalus, and louingly entertained by most of the Senatours: who bade him be confident, and requested of the Senate his brothers Kingdome for himselfe; for it should surely be giuen him. These hopefull promises tickled Attalus with such ambition, that hee eyther approued, or seemed to approue the motion. But his honest nature was soone reclaymed by the faithfull counsaile of Stratius a Physician; whome Eumenes had sent to Rome of purpose to keepe his brother vpright. So, when hee came into the , hee deliuered the errand about which hee had beene sent; recounted his owne seruices done to the Romans in the late Warre, Liu. lib. 45. wherewithall he forgat not to make of his brother as good mention as he could: and finally requested, That the Townes of Aenus and Maronea might be beftowed vpon himselfe. Polyb. Legat. 93. By his omitting to sue for his brothers Kingdome, the Senate conceiued opinion, that he meant to craue another day of audience for that businesse alone. Where∣fore, to make him vnderstand how gracious hee was, they not onely graunted all his desire; but in the presents which they gaue to him (as was their custome to Embassadours that came with an acceptable message) they vsed singular magni∣ficence. Neuerthelesse, Attalus tooke no notice of their meaning; but went his Polyb. ibid. way, contented with what they had alreadie graunted. This did so highly dis∣please the Senate, that whilest hee was yet in Italie, they gaue order for the li∣bertie of Aenus and Maronea: thereby making vneffectuall their promise; which otherwise they could not, without shame, reuoke. And as for the Gallogreekes, which were about to inuade the Kingdome of Pergamus; they sent Embassa∣dours to them, with such instructions, as rather encouraged than hindered them in their purpose. The displeasure of the Senate beeing so manifest; Eumenes thought it worthie of his labour to make another voyage to Rome. Hee might well blame the follie of his second voyage thither, for this necessitie of the third: since, by his malice to Perseus, he had layed open vnto these ambitious Poten∣tates the way to his owne dores. No sooner was he come into Italie, than the Se∣nate was readie to send him going. It was not thought expedient to vse him as an enemie, that came to visit them in loue: neyther could they, in so doing, haue a∣uoided the note of singular inconstancie: and to entertaine him as a friend, was more than their hatred to him, for his ingratitude, as they deemed it, would per∣mit. Wherefore they made a Decree, That no King should be suffered to come to Rome; and by vertue thereof sent him home, without expence of much further complement. Prusias King of Bithynia had beene at Rome somewhat before; where he was welcommed after a better fashion. Hee had learned to behaue himselfe as hum∣bly as the proud Romans could expect or desire. For entring into the Senate, hee lay downe, and kissed the threshold, calling the Fathers his gods and saui∣ours: as also hee vsed to weare a Cap, after the manner of slaues newly manumi∣sed, profesfing himselfe an enfranchised bondman of the People of Rome. Hee was indeede naturally a slaue, and one that by such abject flatterie kept himselfe safe; though doing otherwise greater mischiefe than anie wherewith Perseus had beene charged. His errand was, besides matter of complement, to com∣mend vnto the Senate the care of his sonne Nicomedes, whome he brought with him to Rome, there to receiue education. Further petition he made, to haue some Townes added to his Kingdome: whereto, because the graunt would haue beene vnjust, he receiued a cold answere. But concerning the Wardship of his sonne, it was vndertaken by the Senate: which, vaunting of the pleasure lately done to Aegypt, in freeing it from Antiochus, willed him thereby to consider, what effectu∣all protection the Romans gaue vnto the children of Kings, that were to their pa∣tronage commended. But aboue all other Kings, Masanissa held his credit with the Romans good. His quarrels were endlesse with the Carthaginians: which made the friendship of the Romans to him the more assured. In all controuersies they gaue judgement on his side: and whereas hee had inuaded the Countrey of Emporia, holding the Lands, but vnable to winne the Townes; the Romans (though at first they could finde no pretext, whereby to countenance him in this oppression) compel∣led finally the Carthaginians both to let goe all their hold, and to pay fiue hun∣dred Talents to the Numidian, for hauing hindered him of his due so long. Now indeede had Rome good leysure to deuise vpon the ruine of Carthage: after which, the race of Masanissa himselfe was shortly by them rooted vp. But heereof the olde King neuer dreamed. Hee sent to Rome one of his sonnes, to congratulate the victorie ouer Perseus; and offered to come thi∣ther himselfe, there to sacrifice for joy vnto Iupiter in the Capitol. His good will was louingly accepted; his sonne rewarded; and hee entreated to stay at home. Cotys the Thracian sent Embassadours, to excuse himselfe touching the aide by him giuen to Perseus, for that the Macedonian had him bound by hostages; and to entreat, That his sonne, which was taken with the children of Perseus, might be set at libertie for conuenient ransome. His excuse was not taken; since hee had voluntarily obliged himselfe to Perseus, by giuing hostages, with∣out necessitie: Yet was his sonne giuen backe to him ransome-free; with admo∣nition, to carrie himselfe better toward the Romans in time following. His King∣dome lay betweene Macedon and some barbarous Nations; in which respect, it was good to hold him in faire tearmes. As for those vnhappie Kings, Perseus and Gentius, they were ledde through Rome, with their children and friends, in the Triumphs of Aemylius and Ani∣cius. Perseus had often made suite to Aemylius, that hee might not be put to such disgrace: but hee still receiued one skornefull answere, That it lay in his owne power to preuent it; whereby was meant, that hee might kill himselfe. And surely, had hee not hoped for greater mercie than hee found, hee would rather haue sought his death in Macedon, than haue beene beholding to the courtesie of his insolent enemies for a wretched life. The issue of the Roman clemencie, whereof Aemylius had giuen him hope, was no better than this: After that hee, and his fellow King, had beene ledde in chaynes through the streetes, before the Charitos of their triumphing Victors, they were commit∣ted to prison, wherein they remained without hope of release. It was the manner, that when the Triumpher turned his Chariot vp towards the Capitol, there to doe sacrifice, hee should command the captiues to be had away to pri∣son, and there put to death: so as the honour of the Vanquisher, and miserie of those that were ouercome, might be both together at the vtmost. This last sentence of death was remitted vnto Perseus: yet so, that hee had little joy of his life; but eyther famished himselfe, or (for it is diuersly reported) was kept watching perforce by those that had him in custodie; and so died for want of sleepe. Of his sonnes, two died; it is vncertaine how. The youngest called Alexander (onely in name like vnto the Great, though destined sometimes per∣haps by his father, vnto the fortunes of the Great) became a Ioyner, or Turner, or, at his best preferment, a Scribe vnder the Roman Officers. In such ended the Royall House of Macedon: and it ended on the suddaine; though some eightscore yeares after the death of that Monarch, vnto whose ambition this whole Earth seemed too narrow. If Perseus had knowne it before, that his owne sonne should one day bee compelled to earne his liuing by handie-worke, in a painefull Occupation; it is like, that he would not, as in a wantonnesse of Soueraignetie, haue commaunded those poore men to be slaine, which had recouered his treasures out of the sea, by their skill in the feat of diuing. He would rather haue been verie gentle, and would haue considered, that the greatest oppressors, and the most vndertroden wretches, are all subject vnto One high Power, gouerning all alike with absolute command. But such is our vnhappinesse; in stead of that blessed counsaile, Doe as yee would be done vnto, a sentence teaching all moderation, and pointing out the way to feli∣citie, wee entertaine that arrogant thought, I will be like to the Most High: that is, I will doe what shall please my selfe. One hath said truly: -- v v -- Et qui volunt quenquam . Sat. 10. Posse volunt — Euen they that haue no murdrous will, Would haue it in their power to kill. All, or the most, haue a vaine desire of to doe euill without controule: which is a dangerous temptation vnto the performance. GOD, who best can judge what is expedient, hath graunted such power to verie few: among whome also, veric few there are, that vse it not to their owne hurt. For who sees not, that a Prince, by racking his Soucraigne authoritie to the vtmost extent, enableth (be∣sides the danger to his owne person) some one of his owne sonnes or nephewes to root vp all his ? Shall not many excellent Princes, not withstanding their brotherhood, or other neerenesse in bloud, be driuen to flatter the Wife, the Mini∣on, or perhaps the Harlot that gouernes one, the most vnworthie of his whole house, yet raigning ouer all? The vntimely death of manie Princes, which could not humble themselues to such ; and the common practice of the Turkish Emperours to murder all their brethren, without expecting till they offend; are too good proofes . may be added, That the heire of the same Ro∣ger Mortimer, who murdered most traiterously and barbarously King Edward the second; was, by reason of a marriage, proclaimed, in time not long after follow∣ing, heire apparent to the Crowne of England; which had he obtained, then had all the power of Edward fallen into the race of his mortall enemie, to exercise the same vpon the Line of that vnhappie King. Such examples of the instabilitie whereto all mortall affaires are subject; as they teach moderation, and admonish the transitorie Gods of Kingdomes, not to authorize, by wicked precedents, the euill that may fall on their owne posteritie: so doe they necessarily make vs vn∣derstand, how happie that Countrie is, which hath obtained a King able to con∣ceiue and teach, That The true Law of free Mo∣narchies. GOD is the sorest and sharpest Schoolemaster, that can be de∣uised, for such Kings, as thinke this world ordained for them, without controlment to turne it vpside-downe at their pleasure. Now, concerning Triumph of L. Aemylius Paulus; it was in all points like vnto that of T. Quintius Flaminius: though farre more glorious, in regard of the Chap. 3. . 4. Kings person, that was led along therein, as part of his owne spoyles; and in regard likewise both of the Conquest and of the Bootie. So great was the quantitie of Gold and Siluer carried by Paulus into the Roman Treasurie, that from thenceforth, vntill the ciuill Warres, which followed vpon the death of Iu∣lius Coesar, the Estate had no need to burthen it selfe with anie Tribute. Yet was this noble Triumph likely to haue beene hindered by the souldiors; who grud∣ged at their Generall, for not hauing dealt more bountifully with them. But the Princes of the Senate ouer-ruled the People and Souldiors herein, and brought them to reason by exhortations. Thus Paulus enjoyed as much honour of his as men could giue. Neuerthelesse, it pleased GOD to take away from him his two remayning sonnes, that were not giuen in adoption: of which, the died fiue before the Triumph; the other, three dayes after it. This losse hee bore wisely: and told the People, That hee hoped to see the Commonwealth flourish in a continuance of prosperitie; since the joy of his victorie was requited with his owne priuate calamitie, in stead of the publike. About the same time, Octauius the Admirall, who had brought Perseus out of Samothrace: and Anicius the Praetor, who had conquered Illyria, and taken King Gentius prisoner; made their seuerall triumphs. The glory of which magnificent spectacles; together with the of Embassages from all parts; and Kings, either visiting the Imperiall , or offering to visit her, and doe their in person; were to say vnto Rome, , Take vpon thee the Maie∣stie, that thy deserts haue purchased. BY this which we haue alreadie set downe, is seene the beginning and end of the three first Monarchies of the world; whereof the Founders and Ercctours thought, that they could neuer haue ended. That of Rome which made the fourth, was also at this time almost at the highest. We haue left it flourishing in the middle of the field; hauing rooted vp, or cut downe, all that kept it from the eyes and admiration of the world. But after some continuance, it shall begin to lose the beauty it had; the stormes of ambition shall beat her great boughes and branches one against another; her leaues shall fall off, her limbes wither, and a rabble of barbarous Nations enter the field, and cut her downe. Now these great Kings, and conquering Nations, haue bin the subiect of those ancient Histories, which haue beene preserued, and yet remaine among vs; and withall of so many tragicall Poets, as in the persons of powerfull Princes, and o∣ther mightie haue complained against , Time, Destinie, and most of all against the Variable successe of worldly things, and Instabilitie of Fortune. To these vndertakings, the Lords of the world haue beene stirred vp, rather by the desire of Fame, which ploweth vp the , and soweth in the Winde; than by the affection of bearing rule, which draweth after it so much vexation, and so many cares. And that this is true, the good aduice of Cineas to Pyrrhus proues. And certainly, as hath often dangerous to the liuing, so is it to the dead of no vse at all; because separate from knowledge. Which were it otherwise, and the extreme ill bargaine of buying this lasting , vnder∣stood by them which are dissolued; they themselues would then rather haue wi∣shed, to haue stolne out of the world without noise; than to be put in minde, that they haue purchased the report of their actions in the world, by , oppressi∣on, and crueltie, by giuing in spoile the innocent and labouring soule to the idle and insolent, and by hauing emptied the Cities of the world of their ancient Inha∣bitants, and filled them againe with so many and so variable sorts of sorrowes. Since the fall of the Roman Empire (omitting that of the Germanes, which had neither greatnesse nor continuance) there hath been no State fearefull in the East, but that of the Turke; nor in the West any Prince that hath spred his wings farre ouer his nest, but the Spaniard; who the time that Ferdinand expelled the Moores out of Granado, haue made many attempts to make themselues Masters of all Europe. And it is true, that by the treasures of both Indies, and by the many Kingdomes which they posfesse in Europe, they are at this day the moft power∣full. But as the Turke is now counterpoised by the Persian, so in stead of so many Millions as haue been spent by the English, French, and Netherlands in a defensiue war, and in diuersions against them, it is to demonstrate, that with the charge of two hundred thousand pound continued but for two yeares or three at the most, they may not only be perswaded to liue in peace, but all their swelling and ouerflowing streames may be brought backe into their naturall channels and old bankes. These two Nations, I say, are at this day the most eminent, and to be regarded; the one seeking to roote out the Christian Religion altogether, the other the truth and sincere profession thereof, to all Europe to Asia, the other the rest of all Europe to Spaine. For the rest, if we seeke a reason of the succession and continuance of this ambition in mortall men, we may to that which hath bin already said; That the Kings and Princes of the world haue alwayes laid before them, the acti∣ons, but not the ends of those great Ones which praeceded them. They are al∣wayes transported with the glorie of the one, but they neuer minde the miserie of the other, till they find the experience in themselues. They neglect the aduice of GOD, while they enioy life, or hope it; but they follow the counsell of Death, vpon his first approach. It is he that puts into man all the wisdome of the world, without speaking a word; which GOD with all the words of his Law, promises, or threats, doth not infuse. Death, which hateth and destroyeth man, is beleeued; GOD, which hath made him and loues him, is alwayes deferred. I haue considered (saith SALOMON) all the workes that are vnder the Sunne, and behold, all is vanitie, and vexation of spirit: but who beleeues it, till Death tells it vs? It was Death, which opening the conscience of Charles the fift, made him enjoyne his sonne Philip to restore Nauarre; and King Francis the first of France, to command that justice should be done vpon the Murderers of the Protestants in and Ca∣brieres, which till then he neglected. It is therefore Death alone that can sud∣denly make man to know himselfe. He tells the proud and insolent, that they are but Abiects, and humbles them at the instant; makes them crie, complaine, and repent, yea, euen to hate their forepassed happinesse. He takes the account of the rich, and proues him a begger; a naked begger, which hath interest in nothing, but in the grauell that filles his mouth. He holds a Glasse before the eyes of the most beautifull, and makes them see therein, their deformitie and rottennesse; and acknowledge it. O eloquent, just and mightie Death! whom none could aduise, thou hast perswaded; what none hath dared, thou hast done; and whom all the world hath flattered, thou onely hast cast out of the world and despised: thou hast drawne together all the farre stretched greatnesse, all the , crueltie, and am∣bition of man, and couered it all ouer with these two narrow words, Hîc iacet. Lastly, whereas this Booke, by the title it hath, calles it selfe, The first part of the Generall Historie of the World, implying a Second and Third Volume; which I also intended, and haue hewne out; besides many other discouragements, perswading my silence; it hath pleased GOD to take that glorious Prince out of the world, to whom they were directed; whose vnspeakeable and neuer enough lamented losse, hath taught me to say with , Versa est in Luctum Citbara mea, & Organum meum in vocem flentium. FINIS. ¶ To the Reader. THe vse of Chronologicall Tables is needfull to all Histories, that reach to anie length of time; and most of all, to those that are most generall: since they cannot, like Annales, yearely set downe all Occurrences not cohoe∣rent. This heere following, may serue as an Index to the present Part of this Worke; pointing vnto the seuer all matters, that hauing fallen out at one time, are farre disioyned in the Relation. Certainely it is not perfect: nei∣ther doe I thinke, that anie can be. For howsoeuer the yeares of the first Patriarchs may seeme to haue beene well-neere compleat, yet in the raignes of the Kings of Iuda and Israel, wee finde manie fractions, and the last yeare, or yeares, of one King reckc∣ned also as the formost of another. The same is most likely to haue fallen out in manie other; though not so precisely recorded. Hereto may be added the diuerse and imperfect formes of the yeare, which were in vse among sundrie Nations: causing the See Lib. . Chap. 3. §. 6. Summer Moneths, in processe of some Ages, to fall into the Winter; and so breeding extreme confusion in the reckoning of their times. Neither is it a small part of trouble, to , out of so manie, and so disagreeing computations, as haue alreadie gotten au∣thoritie, what may probably be held for truth. All this, and a great deale more, is to be , in excuse of such error as a more intentiue and perfect Calculator shall happen to finde herein. It may serue to free the Booke, and likewise the Reader (if but of meane iudgement) from anie notorious Anachronicisme; which ought to suffice. The Booke in∣deed will need it, euen in that regard; not onely for some errors of the Presse, in the num∣bring of yeares, but for some hastie mis-reckonings of mine owne; which I desire to haue hereby reformed, in that the printing of this Table shall not want carefull diligence. The Reader, if he be not offended with the rest, shall finde reason to be pleased with this, as tending wholly to his owne ease. The Titles ouer the Columnes, reference to that which followes vnder them; as will readily be conceiued. Where two Titles, or more, are ouer the head, as Rome Nabonassar there doe the numbers vnderneath answere proportionably, the higher to the higher, the lower to the lower. For example: The walls of Ierusalem were finished in the 319. yeare from the building of Rome, and in the 314. from NABONASSAR. In like manner it is to be , That IEHOSOPHAT began his in the 3774. of the IVLIAN Aera, in the 3092. of the World, and in the 99. yeare os the Temple. This needes not more illustration; nor indeede so much, to those that are acquainted with workes of this kinde. To auoid prolixitie, I haue forborne to insert those yeares, which I finde not signed with some accident: as with the birth or death of some Patriarch; the beginning of some Kings Raigne; some change of Gouernment; some Battaile fought; or the like. So, of the 13. yeares wherein SYLVIVS CAPETVS raigned ouer the Latines, I note onely the first; that is, omitting betweene the 4. of IEHOSOPHAT, wherein CAPETVS began, vnto the 17, wherein SYLVIVS A∣VENTINVS succeeded, and wherein IEHORAM st raigned with IEHOSOPHAT his father. For I thouht it vaine to filled vp a Page with 12. lines of idle cyphers; numbring 2. 3. 4. 5. and so still onwards, till I had come to the first of AVENTI∣NVS, and 17. of IEHOSOPHAT. In setting downe the Kings, there is noted ouer the head of euerie one, what place he held in order of Succession; as whether he were the first, second, fift, seuenth, or so forth, in ranke, of those that raigned in his Countrey, with∣out notable interruption: Before the name is the first yeare of his raigne; at the end, or of the name (as the space giues leaue) is the whole number of yeares in which he raigned; in the spaces following are those yeares of his, which concurrent with the be∣ginning of some other King, or with the yeare of anie remarkable accident. Where two numbers, or more, are found before one Kings name, there is it to be vnderstood, that the same yeare belonged, not onely to the King then beginning, but vnto some one, or more, of his fore-goers: as the first yeare of IEHORAM King of Isracl was the same with the se∣cond of his brother AHAZIA, and the 22. of his father AHAB. So, where two or three names are found in one space; as in the 3077. yeare of the World, ZIMRI, TIBNI, and OMRI: it is meant, that euerie one of them raigned in some part of the same yeare; which is reckoned the second of ELA, and the first of OMRI. Particularly, vnder the yeares of the Aegyptian Kings are set downe the yeares of those DYNASTIES, which it was thought meet to insert; as likewise, otherwhiles, the day of the moneth vpon which NABONASSARS yeare began: which, how it varied from other yeares, may be found in the place last aboue cited. Concerning the Aera, or accompt of yeres, from IPHITVS, who began the Olympiads, from Rome built, from NABONASSAR, and the like; as much as was thought conueni∣ent hath beene said, where due place was, in the Booke it selfe: so as it remaineth onely to note, that vnder the title of Olympiads is set downe first the number of the Olympiad, and beneath it, the yeare of that Olympiad: as that CYRVS began his raigne in Persia, in the 55. Olympiad, and the first yeare thereof. Now, for that the yeares of the World, of the Olympiads, of Rome, of NABONAS∣SAR, and other, had not beginning in one month, but some of them in March, some in A∣pril, some about Midsummer, and some at other times: the better to expresse their beginnings, some painefull Chronologers haue diuided them proportionably in their seue∣rall Columnes; opposing part of the one yeare to part of the other: not (as I haue here done) cutting all ouer thwart with one streight line, as if all had begun and ended at one time. But this labour haue I spared, as more troublesome than vsefull; since the more part would not haue apprehended the meaning, and since the learned might well be without it. It will onely be needfull to obserue, that howsoeuer the Aera of the Olympiads be 24. yeares elder than that of Rome, and 29, than that of NABONASSAR, yet the raigne of some King may haue begun at such a time of the yeare as did not sute with this difference. But hereof I take little regard. The more curious will easily finde my meaning: the vulgar will not finde the difficultie. One familiar example may explane all. Queene ELIZABETH began her raigne the 17. of Nouember, in the yeare of our LORD 1558: Shee was crowned; held a Parliament; brake it vp; threw downe Images; and reformed manie things in Re∣ligion; all in her first yeare: yet not all in that yeare 1558, but the greater part in the yeare following; whether we begin with the first of Ianuarie, or with the 25. of March. The like may be otherwhiles found in this Table; but so, as the difference is neuer of a whole yeare. The IVLIAN Period, which I haue placed, as the greater number, ouer the yeares of the World, was deuised by that honorable and excellently learned IOSEPH SCALIGER: being accommodated to the IVLIAN yeares, now in vse among vs. It consisteth of 7980 yeares; which result from the multiplication of 19. 28. and 15, that is, of the Cycle of the Moone, the Cycle of the Sunne, and the yeares of an Indiction. Being diuided by anie of these, it leaues the number of the present yeare; or if no fraction remaine, it shewes the last yeare of that Cycle to be current. For example: in the 4498. of this Period, when was fought the great battaile of Cannae, the Prime or Golden number was 14, the Cycle of the Sunne 18, and consequently the Dominicall letter F. as may be found by diuiding the same number of the IVLIAN Period 4498, by 19. for the Prime, by 28. for the Cycle of the Sunne. This IVLIAN Perioà, after the present accompt, alwayes exceedes the yeares of the World by 682. Besides the former vses, and other thence redounding, it is a better Character of a yeare, than anie other Aera (as From the beginning of the World, From the Floud, From Troy taken, or the like) which are of more vncertaine po∣sition. More I shall not need to write, as touching the vse or explication of these Tables. Nei∣ther was thus much requisite to such as are conuersant in workes of this kinde: it sufficeth if hereby all be made plaine enough to the vulgar. A CHRONOLOGICALL TABLE. YEERES OF THE JVLIAN PERIOD, WORLD, PATRIARCHS, &c. Iulian, The World, and Adam 683 1. Adā 920 813 131 1. Seth 912 918 236 106 1. Enos 905 1008 326 196 91 1. Ca ∣nan. 910 All the yeeres of the Patriarchs, wherein they begate children, dyed, or performed any thing, are reckoned compleat: which is inferred out of the addition of the yeres before they begate children, vnto those that followed; making alwayes a compleate summe. GEN. 5. 1078 396 266 161 71 1. Ma∣halaleel. 895. 1143 461 331 226 136 66 1. a∣red. 962 1305 623 493 388 298 228 163 1. E¦noch. 265 1370 688 558 453 363 293 228 66 1. Me∣thuselah 969 1557 875 745 640 550 480 415 253 188 1. La∣mech. 777 Adam dyed a∣bout the end of this yeere. 1612 930 800 695 605 535 470 308 243 56 Henoch translated. 1669 987 857 752 662 592 527 365 300 113 Seth ay ed a∣bout the end of this yeere. 1724 1042 912 807 717 647 582 355 168 1739 1057 822 732 662 597 370 183 1. No∣ah. 950 Iulian. The World Enos. Cai∣nan. Maha laleel. lared. Mc∣thuse∣lah. La∣mech. Noak. Sem. Enos dyed. 1822 1140 905 815 745 680 453 266 84 Cainan dyed. 1917 1235 910 842 775 548 361 179 Mahalaleel dyed this yeere. 1972 1290 895 830 603 416 234 Iared dyed. 2104 1422 735 584 366 Floud threatned, GEN. 6. 3. 2219 1537 850 663 481 2241 1559 872 685 503 .Sem. 600 Lamech dyed. 2333 1651 964 777 595 93 Methusaleh yeere a before the Floud. Noah into the Arke. C. 7. §. 8. & 9. The Floud. 2338 1656 969 600 98 The Floud : Noah issued out of the Arke. 2339 1657 601 99 Iulian. World. Floud. Noah. Sem. 1. Ar∣phaxad 438 2341 1659 603 101 2376 1694 37 638 136 36 1. Sa∣lah. 433 2406 1724 67 668 166 66 31 1. He∣ber. 464 2440 1758 101 702 200 100 65 35 1. Pe∣leg. Kings of As∣syria. 2470 1788 1 1 732 230 130 95 65 31 1. Reu. 239 1. Nim rod. 114 2502 1820 163 764 262 162 127 97 63 33 33 1. Sa∣rug. 2 0 Kings of Ae∣gypt. Vide lib. 2. c. 2. §. 2. 2530 1848 191 792 290 190 155 125 91 61 61 29 1 Cham 161 2532 1850 193 694 292 192 157 127 93 63 63 31 3 1. Na∣hor. 148 2561 1879 222 1. Te∣rah. 205 823 321 221 186 156 122 92 92 69 32 30 2584 1902 245 846 344 244 209 179 145 115 2 1. Bel{us} 65 83 55 53 24 Iulian. VVorld. Floud Noah. Sem. Arpha¦xad. Salah. Heber. Peleg. Reu. Assyria Sarug. Egypt. Nahor Terah. Kings of Sicyon. 2618 1936 279 880 378 278 243 213 179 149 35 117 89 87 58 1 AEgy ∣leus. 5 2649 1967 310 911 409 309 274 244 210 180 3 1. Ni∣nus. 52 148 120 118 89 32 2670 1988 331 932 430 330 295 265 231 201 22 169 141 139 110 2 1. Eu∣rops. 45 The last yeere of Peleg his life. 2678 1996 339 940 438 338 303 273 239 209 30 177 149 147 118 9 The death of Nahor. 2679 1997 340 941 439 339 304 274 210 31 178 150 148 119 10 Noah dyed this yeere. 2688 2006 349 950 448 348 313 283 219 40 187 159 128 19 The 16. Dynastie in Egypt. Vid. L. 2 c. 2. §. 3, 4, 5, & c. 2691 2009 352 451 351 316 286 222 43 190 2 . Miz¦raim or O∣siris, 261 131 22 1. A¦bram. 175 2701 2019 362 461 361 326 296 232 4 1. Semira∣mis, 42 200 11 141 32 11 The last yeere of Reu. 2708 2026 369 468 368 333 303 239 8 207 18 148 39 18 2715 2033 369 475 375 340 310 15 214 25 155 3 1. Telchin or S lchin, 20 25 The last of Sarug. 2731 2049 392 491 391 356 326 31 230 41 171 17 41 Julian. VVorld, Floud. Sem. Arphaxad. Salah. Heber. Assyria. Aegypt. Terah. Sicyon. Abram. 2735 2053 396 495 395 360 330 35 45 175 4 1. Apis, 25. 45 2743 2061 404 503 403 368 338 5 1. Ninias, 38 53 183 9 53 2760 2078 421 520 420 385 355 18 70 200 5 1. Thelxion or Thelasion. 5 70 Abram receiues the Promise. Terah dyes in. Haran 1. 2. c. 1. §. 1, 2, 3. 2765 2083 426 525 425 390 360 23 75 205 6 75 Iulian, World. Promis . Sem. Arphaxad. Salah. Heber. Abram. Assyria. Aegypt. Sicyon. Abram enters into Canaan, and descends nto Egypt. The first of the 430. yeeres of Seruitude 2766 2084 1 526 426 391 361 76 24 76 7 Abram returnes into Canaan. 2767 2085 2 527 427 392 362 77 25 77 8 Abram his victo∣rie ouer Chedorlao¦mer, & other Kings l. 2. c. 1. §. 8, 9. &c. 2775 2093 10 535 435 400 370 85 33 85 16 Ismael borne. 2777 2095 12 537 437 402 372 87 35 87 18 Arphaxad dyes. 2778 2096 13 538 438 403 373 88 36 88 19 Iulian. World. Promis . Sem. Salah. Heber. Abra∣ham. Assyria Aegypt. Sicyon. 2781 2099 16 541 406 376 91 6 1. Ari∣us 30 91 22 Isaac borne when Abraham was 100. yeeres old compleate 101. current. 2791 2109 26 551 416 386 101 11 101 32 1. Isaac 180 The last yeere of Salah. 2808 2126 43 568 433 403 118 28 118 49 18 2811 2129 46 571 406 121 7 1 Ara∣lius 40 121 52 21 2812 2130 47 572 407 122 2 122 6 1. AEgy∣rus, 34 22 Sarai the wife of Abraham dyed this yeere. 2827 2145 62 587 422 137 17 137 16 37 Isaac tooke Rebecca to wife, when he was 40. yeeres old compleate. 2831 2149 66 591 426 141 21 141 20 41 The last yeere of Sem. 3840 2158 75 600 435 150 30 150 29 50 Iulian. World. Promise. Heber. Abra∣ham. Isaac. Iacob. Assyria Aegypt. Sicyon. Ar∣giues. 2846 2164 81 441 156 56 36 156 7 1. Thuri∣machus, 45 2851 2169 86 446 161 61 1 Iacob 147 8 1. Ba∣leus 3 161 6 1. Ina∣chus, 50 Abraham dyed this yeere. 2865 2183 100 460 175 75 15 15 175 20 15 Heber dyed this yeere. 2869 2187 104 464 79 19 19 179 24 19 The 17. Dynestie, called of the Shep∣heards, beginning this yeere, lasted 103. yeeres. 2881 2199 116 91 31 9 1. Arma∣mithre , 38 191 1 36 31 2891 2209 126 101 41 11 201 11 8 1. Leucip∣pus, 53 41 2901 2219 136 111 51 21 211 21 11 2 1. Ph ro∣neus, 60 The floud of Ogyges, a thousand and twentie yeeres before the Olympiads. See L. 1. c. 7. §. 2. 2919 2237 154 129 69 10 1 Belochus Priseus, 35 229 39 29 19 2942 2260 177 152 92 24 252 62 52 42 1. Io∣seph. 110 1944 2262 179 154 94 26 254 64 9 1. Messa¦pius, 47 44 3 See L. 2. c. 2. §. 6. 2952 2270 187 162 102 34 3 & 4 1. Typhon, and after him Hercul. 7. 72 9 52 11 2954 2272 189 164 104 11 1. Ba∣leus 52 3 74 11 54 13 Iulian. World. Promise. Isaac. Iacob. Assyria Egypt. Sicyon. Argiues. Ioseph sold into Aegypt. 2959 2277 104 169 109 6 5 1 . 79 11 16 50 18 2961 2279 196 171 111 8 3 81 18 3 1. Apis. 35 20 The last yeere of Isaac. 2970 2298 215 180 120 17 12 90 27 10 9 Israel into Aegypt. 2980 2298 215 130 27 22 100 37 20 39 The eighteenth Dynastie in Aegypt, which lasted 348. yeeres. 2984 2302 219 1 4 31 26 1 41 24 43 2991 2309 226 141 38 33 8 10 1 Pera∣ us, 6 31 50 2996 2314 231 146 43 1 6 4 1. Argus, 55 Iacob. dyes in Aegypt. 2997 2315 232 147 44 7 56 Iulian. World. Promise. Ioseph. Assyria. Aegypt. Sicyon. Argines. 3006 2324 241 65 12 1. Al ades, 32 48 23 16 11 3037 2355 272 96 32 79 54 11 1. Pl ∣ aus, 4 42 3038 2356 273 97 13 1. Mamit{us}, 0 80 55 2 43 The last yeere of Ioseph. 3051 2369 286 110 14 93 68 15 56 066 2384 301 29 108 83 0 5 . P r sus, or Cr sus, 5 068 2386 203 14 1. Mancaleus, 0 110 85 32 3 3074 2392 30 7 6 1. esos is the Great 3 91 38 9 3085 2403 320 18 12 102 12 1. Orth∣polis, 6 20 3098 2416 333 15 1. Spherus or phereus, 20. 25 115 14 33 3107 2425 342 10 1 Sesostris the second 14 124 23 42 3116 2434 351 1. Moses. 120 19 10 133 32 51 Iulian World. Promise. Moses Assyria. Aegypt. Sicyon. Argiues. 3118 2436 353 3 16 1. Mamilas, or Mamelus. 30 12 135 34 53 3120 2438 355 5 3 14 137 36 6 1 Phor¦bas. 35 3121 2439 356 6 4 8 1. Or{us}, 2. or Bu¦siris, 38. 138. 37 2 Athe∣nians. 3148 2466 383 33 17 1. Sparetus, 40 28 165 13 1. Marathius, 30 29 3151 2469 386 36 4 31 168 4 32 1. ops. 50 Moses visites his brethren the Israelites; kills an Aegyptian, and flyes into Midian. 3155 2473 390 40 8 35 172 8 7 1. Trio∣pas, 46 5 3159 2477 394 44 12 9 1. Therm is. or A∣cench r s. Qu. 2. 176 12 5 9 3171 2489 406 56 24 10 1. Ratheris, or Achoris, 9. 188 24 17 21 3178 2496 413 63 31 8 195 14 1. Marathus, 20. 24 28 3180 2498 415 65 33 11 1. Ch cres, 16 197 3 26 30 3188 2506 423 73 18 1. Ascatades. 40 9 205 11 34 38 Moses his wonders in Aegypt. 3195 2513 430 80 8 16 212 18 41 45 Iulian. World. Exodus. Moses. Assyria. Aegypt. Sicyon. Argos. Athens The Passeouer. Israel deliuered out of Egypt. Pha∣raoh drowned. The Law giuen. The first of the 480. yeeres from Exodus to building the Temple. 3196 2514 1 81 9 12 1. Acherres, 8. 213 19 42 46 The Floud of Deucalion, and Constagra∣tion of Phaeton about this time. 3198 2516 3 83 11 3 215 15 1. Echireus, 55. 44 48 3201 2519 6 86 14 6 218 4 8 1. Croto∣pus, 21 2 1. Cra∣na s. 10 3204 2522 9 89 17 13 1. Cherres, 15 221 7 4 4 3211 2529 16 96 24 8 228 14 11 3 1. Amphy∣tryon, 12 3219 2537 24 104 32 14 1. Armeus, or Danaus, 5. 236. 22 19 9 3222 2540 27 107 35 4 239 25 9 1. S hen ∣lus, 11 12 Iulian. World. Exodus. Moses Assyria. Aegypt. Sicyon. Argos. Athens 3223 2541 28 108 36 5 240 26 2 4 . Erictho∣nius. 50 3224 2542 29 109 37 15 1. Ramesses, 68 241 27 3 2 Troy. 3228 2546 33 113 19 1. Amyntas, 45 5 245 31 7 6 3229 2547 34 114 2 6 246 32 8 7 1 . Darda¦nu , 64 3233 2551 38 118 6 10 250 36 10 1. Da∣nau , 0 11 5 The Last yeere of Moses. 3235 2553 40 120 8 12 252 38 3 13 7 Iulian. World. Exodus. Israel. Assyria. Aegypt. Sicyon. Argos. Athens Troy. The Israelites enter the Land of Promise. 3236 2554 41 1 Iosua 18 9 13 253 39 4 14 8 3253 2571 58 18 26 30 270 16 1. Corax, 30 21 31 25 3254 2572 59 2 1 Otho∣niel, 40 27 31 271 2 22 32 26 3273 2591 78 20 20 1. Belochus the second. 25. 50 290 21 41 5 1. Pan∣diŏ, 40 45 3283 2601 88 30 11 60 300 17 1. Epopeus, 35 11 2. Lyn∣ce{us}, 41 11 55 3292 2610 97 39 20 16 1. Menophis, 309 40. 10 10 20 64 3293 2611 98 40 21 2 310 11 11 21 2 1. Erictho∣nius. 46 3294 2612 99 3 1 Ehud 80 22 3 311 12 12 22 2 3298 2616 103 5 21 1. Belopares. 30 7 315 16 16 26 6 3313 2631 118 20 16 22 330 31 31 6 1. Er cth ∣us. 50 21 3318 2636 123 25 21 27 335 18 1. Lamedon. 40 36 6 26 3324 2642 129 31 27 33 341 7 12 1. A∣bas. 23 12 32 3328 2646 133 35 22 1. Lamprides, 32. 37 345 11 5 16 36 The 19. Dynastie: of the Larthes, 194. yeeres. See lib. 2. c. 26. §. 4. 3332 2650 137 39 5 17 1 Zethus, or Sethesis, 55 1 15 9 20 40 3339 2657 144 46 12 8 8 22 16 27 3 1 Tros. 60 Tantalus in Phrygia. 3347 2665 152 54 20 16 16 30 13 1. Proe∣tus, 17 35 9 3358 2676 163 65 31 27 27 19 1. Si on, 45. 12 46 20 3360 2678 165 67 23 1. Sosares, 20 29 29 3 14 48 22 3363 2681 168 70 4 32 32 6 17 7 1. Cecrops the second, 40 25 Pelops in Pisa, who gaue name to Pe∣lopo n sus. 3364 2682 169 71 5 33 33 7 14 . Acri∣sus, 31 2 26 Ion and Xuthus the sonne of Hellen. See l. 2. c. 17. §. 6. 3374 2692 179 4 1. Debora & Ba. 40 15 43 43 17 11 12 36 3380 2698 185 7 24 1. Lampares, 0 49 48 23 17 18 42 3387 2705 192 14 8 18 1. Ramses, 66. 56 30 24 25 49 After the death of Acrisius, the Kingdome of the Argines was diuided into many small parts, and ouer∣grown▪ by that of Mye na whereof some Kings des ended from Perse , others from Pelops, as in the Pedegree ollowing. 3394 2712 199 21 15 8 63 37 31 32 56 genealogy lulian. World. Exodus. Israel. Assyria. Egypt. Sicyon. Mice∣nae. Athens Troy. 3399 2717 204 26 20 13 68 42 37 4 1. Ilus, 55. 3402 2720 207 29 23 16 71 45 1 Euri¦stheus, 45 40 4 3403 2721 208 30 24 17 72 20 1. Poly∣bus. 40 2 8 Pa dion the 2. 2 5 3410 2728 215 37 25 1. Pannias, 45 24 79 8 9 8 12 3414 2732 219 5 1. Gede∣on, 40. 5 28 83 12 13 12 16 Pandion chased out of his Kingdome, which is re∣couered by his sonne Aegeus, in few yeeres after. The omission of this Interregnum, and reckoning the yeeres in the fortie eight of , or the numbring them a∣part by themselues, breede answerable difference in the times of the Athenians following: as of Mnestheus, Carops, and the rest. 3427 2745 232 14 18 41 96 25 26 25 29 3432 2750 237 19 23 46 101 30 31 9 1. 48. 34 Oedipus in Thebes. 3443 2761 248 30 34 57 112 21 1. Ina∣chus 42 42 12 45 3447 2765 252 34 38 61 116 5 1. Atreus and Thye∣ es,. 65 16 49 3453 2771 258 40 44 19 1. Amenophis, 122 40 11 7 22 55 3454 2772 259 6 1. Abime∣lech, 3. 45 2 123 12 8 23 5 1. Laomedon, 36 3455 2773 260 2 26 1. Sosarmus 19 3 124 13 9 24 2 3457 2775 262 7 1. Tho∣la, 23 3 5 126 15 11 26 4 3474 2792 379 18 27 1. Mitreus 27 22 143 32 28 43 21 3480 2798 285 8 1. Iair. 22 7 28 149 38 34 10 1. The∣seus, 30 27 3485 2803 290 6 12 33 154 22 1. Phe∣stus, 8. 39 6 32 3490 2808 295 11 17 38 159 6 44 11 6 1. Priamus, 40 3493 2811 298 14 20 20 1. Annemenes, 162 26 23 1. Adra∣stus, 4 47 14 4 3497 2815 302 18 24 5 166 24 1. Poly∣phides 31 51 18 8 3501 2819 306 22 28 1. Ta tanes 32 9 170 5 55 22 12 Iulian. World. Exodus. Israel. Assyria. Egypt. Sicyon. Mice∣nae. Athens Troy. 3502 2820 307 9 1. leph¦ta, 6. 2 10 171 6 56 23 13 3508 2826 313 10 1. Ib∣zan. 7. 8 16 177 12 62 29 19 3510 2828 215 3 10 18 179 14 64 11 1. Mne¦sthe{us} 24 21 3512 2830 317 5 12 20 181 16 1. Aga∣memnon, 18 3 23 3515 2833 320 11 1. Elon 10 15 23 184 19 4 6 26 The warre of Troy beganne this yeere. 3519 2837 324 5 19 21 1. Thuoris, 7 188 23 8 10 30 3525 2843 330 12 1. Ab∣don, 8. 25 7 194 29 14 16 36 The 20. Dynastie, called Of the Diapo∣litani, beganne this yeere in Aegypt, and lasted 178. yeeres, See lib. 2. c. 26. §. 4. 3526 2844 331 2 26 20 1. Dynastie. 178 30 15 17 37 3528 2846 333 4 28 3 25 1. Pelas∣gus, 20. 17 19 39 Troy taken 408. yeeres, before the be∣ginning of the Olympiads, See l. 2. c. 14. §. 1. 3529 2847 334 5 29 4 2 18 20 40. Troy ta∣ken. Iulian. World. Exodus. From Troy taken. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Sicyon. Myce∣nae. Athens The King∣dome of the Latines. 3530 2848 335 1 6 30 5 3 1. Aegy∣sthus, 6. 21 3533 2851 338 4 13 1. Samson, 20. 29 1. Teu∣teus 40 8 6 4 24 1. Aeneas, 3. 3534 2852 3 9 5 2 2 9 7 5 12 1. D mo∣phon, 33 2 3536 2854 341 7 4 4 11 9 1. Ore∣stes, 70 3 2 1. Ascanius, 38 3548 2866 353 19 16 16 23 26 1. Zeu∣sippus 32 13 15 13 3553 2871 358 2 14 1. Eli. 40. 21 28 6 18 20 18 3567 2885 372 38 15 35 42 20 32 13 1. Oxyn∣ es, 12. 32 3573 2891 378 44 21 30 1. Thy∣neus 0 48 26 38 7 38 3574 2892 379 45 22 2 49 27 39 8 3 1. Syl. Posthu∣mus, 29. Iulian. World. Exodus. From Troy taken. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Sicyon. Myce∣nae. Athens The King∣dome of the Latines. The Sycionian Kings ended in Zeusippus. 3579 2897 284 50 27 7 54 32 44 14 1. Apui∣las, 1. 6 3580 2898 385 51 28 8 55 45 15 1. Timoe∣ es, 8. 7 3588 2906 393 59 36 16 63 53 16 1. Melan∣thus, 37. 15 3593 2911 308 64 15 1. Samuel, and after him Saul, 40. 21 68 58 6 20 3603 2921 408 74 11 31 1. De ci∣lus, 40. 78 68 16 4 1. Syluius Ae∣neas, 31. 3606 2924 411 77 14 4 81 1. Tesame∣nus, 2. 19 4 The de cen of the Heracl e unto Peloponnesus, gaue end to the Kingdome of Mycenae, and beginning to the Kingdome of Sparta, Corinth, and Messon , the Kings whereof I forbeare to in∣sert into this Table. 3609 2927 414 80 17 7 84 22 7 3625 2943 430 96 33 23 100 17 1. Co∣dr{us}, 21 23 Iulian World. Exodus. From Troy taken. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens Latines. 3633 2951 438 104 1. Dauid, 40. 31 108 9 31 3634 2952 439 105 2 32 109 10 5 1. Syl. La¦tinus, 50. 3643 2961 448 114 11 32 1. Eupa¦les, 38. 118 19 10 The Medontidae succeede vnto the A∣thenian Kings, after the death of Codrus. See L. 2. C. 17. §. 10. 3646 2964 451 117 14 4 121 1 1. Me∣d n, 20 13 13 3666 2984 471 137 34 24 141 2 1. Aga∣stus, 36. 33 Vaphres reigneth in Aegypt. See L. 2. C. 26. §. 5. 3673 2991 478 Tem∣ple 1. 144 1. Salomon, 40 31 148 8 40 Salomon beganne to build the Temple 480. yeeres compleat after the deliuerance out of Aegypt. 3676 2994 481 1 147 4 34 151 11 43 3681 2999 6 152 9 33 1. Laosth ∣nes, 45. 156 16 48 3684 3002 9 155 12 4 159 19 6 1. Syl. Alba 39. 3692 3010 17 163 20 12 1. Sesac 26 167 27 9 3702 3020 27 173 30 22 11 177 3 1. Archip¦pus, 19. 19 Iulian. World. Tem∣ple. From Troy taken. Israel. Assyria. Egypt. Athens Latines. The 21. Dynastie in Aegypt, which la∣sted 130. yeeres. 3704 3022 29 175 32 24 13 1 3 21 The on ck migration after the taking of Troy 180. yeeres. See L. 2. C. 17. §. 6. 3709 3027 34 180 37 29 18 6 8 26 Iulian. World. Temple. Troy. Iuda. Israel. Assyria. Egypt. Athens Latines. 3713 3031 38 184 1 1. Rehoboam, 17. 1 1. leroboam, 22. 33 22 10 12 30 3718 3036 43 189 6 6 8 1. Chem∣ is, 50 15. 17 35 721 3039 46 192 9 9 41 4 18 4 1. Tersip∣pus, 41. 38 3723 3041 48 194 11 11 43 6 20 3 7 1. Syl. A∣ ys, 26. 3726 3044 51 197 14 14 34 1. Pyrithiades 0 9 23 6 4 7 0 3048 55 201 2 1. Ab am, 3. 18 5 13 27 10 8 3733 3051 58 204 3 1. Asa, 41. 21 8 16 30 13 11 37 4 3052 59 205 2 22 2 1. Nadab. 2. 9 17 31 14 12 3735 3053 60 206 3 2 3. 1. Baasha, 24. 10 18 32 15 13 3749 0 7 74 220 17 15 24 32 46 29 8 1. Syl. C pys, 28 3756 3074 81 227 24 22 35 1. Ophrateus, 20 39 53 36 8 3758 3076 83 229 26 24 4 1. Ela, 2. 3 41 55 38 10 Of these Israelitish Kings. See lib. 2. c. 19. §. 5. 3759 3077 84 230 27 2 1 5 Zimri. 6 Tibui. 7 Omri. 12. 4 42 56 39 11 3762 3080 87 233 30 4 7 45 59 5 1. Phor∣bas, 31. 14 3768 3086 93 239 36 10 13 1. Che∣ops, 56. 65 7 20 3770 3088 5 241 38 12 8 1. Ahab, 22. 15 3 67 9 22 3774 092 99 245 4 1. Iehosaphat, 5 5 19 7 71 13 26 Iulian. World. Temple. Troy. Iuda. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens La∣tines. 3776 3094 101 247 3 7 36 1. Ophra∣ e , 50. 9 73 15 28 3777 3095 102 248 4 8 2 10 74 16 9 1. Syl. Ca¦p us, 13 Of Iehoram his sundrie beginnings to reigne. See lib. 2. c. 20. §. 1. & 2. 3790 3108 115 261 17 5 1. Iehoram. 21 9 1. Ahazia, 2. 15 23 87 29 10 1. Syl. Ty∣bermus, 8 3791 3109 116 262 18 2 22 2 10 1. I horam, 12. 16 24 88 30 2 3793 3111 118 264 20 0 3 18 26 90 6 1. Meza∣les, 30. 4 3795 3113 120 266 22 1. Iehoram againe, 8. 5 20 28 92 3 6 Iehosaphat dies, and Iehoram reignes alone. 3798 3116 123 269 25 4 8 23 31 95 6 11 1. yl. A¦gr pa, 41. 3802 3120 127 273 8 6 1. Ahazia. 1. 12 27 5 99 10 3803 3121 128 274 7 1. Athalia, 7 11 1. Iehu, 28. 28 36 100 11 6 3809 3127 134 280 7 8 1. Ioas. 40. 7 34 42 106 17 12 Carthage built. L. 2. c. 22. §. 6. 3819 3137 144 290 11 17 44 52 116 27 22 3825 3143 148 294 15 21 48 56 120 7 1. Diogne∣ us, 28. 26 3824 3142 149 295 16 22 49 1. C phr ∣ s, 50. 121 2 27 3826 3144 151 297 18 24 37 Oc azapes or 1. Ana y ¦ araxes 42 3 123 4 29 3831 3149 156 302 23 12 1. Iehoabaz. 17 6 8 128 9 34 The end of the 21. Dynastie. The Dy∣nasties following, l omit. 3833 3151 158 304 25 3 8 10 130 11 36 3839 3157 164 310 31 9 14 16 17 12 1. Syl. Al∣ladius, 19 Ioas reigned with his Father. Lib. 2. c. 22. §. 7. 3845 3163 170 316 37 15 13 1. Ioas. 20 22 23 7 Ioas reignes alone. 3847 3165 172 318 39 1. Ioas, 16. 22 24 25 9 3848 3166 173 319 40 9 1. Amazi , 20. 2 23 25 26 10 Iulian. World. Temple. Troy. Iuda. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens Latines. 3851 3169 176 322 4 5 26 28 8 1. Phere∣dus, 19 13 3858 3766 183 329 11 12 33 35 8 13 1. Syl A∣uen nus, 37 3862 3180 187 333 15 16 14 1. Ieroboam, 41. 37 39 12 5 3868 3186 193 339 21 7 38 1. Sardana∣palu , 20. 45 18 11 3870 3188 195 341 23 9 3 47 9 1. Ari∣phron 20 12 3874 3192 199 345 27 13 7 1. Myce∣ inus, 6. 5 16 Iulian. World. Temple. Troy. Iuda. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens Latines. Media L. 2. C. 22. §. 11. 3877 3195 202 348 1. Interreg∣num eleuen yeeres. 16 10 4 8 19 3880 3198 205 351 4 19 13 1. Boc∣chorus, 44 11 22 L. 2. c. 22. §. 12. 3887 3205 212 358 11 26 10 Sarda∣ apalus slaine. 8 18 29 L. 2. c. 33. §. 1. & 4. 3888 3206 213 359 10 1. Ʋzzia, or, Agaria, 52. 27 9 19 30 1. Arba∣ces, 28. 3890 3208 215 361 3 29 11 10 1 Th ∣sp us, 27 32 3 L. 2. c. 23. §. 4. 3892 3210 217 363 5 31 1. Belosus, or Phul. 48. 13 3 34 5 3895 3213 220 366 8 34 4 16 6 14 1. Syl. Pro¦ca , 23. 8 L. 2. c. 23. §. 1. 3903 3221 228 374 16 1. Interreg∣num, 23. yeeres. 12 24 14 9 16 3916 3234 241 387 29 14 25 37 27 22 2 1. Sosar∣mus, 30. 3917 3235 242 388 30 15 26 38 11 1. Agam∣n st r, 20 23 2 3918 3236 243 389 31 16 27 39 2 15 1. Syl▪ A∣mulius, 44 3 3924 3242 249 395 37 22 33 . and after him A y¦sis. 6. 8 7 9 Zacharia began at the very end of the yeere. L. 2. c. 23. §. 1. 3925 3243 250 396 38 3 15 Zacharia sixe Months. 34 2 9 8 10 Iulian. World. Temple. Troy. Iuda. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens La∣tines. Media 3926 3244 251 397 39 16 Shallum one month. 17 M nahem 10 35 3 10 9 11 This yeere neerely concurres with the first of Menahem. 3927 3245 252 398 40 1 36 4 11 10 12 3930 3248 255 401 43 4 39 1 Sabacus the Ethio∣pian. 50 14 13 15 3937 3255 262 408 Iphitus Olym∣piads. 50 18 1. P ka∣ a, 2. 46 8 12 1. AEschy∣lus, 23 20 22 The beginning of the Olympiads. L. 2. c. 23. §. 5. 3938 3256 263 409 1 1 1 51 2 47 9 2 21 23 3939 3257 264 410 2 1 2 52 19 1. Pek omeliae. 2 48 10 3 22 24 L. 2. c. 23. §. 6. 3940 3258 265 411 3 1 3 11 1 Iotham 1 2 2 1. Tigla Phul , 27 11 4 23 25 Iulian. World. Temple. Iphit: Olym∣piads. Iuda. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens La∣tines. Med . 3946 3264 271 9 3 1 7 8 7 17 10 29 3 1. Medi∣ s, 40 3955 3273 280 18 5 2 16 12 1. Ahaz, 16 17 16 26 19 38 10 3959 3277 284 22 6 2 5 1. Jnter∣regnum. 7. yeeres. 20 30 23 42 14 3960 3278 285 23 6 3 6 2 21 31 13 1. Al me∣non, 2 43 15 Iulian. World. Temple Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olymp. Iuda. Israel. Assyria Egypt. Athens Romās. Media Rome built. Lib. 2. chap. 24. §. 5. Carops the First, gouerning in Athens for ten yeeres: after whom succeeded sixe cho sen each after other for the like time; and the office became Annuall. 3962 3280 287 1 25 7 1 8 4 23 33 1 1. Ca∣ ops, 10 1 1. Romu∣lus, 37. 17 3966 3284 291 5 29 8 1 12 20 1. Hosea, 9. 27 37 5 5 21 The Aera of Nabonassar. L. 2. c. 25. §. 1. 3967 3285 292 6 1 30 8 2 13 2 3 1. Salma∣nas ar or Nabanas∣sar, 10 38 6 6 22 Ezekia began in the very end of this yeere. L. 2. c. 25. §. 1. 3968 3286 293 7 2 31 8 3 14 13 Ezekia, 29 3 2 39 7 7 23 This yeere concurres with the first of Ezekia. Ibid. 3969 3287 294 8 3 32 8 4 15 1 4 3 40 8 8 24 The beginning of the first Messenian Warre. Whereof see L. 2. c. 27. §. 4. It lasted 20. yeeres. 3971 3289 296 10 5 34 9 2 3 6 5 42 10 10 26 Samaria besieged by Salmanassar. 3972 3290 297 11 6 35 9 3 4 7 6 43 11 27 The captiuitie of the ten Tribes. 3974 3292 299 13 8 37 10 1 6 9 8 45 13 29 3976 3294 301 15 10 39 10 3 8 10 4 1. Sena∣cherib, 7. 47 15 31 L. 2. c. 26. §. 7. 3980 3298 305 19 14 43 11 3 12 Kings of the Chal¦deans. 5 1. Se∣thon. 33 19 35 Senacheribs Armio destroied, and be slaine. 3982 3300 307 21 16 45 12 1 14 7 3 21 37 3983 3301 308 22 17 46 12 2 15 1. Mero∣dach or Mardoc ¦padus. 5 1. Asar∣haddon. 10 4 22 38 3980 3304 311 25 20 49 13 1 18 4 4 7 25 4 1. Cardi∣ceas, 13 Merodach gets the whole Empire. This yeere or in the end of the yeere foregoing, An Eclipse of ☽ 3993 3311 318 32 27 56 14 4 25 1. Mero∣dach, 40 11 14 32 8 Iulian. World. Temple. Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olymp. Iuda. Chal∣doea. Egypt. Rome. Media Lydia. Two Eclipses of the Moone, in the second yeere of Mardocempadus. 3994 3312 319 33 28 57 15 1 26 2 15 33 9 3997 3319 322 36 31 60 15 4 29 5 18 36 12 1. Gy∣ges, 8 3998 3316 323 37 32 61 16 1 14 1. Ma∣nasses 55 6 19 37 13 2 3999 3317 324 38 33 62 16 2 2 7 20 Inter-reg∣num one yeere. 5 1. Deio∣ces, 53. 3 4000 3318 325 39 34 63 16 3 3 8 21 2 1 Numa Pompilius, 43 2 4 L. 2. c. 27. §. 2. 4013 3331 338 52 47 76 19 4 16 21 1. Inter∣reg∣num, 2. 14 15 17 4015 3333 340 54 49 78 20 2 18 23 1 12 Prin∣ces, 15 16 17 19 The beginning of the second Messemian Warre; which lasted about 18. yeeres. L. 2. c. 27. §. 4. 4029 3347 354 68 63 92 23 4 32 37 5 1. Psam∣mit us. 4 30 31 33 L. 2. c. 28. §. 3. 4033 3351 358 72 67 96 24 4 36 2 1. Ben Merodach, 2. 5 34 35 37 4035 3353 360 74 69 98 25 2 38 3 7 36 37 2 1. Ar∣dys, 49 4043 3361 368 82 77 106 27 2 46 11 15 3 1. Tullus Ho ilius 32 45 9 4052 3370 377 91 86 115 29 3 55 20 24 10 6 1. P aor¦ s, 24 18 4053 3371 378 92 87 116 29 4 15 1. A∣men, 2. 21 25 11 2 19 Iulian. World. Temple Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olymp. Iuda. Chal∣daea. Egypt. Rome. Media Lydia. The Expedition of the Scythians. L. 2. c. 28. §. 3. & 4. 4054 3372 379 93 88 117 30 1 2 3 1. Nabu∣ assar, 3 26 12 3 20 4055 3373 380 94 89 118 0 2 16 1. Iosi∣as, 31 2 27 13 4 21 L. 2. c. 28. §. 2. 4073 3391 398 112 107 136 34 4 19 20 1. Ne∣co, 17 31 22 39 4075 3393 400 114 109 138 35 2 21 22 3 4 1. A eus Martius, 34 24 41 4076 3394 401 115 110 139 35 3 22 23 4 2 7 1. , 40 42 4084 340 409 123 118 147 37 3 30 31 12 10 9 3 1. Sady∣ t s, 1 L. 2. c. 28. §. 1. & 2. 4085 3403 410 124 119 148 37 4 31 1 Ie oa a 3. 32 13 11 10 2 Nabuchodonosor had reigned one yeere with his Father, which is to be regarded in Astronomicall obseruations concerning his time. L. 2. C. 28. §. 6. & C. 25. §. 1. 4086 3404 411 125 1 0 149 38 1 18 1. Iehoia¦kim, 11 33 14 12 11 3 4089 3407 414 128 123 152 38 4 4 4 1 Nabuch ¦ nosor the Great. 44 17 15 14 6 4090 3408 415 129 1 4 153 39 1 5 2 1. Psam∣mis, 12. 16 15 7 4096 3414 421 1 5 1 0 159 40 3 11 9 1. Ieho i¦ . 0 zedekia 11. yeeres 8 7 22 21 1. ¦ es, 57 Zedekia his iourney to Babylon. L. 2. c. 28. §. 6. 4099 3417 424 138 1 162 41 2 4 11 10 5 1. , 38 24 4 4102 3420 427 141 1 6 165 42 1 7 14 1. Apri s or o hra 1 4 27 Ierusalem taken by Nabuchodonosor: with whose 18. for the more part, and partly with whose 19. this yeere concurres. 4106 3424 431 145 140 169 43 1 11 18 5 8 31 11 Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olym∣piads. Capti∣uitie. Capti∣uitie. Egypt. Rome. Media Lydia. Ierusalem destroyed. 4107 3425 140 141 170 43 2 1 19 6 9 32 12 Aegypt conquered by Nabuchodonosor. L. 3. c. 1. §. 8. & 9. 4111 3429 150 145 174 44 2 5 23 0 1 Phar. Ho∣ hra s am & the king¦dome of E∣gypt gouer¦ned rtie yeeres by Ʋi ereyes. 13 36 16 4116 3434 155 150 179 45 3 10 28 18 8 1. As ya¦ges, 3 . 21 Nabuchodonosor liues wilde; and his Kingdome is gouerned by others for him, during seuen yeeres. L. 3. c. 1. §. 13. 4125 3443 164 159 188 47 4 19 27 1. Euilm ¦rodach. 2. 15 27 10 30 4127 3445 166 161 190 48 2 21 39 1. Nigh∣sa , & N ¦ ocri , 4. 17 29 12 32 Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olym∣piads. Iuda. Chal∣daea. Egypt. Rome. Media Lydia. Nebuchadnezzar recouers his sense and Kingdome. 4131 449 170 165 194 49 2 25 43 Laboro∣sardach. 9. moneths. 21 33 16 36 Lib. 3. Chap. 1. §. 6. The 37. of Iechonia his captiuitie com∣pleate, and he enlarged. 4133 3451 172 167 196 49 4 27 5 1. Euilme∣ro dach, 26 23 35 18 38 4137 3455 176 171 200 50 4 31 5 27 6 1. Seruius ullus, 41 22 42 Fortie yeeres after the Conquest of Egypt past, Amasis beganne his reigne: this being inclusiuely the 41. and therefore the next yeere seemes concurrent with Amasis his first. 4151 3469 190 185 214 54 2 45 19 Ama∣sis, 34 15 9 1 Cyaxares or Darius the Mede, 26 56 4153 3471 192 187 216 54 4 47 21 2 17 3 5 1 Croe∣sus. 14 Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olym∣piads. Persia. Chal∣daea. Egypt. Rome. Media Lydia. Iewes. 4154 3472 193 188 217 55 1 1. Cyras in Persia, 23 22 3 18 4 2 48 The seuen Sages in Greece. 4159 3477 198 193 222 56 2 6 6 1. Baltha¦sar, 17 8 23 9 7 53 Pisistratus makes himselfe Tyrant in Athens. 4164 3482 203 198 227 57 3 11 6 13 28 14 12 58 4166 3484 205 200 229 58 1 13 8 15 30 16 14 Croesus ta∣ken by Cy∣rus. 60 The end of the Chaldaean Empire. 4175 3493 214 209 238 60 2 22 17. Bal∣thasar slaine. 24 39 25 69 4176 3494 215 210 239 60 3 23 1. Da∣rius the Mede 2. 25 40 26 70 The beginning of Cyrus his Empire. His Edict of libertie to the Iewes. 4177 3495 216 211 240 60 4 1 Cyrus 7. 2 26 41 Yeeres from 1 Cyrus Zoroba∣bel. 4181 3499 220 215 244 61 4 5 30 7 L. Tarqui∣nius Super¦bus, 25 5 Onely Zorobabel & Nehemias are remembred as Go∣uernors of the Iews vnto the 32. of Ar∣taxerxes Mne∣mon. But there were many before Nehemias, as him selfe witnesseth. Ch. 5. n. 15. so that the flories of them, their number, and names, are vncer∣tayne. 4184 3502 223 218 247 62 3 2 1. Cam∣byses, 7. 33 4 8 The two first yeeres of P a menitus and part of the third may be added to the y eres of his Father, if it be true that Cambyses wanne Egypt presently vpon the death of Amasis. L. 3. c. 4. §. 2. 4186 3504 225 220 249 63 1 3 1. Psammenitus, 3 6 10 The Conquest of Aegypt by Cambyses. 4188 3506 227 22 251 63 3 5 3 8 12 Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olymp. Persia. Egypt. Rome. Greece Iewes. From Cyrus. Cambyses reigned seuen yeeres and fiue moneth, so as this bis last yeere was filled vp by the Magi, and (as may seeme) a good part of the next. L. 3. c. 4. §. 4. 4191 3509 230 25 254 64 2 8 The Magi one yeere. 11 15 4192 3510 231 226 255 64 3 3 1. Darius Hystaspis, 36 12 16 Iulian. and World. Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olym∣piads. Persia. Egypt. Rome. Greece. Iewes; and from Cyrus. 4197 3515 236 231 260 65 4 6 17 Hip ias the son of P sis aus Tyran. in Athens. 21 4204 3522 243 238 267 67 3 13 Babylon which ha rebelled in ken by Da¦rius. 42 28 The Tarquines expelled Rome. L. 4. c. 7. §. 1. 4205 3523 244 239 268 67 4 14 25 29 The Carthaginians first league with Rome. L. 5. c. 1. §. 2. 4206 3524 245 240 269 68 1 15 Brutus and Publicola Consuls. 30 L. 3. c. 5. §. 4. 4211 3529 250 245 274 69 2 20. Darius his expedi∣tion a∣gainst the Scythians 35 4212 3530 251 246 275 69 3 21 The Athenians and Ionians take Sardes. 36 4222 3540 261 256 285 72 1 31 Sp. Casuus Posth. Co∣min us. Consuls. The battaile of Mara∣thon. 46 4226 3544 265 260 289 73 1 35 Aegypt rebel∣leth against Darius. 50 4228 3546 267 262 291 73 3 4 1. Xer∣xes, 21 52 The Law Agraria in Rome propounded, for diuision of lands: which bred great com∣motion. 4229 547 268 263 292 73 4 2 Aegypt reco∣uered by Xerxes. Proc. Vir∣ginius Sp. Cassius. Coss. 53 An Eclipse of the Sunne. L. 3. c. 6. §. 2. 4233 3551 272 267 296 74 4 6 The great muster of Xerxes his Arme at Sardes. 57 L. 3 c. 6. §. 3. & 6. 4234 3552 273 268 297 75 1 7 The battailes at Thermopylae, Arte misi & S l mi . 58 L. 3. c. 6. §. 9. 10. & 11. 4235 3553 274 269 298 75 2 8. Xerxes his tragi∣call loue. The battaile of Platea and My∣cale. 59 L. 3. C. 7. §. 1. & 2. 4237 3555 276 271 300 75 4 10 The Athenians rebuild their wals, and lay the foun∣dation of their Dominion. 61 4244 3562 283 278 307 77 3 17 The great victo∣ries of Ci n, a Eurymedon, a d elsewhere. 68 L. 3. c. 7. §. 3. 4248 3566 287 282 311 78 3 21 The death of Xerxes by the treason of Artaba us. 72 4249 3567 288 283 312 78 4 5 1. Arta∣xerxes Longima¦nus, 40. Themis ocles be∣ing ban shed, f , to Artaxerxes, 73 4251 3569 290 285 314 794 2 3 Inarus set vp as King by the Aegyptians. 75 L. 3. c. 7. §. 5. & 7. 4255 3573 294 289 318 80 2 7. The mariage of Hester. Inarus van∣quished by the Persians. 79 Esdras com¦meth to Ie¦rusalem. 1. Daniel his 70. weekes, or 490. yeers b in 4264 3582 303 298 327 82 3 16 e dece iri chosen to cōpound a body of the Roman Lawes. Hippocrates the great Physicion, and De∣mocritus the Philo∣sopher flourish. 88 10 The Accompt from the solution of the Captiuitie, is the same with that from Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olym∣piads. Persia. Egypt. Rome. Greece. Iewes rom Cy¦rus and Daniel. 4265 3583 304 299 328 82 4 17 The decem viri cho∣sen for a second yere tyrannize & vsurpe the pla e a third yeere Cymons voyage to Cyprus, in which he died. 89 11 Nehemias comes to Ierusalem. 4268 3586 307 302 331 83 3 20 A League for 30. yeeres, betweene Athens & Sparta 92 14 4272 3590 311 306 335 84 3 24 Tribuni Militū first chosen in stead of Cō¦suls, Dio∣nys. Liuie placeth them in the 110. yeere of Rome. 96 18 4273 3591 312 307 336 84 4 25 The conquest of Samos by the Athe¦nians vnder Peri∣cles. 97 19 4278 3596 317 312 341 86 1 30 The Athenians & the Cor ae ns a∣gainst the Corin∣thians. 102 24 The wals of Ierusalem finished. Nehemias returnes to King Artaxer∣xes. 4280 3598 319 314 343 86 3 32 104 26 L. 3. c. 8. §. 1. 4283 601 322 317 346 67 2 35 The first yeere of the Peloponnesian Warre. 107 29 L. 3. c. 9. §. 1. L. 3. c. 8. §. 4. 4289 3607 328 323 352 88 4 6 Xerxes 2. months. 7 Sogidanus 8. months. The victory of the Athenians at Pylus. 113 35 L. 3. c. 9. §. 1. 4290 3608 329 324 353 89 1 8 1. Darius Nothus. 19. 114 36 L. 3. c. 8. §. 5. & 6. 4292 3610 331 326 355 89 3 3 A vaine & trou∣blesome peace be∣tweene Athens and Sparta. 116 38 L. 3. c. 9. §. 1. &c. 8. §. 8. 4301 3619 340 335 364 91 4 12 Egypt rebelleth a∣gainst the Persian, & sets vp Kings that raigne successiuely, til Och his reconquest. 1 1. Amyr∣tau , 6 The Athenian for∣ces in Sicil vtterly destroyed. 125 47 C. 8. §. 9. 4302 3620 341 336 365 92 1 13 Darius enters in∣to con ederacie with the Spartans. 2 The gouernment of the 400. in A thens, which was suppressed the yeere following. 126 48 The Carthaginians inuade Sicil with an Armie of 300000. L. 5. c. 1. s. 4. † 3. 4304 3622 343 338 367 92 3 15 4 The Athenians begin to recouer strength. 128 50 L. 3. c. 8. §. 10. 4306 3624 345 340 369 93 1 17 6 Alcibiades after many victories re∣turnes frō banish∣ment to Athens is made General, & banished againe. 130 52 4307 3625 346 341 370 93 2 18 2 1. Nephres 6 The battaile at Arginusae. 131 53 4308 3626 347 342 371 93 19 2 Dionysius the el∣der vsurps tyran∣nie in Syracuse. 132 54 L. 3. c. 8. §. 12. 4309 3627 348 343 372 93 4 9 1. Artaxerxes Mnemon 43 3 The battaile at Argos, Potamos, &c. 133 55 4311 3629 350 345 374 94 2 3 5 The siege of Veii, which last∣ed 10. yeres 135 57 L. 3. c. 10. §. 1. 4313 3631 352 347 376 94 4 5. The expedition of Cyrus against Arlaxerxes. 3 1. Acoris 12 Socrates put to death. The 30. ty∣rants put downe in Athens. 137 59 Iulian and World. Rome and Nab: Iphit: Olym∣piads. Persia. Aegypt. Rome. Greece. Iewes From Cyrus. Daniel. L. 3. c. 11. §. 4. 4318 3636 357 352 381 96 1 10 6 Agesilaus warreth in Asia. 142 64 L. 3. C. 11. §. 7. 4320 3638 359 354 383 96 3 12 8 The victorie of Co∣non at Gnidus, &c. 144 66 4321 3639 360 355 384 96 4 13 9 Vey taken by Camillus. Xenophon and Plato flourish. 145 67 4325 3643 364 359 388 97 4 17 3 1 Psammiticus the son of Inarus, & after him Nephr s, that had bin expelled reigned in all about two yeeres. The honorable vi∣ctorie of Camillus ouer the Falisci. 149 71 L. 4. c. 7. §. 1. L. 3. c. 11. §. 9. 4326 3644 365 360 389 98 1 18 2 Rome taken & burnt by the Gauies. The Peace of An¦talcidas. 150 72 4327 3645 376 361 390 98 2 19 4 1. Nectanebus. 18 151 73 4332 3650 371 366 395 99 3 24 6 M. Manlius Capitolinus put to death. The Lacedaemonians take the Citadell of Thebes by treason. 156 78 L. 3. c. 11. §. 11. 4336 3654 375 370 399 100 3 28 10 The Thebans recouer their Citadell, and make strong warre vp n the Laced ¦nians. 160 82 4340 3658 379 374 403 101 3 32 14 Tribunes o the people continued 5. yeares in office, propound popu∣lar Lawes, among which, That one of the Consuls should be still a Pl b ian. 164 86 L. 3. c. 12. §. 1. 4343 3661 382 377 406 102 2 35 17 The famous battaile of Lenctra. 167 89 L. 3. c. 12. §. 4. 4345 3663 384 379 408 102 4 37 4 1. Tachus 8. Euse∣bius giues only 2. yeres to Tachus. Reinee. 6; but the storie of him proues more. L. Sextius a Ple∣beian, and L. A ylius, Consuls. The hastie growth of the Theban Estate. 1 9 91 4351 3669 390 385 414 104 2 43. Many Prouin∣ces rebell against Artaxerxes, and are soone reclaymed. 7 The great Battaile of Mantinaea. Epami∣nondas dyes. 175 97 L. 3. c. 12. §. 8. 4352 3670 391 386 415 104 3 10 1. Ochus. 23. 8. Tachus betray∣ed by Agesilaus. 1. Nectanebus 13. Peace in Greece. The Athe∣nians weaken themselues by conn ng their Treasure to vaine vses. 176 98 Ionathan about this t me high Priest. 4354 3672 393 388 417 105 1 3 3 1. Philip King of Ma∣cedon 24. yeeres, and part of the 25. 178 100 L. 4. c. 1. §. 4. 4359 3677 398 393 422 106 2 8 8 6 The Phocian warre begins. 183 1 5 4364 3682 403 398 427 107 3 13 Ochus re∣conquers Ae∣gypt. 13. Nectane∣bus bus flies into Aethiopia. 11 188 110 L. 4. c. 1. §. 6. 4368 3686 407 402 431 108 3 17 15 The end of the Phocian Warre. 192 114 L. 5. c. 1. §. 4. †. 4. 4369 3687 408 403 432 108 4 18 16 Timoleon his voy∣age into Sicil. 193 115 4370 3688 409 404 433 109 1 19 Nabonassar. Nouemb. the 17. 17 Philip wasteth lly∣ria, and drawes the Thessaliās to follow him 194 116 After this, the yeeres from Cyr{us} & Daniel are too few, by One. 4375 3693 414 409 438 110 2 11 1 Arses 3. 22 199 121 Iaddus High Priest. 16 Iulian and World. Rome and Nab: Iphit: Olym∣piads. Persia. Aegypt. Rome. Greece. Iewes From Cyrus. Daniel 4376 3694 415 410 439 110 3 2 23 The battaile of Cheronaea. Phi∣lip chosen Captayne Generall of the Greekes. 2 199 121 4378 3696 417 412 441 111 1 12 1. Darius 5. yeeres & somwhat more Nabon. Nouemb. 15. 25 Philip slaine by Pa sanias. 1. Alexander the great twelue yeeres and fiue moneths. 4 201 123 4379 3697 418 413 442 111 2 2 2 Thebes razed by Alexander. 5 202 124 4380 3698 419 414 443 111 3 3 3 Alexander passeth into Asia. 6 203 125 L. 4. c. 2. §. 4. 4381 3699 420 415 444 111 4 4 The battaile of Issus. 4 7 204 126 L. 4. c. 2. §. 5, 6 & 7. & l. 5. c. 2. §. 8. 4382 3700 421 416 445 112 1 5 The Gaules enter into League with the Romans. 5 Alexander winnes Tyre and Egypt. 8 205 129 Iaddus mee∣ting Alexan¦der, is reue∣renced by him. Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olymp. An Eclipse of ☾ 4383 3701 422 417 446 112 2 6 The battaile of Arbela. 6 Babylon, Susa, and Persepolis wonne by Alexander. 9 206 128 L. 4. c. 2. §. 13. 4384 3702 423 418 447 112 3 7 Darius slaine by Bessus. 7 10 207 129 Macedon. Aegypt. Greece. Romans. Iewes. Daniel 4385 3703 424 419 448 112 4 8. Al xand r chan∣geth conditions: hee puts to death Parme∣ io and Philotas. 11 130 4380 3704 425 420 449 113 1 9. Alexander pas¦seth into India: lls Clytus and Cal∣listhenes. 12 131 Alexander dyed 17. dayes before the Summer Solstice From Nabonassar hitherto are collected 424. yeeres: and hence to the reigne of Augustus, 294. The summe 8, 718. yeeres, which agrees with this accompt, Ptolem. Almagest. l. 3. c. 8. 4390 3708 429 424 453 114 1 13. Alexan∣der dyes at Babylon. Nabon. Nouemb. 12. 16 135 4391 3709 430 425 454 114 2 1. Aridaeus, 6. and foure mo∣neths. 1 1. Ptolemie Lagi, 39. L. 3. c. 3. §. 1. 2 & 3. The Lamian Warre. 1. Oni∣as, 23. 136 4 94 3712 433 438 457 115 1 4 4. Perdic∣cas slaine in Egypt. Nab. N u. 11 L. 4. c. 3. §. 8. & 9. Victories of Eumenes. 4 139 4395 371 434 429 458 115 2 5. Antigonus sent against Eumenes. 5 5 140 Aridaeus slaine by Olympias. Antigon{us} beaten by Eumnes. 4397 3715 436 431 460 115 4 7 7 7 142 Eumenes betrayed to Antigonus. Olympias slaine by Cassander. Antigo∣nus growes dreedfull 4398 3716 437 432 461 116 1 1. Cassander. 19. 8 Thebes reedi∣fied by Cas∣sander. 8 143 Some place the beginning of Seleucus in this twelfth from Alexander, b which ac∣com p he reigned 32. yeeres. 4402 3720 441 436 465 117 1 5 12 Nabonassar. Nouemb. 9. Demetrius beaten at Gaza, by Pto∣lemie and Se∣le us. 12 147 Peace between Alex∣anders Captains, with diuision of Prouinces. 4403 3721 442 437 466 117 2 6 13 13 148 Iulian, and World. Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olymp. Macedon. Egypt. Syria and the Kingdome of the Greekes. Greece. Romans. Iewes. Daniel The Aera of the Kingdome of the Greekes. 4404 3722 443 438 467 117 3 7 14 1 1. Seleuc{us}. 3 1 L. 4. c. 5. § 7. 14 14 Alexanders Cap∣tayns assume the name of Kings. 4406 3724 445 440 469 118 1 9 16 Ptolemie ouercome by Demetrius at Cyrrus. 3 3 Athens set free by Demetrius the sonne of Au∣tigon s. 10 151 L. 4. c. 6. §. 4. 4413 3731 452 447 476 119 4 16 23 10. The battaile at Ipsus, wherein An∣tigonus was slaine. 10 23 1 8 4414 3732 453 448 477 120 1 17 24 11 S lencus makes alliance with De∣metrius. 11 1 th A cie t 13 1 4417 3735 456 451 480 120 4 1. Antipater and Alexander the sonne of Cas∣sander. 4 27 14 14 4 162 L. 4. c. 6. §. 7. 4421 3739 460 455 484 121 4 1. Demtri{us}. 6. 31 18 18 8 166 Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olym∣piads. Macedon. Egypt. Syria. Greece. Rome. Iewes. Daniel 4427 3745 466 461 490 123 2 1. Pyrrhus 7. Moneths. 37 24 24 . Elezar igh Priest 1 172 4428 3746 467 462 491 123 3 1. Lysimachus 5. 38 25 25 2 17 4429 3747 468 463 492 123 4 2 39 2 1. Ptolemi Philadel∣phus, 38 26 26 3 174 The translation of the Bible by the Sep∣tuagint. 4432 3750 471 466 4 5 124 3 5 4 29 29 The arentines raise warre in the easterne part of Italie, & call in Pyrrhus against the Romans. 6 177 L. 4. c. 6. § 9. & 4433 3751 472 467 496 124 4 . Lysimachus slaine. Selencus 7. Mon. 5 30. Selencus slaine in the end of the 124. Olymp. Polib. & Iu∣stin. 30 Pyrrhus his victo∣rie against the Romans. 7 178 L. 4. c. 7. §. 3. & 7. 4434 3752 473 468 497 125 1 1. Ptolemie Ceraunis, Antipater, Mel ager, Sosthenes, 6 Nabon Nouēb. 1 2 1. Antiochus So t, 19 31 The Gaules doe great spoile in Macedon and Greece, vnder Brennus and Belgius. 8 179 4436 3754 475 470 499 125 3 1 1. Antigonus Gon tas, 36. 8 3 33 Pyrrhus goes into Sicil. 10 181 L. 5. c. 2. §. 6. 4438 3756 477 472 501 126 1 3 10 Na¦bon si rs yere begins the first of Octob. 5 35 About these tim the Achaeans be∣gunne their so∣cietie. Pyrrhus called out of Sicil against the Romans. 12 183 4439 3757 478 473 502 126 2 4 11 6 6 Pyrrhus ouer∣throwne by the Romans. 13 184 L. 4. c. 7. §. 5. 4441 3759 480 475 504 126 4 6 13 8 38 Pyrrhus slaine at Argos. The Tarentines craue aid of the Carthaginiās 15 186 The translation by the septuagint finished, this 17. of Philadelphus. 4445 3763 484 479 508 127 4 10 17 12 42 19 1 0 Consuls 4446 3764 485 480 509 128 1 11 18. Na∣bonassar. Oct. 29. 13 43 1. Manas∣ses high Priest, 27. 191 The more ancient Roman Consuls haue beene often so v rlayne, that Liuie hath doubted whom to name. 4450 3768 489 484 513 129 1 15 2. Na¦bonassar, Octob. 28 17 47 L. 5. c. 1. §. 3. The beginning of the first Pu∣nicke Warre. 5 195 Ap. Clau∣dius. M. Fuluius Iulian. and World. Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olymp. Mace∣don. Egypt. Syria and the Kingdome of the Greekes. Greece. Romans. Iewes. Daniel Consuls. 4453 3771 492 487 516 129 4 18 25 3 1. Antiochus Theus. 16 50 8 198 L. Valerius. T. Octacilius. L. 5. c. 1. §. 6. 4454 493 488 517 130 1 19 26 2 51 Duilius his victorie at Sea. 9 199 C. Duilius.Cn. Cornelius. 4457 3775 496 491 520 130 4 22 29 5 54 Regulus pas∣seth into A∣fricke. 12 202 M. Attil. Reg. Cn. Cornelius. L. 5. c. 1. §. 8. 4458 3776 497 492 521 131 1 23 30 6 55 Marcus Cary∣nensis Praetor of the Achaeans. Regulus taken prisoner. 13 203 L. Manlius. Q. Caditus. 4463 3781 502 497 526 132 2 28 35 11 60 Aratus recouers Sicyon and ioynes it to the Achaeans. 18 208 L. Caecilius. C. Furius. The Roman Consuls beaten at Lilybaum. The beginning of the Parthian Kingdome. 4464 3782 503 498 457 132 3 29 36 12 61 Regulus his death. 19 209 C. Atilius. L. Manlius. 4465 3783 504 499 528 132 4 30 37 13 62 Shipwrack, and vn∣happie ight of the Romans at sea. 20 210 P. Claudius, Pulcher, & L. Iunius. 4467 3785 506 501 530 133 2 32 3 1 Ptolemie E erge es, 26 15 64 22 212 L. Caecilius. M. Fabius. Amilcar the Cartha∣ginian in Sicil. L. 5. c. 1. §. 11. 4469 3787 508 50 532 133 4 34 3 4 1. Selencus Callenicus 20 66 24 214 M. Fabius. C. Atilius. 4472 3790 511 506 535 134 3 2 1 Deme¦trius 10 6 4 69 Luctatius his great victorie as AEgateis. 27 217 C. Luct. Catul A. Posthumius The warre of the Mer¦cinaries with the Car∣thaginians. L. 5. c. 3. 4473 3791 512 507 536 134 4 2 7 5 70 Aratus wins Corinth. Peace granted to Carthage. Onias 1 218 Q. Luctatius. A. Manlius. 4474 3792 513 508 537 135 1 3 8 Nabon Oct. 22 6 71 1. Simon the iust 28 219 C. Claudius. M. Semproi The warre with the Mercinaries ended. 4476 3794 515 510 539 135 3 5 10 8 73 The Romans take Sardinia from the Carthaginians. 3 221 Gracchus. Falco. 4482 3800 521 516 545 137 1 3 1. Antigo∣nus Doson 1 16 14 79 9 227 Lepidus. Malleolus. 4483 3801 522 517 546 137 2 2 17 15 80 A Roman Embassa∣dor slaine by Queene T r . 10 228 M. Aemylius M. Iunius. L. 5. c. 2. §. 7. 4485 3803 524 519 548 137 4 4 19 17 82 Teuta Queene of Illyria subdued by the Romans. 12 2 0 L. Posthumius. C. Fulnius. L. 5. c. 5. §. 1. 4489 3807 528 523 552 138 4 8 23 5 1. Sel ent C ra us. 3 86 16 4 L. Aemylius. C. Atilius. Flaminius was also Consul this yeere. See L. 5. c. 2. § 8. 4492 3810 531 526 555 139 3 11 26 5 1. Antiochus the Great. 36. 89 Marceilus his vi∣ctorie ouer the Gaule bout Milan. 19 237 C. Cornelius. M. Marcellus L. 5. c. 5. §. 2. 4493 3811 532 527 556 139 4 12 4 1. P olo P lo pator 27. 2 90 20 238 P. Cornelius. M. Minuti s. 4494 3812 533 528 557 140 1 4 1. Phi∣lip. 42. 2 3 91 20 239 L. Verturius. C. Luctatius. Iulian. World. Rome. Nabon Iphit. Olymp. Macedon. Egypt. Syria & King∣dome of the Greekes. Greece. Rome. Iewes and Daniel Consuls. Hannibal takes Saguntum. 4495 3813 534 529 558 140 2 2 3 4 92 Demetrius P arius chased out of his Lordship. L. 5. c. 3. §. 4. 22 240 L. Aemylius. M. Liuius. The beginning of the second Punick warre. 4496 3814 535 530 559 140 3 3 4 5 93 The battayles of Ticinus and Treb a. 23 241 P. Cor. Scipio. T. Sempronius The occurrences of this yere are refer∣red by Polyb. l. 5. to the 3. of the 14. Olymp. This bat∣taile of Thrasymene was sought in the Spring, the Olympian y ere beganne at the Summer Solstice. Hannibal and Mar∣cellus. Hiero King of Syracuse dyes. Hiero∣n mus. succeedes. 4497 3815 536 531 560 140 4 4 O Eclips. Li . l. 22 recko∣ning by 5 Warre in Syria be∣tween An¦ chus & Ptolemie. 6 94 Philip and the Achae∣a s make peace with the . The battayles of Thrasymene. 24 242 C. Flaminius. Cn. Seruilius. 4498 3816 537 532 561 141 1 5 6 Nabonassars yeere begins O¦ctob. 16. 7 9 The great bat∣taile of Can¦nae 25 243 C. Teret. Varro L. AEm. Paul. 4499 3817 538 533 562 141 2 6 7 8 96 Posthumi{us} the Roman Consul slain b the Gaules 2 244 L. Posthumius T. Semp. Grac. Q. Fabius. The 2. Scipioes slain in Spain. Han∣nibal wins Tarēiū 4502 3820 541 536 565 142 1 9 10 11 99 Philip & the Achae¦ans haue war with the Ae o∣lians and Romās in Greece. Syracuse won by Marcellus. Capua besieged 247 1. O ias high Priest 39. Ap. Claudius. Q. Ful ins. Hannibal at the walls of Rome 4503 3821 542 537 566 142 2 10 11 12 100 Young Scipio sent into Spaine. Capua won by the Romās. 2 248 Cn. Ful ins. P. Sulpitius. 4507 3825 546 541 570 143 2 14 15 16 104 The battayle at Metaurus. 6 252 C. Clau. Nero. M. Liuius. 4508 3826 547 542 571 143 3 15 16 17 105 Scipio driues the Carthaginians quite out of Spain 7 253 Q. Caecilius. L. Veturius. 4510 3828 549 544 573 144 1 17 5 1. Ptolemie Epiphanes 24 19 107 Scipio inuades Africke. 9 255 Cethegus. P. Sempronius 4511 3829 550 545 574 144 2 18 2 20 108 King Syphax taken. 10 256 Seruilius, and Seruilius. 4512 3830 551 546 575 144 3 19 3 21 109 Hannibal vanquished by Scipio. 11 257 T. Claudius. M. Seruilius. The end of the second Punicke Warre, and begin∣ning of the Mace∣donian war with Philip. This yeere and the next were three Eclipses of the Moone. 4513 3831 552 547 576 144 4 20 4 22 110 Scipio triumphs ouer Carthage. 12 258 Lentulus. Patus. 4516 3834 555 550 579 145 3 23. Philip ouer∣come at the Riuer Apsus, by the Ro∣mans. 7 25 113 L. 5. c. 4. §. 13. 15 261 T. Q. Flamin. Sex. AElius. L. 5. c. 5. §. 14. 4517 3835 556 551 580 145 4 The battaile at Cynoscephalae 8 26 114 16 262 Cethegus. Q. Minutius. Hannibal expel∣led Carthage. l. 5. c 5. §. 4. & c. 4. §. 15 4518 3836 557 552 581 146 1 25 Peace be∣tweene Philip and the Romans. 9 27 115 Liberty of Greece pro¦claimed by the Romās 17 263 L. Furius. Marcellus. C. 5. §. 5. 4519 3837 558 553 582 146 2 26 10 28 116 War vpon Nabis the Tyrant. 18 264 M. Cato. L. Valerius. C. 5. §. 7. 4522 3840 561 556 585 147 1 29 13 31 Antiochus at Chalcis. 119 21 267 L. Quintius. Cn. Domitius. 4523 3841 562 557 586 147 2 30 14 32 Antiochus vanquish∣ed at Thermopolae. 120 22 268 Acili{us} Glabrio Nasica. 4524 3842 563 558 587 147 3 31 15 33 121 C. 5. §. 8 The great victory of L Scipio ouer Antiochus in Asia, which gaue beginning to the Ro¦man Luxurie. 23 269 L. Scipio. C. Laelius. Iulian. World Rome. Nabon Iphit: Olymp Macedon. Aegypt. Syria & King∣dome of the Greekes. Greece Rome. Iewes and Daniel Consuls. L. 5. c. 5. §. 9 4527 3845 566 561 590 148 2 34 18 36 124 S p ri∣uen to ba∣nish him∣selfe from Rome. 26 272 Lepidus. Flaminius. 4528 3846 567 562 591 148 3 35 19 6 1. Selencus Philo∣pator, 12. 125 27. 273 Sp. Posthumi{us}. Q. Martius. L. 5. c. 6. §. 2. 4531 3849 570 565 594 149 2 38 22 4 128 Scipio, Hannibal, and Philo∣p men die. Tully pla∣ceth Scipi∣oes death two yeeres earlyer. 30 276 Marcelius. Q. Fabius L. 5. c. 6. §. 3. 4532 3850 571 566 595 149 3 39 The tyrannie of Phi∣lip. His son Dem tri∣us accused to him, & slaine the next yeere. 23 5 129 31 277 Paulus. Cn. Baebius. Chap. 6. §. 4. 4533 3851 572 567 596 149 4 40 24 6 130 Callicrates Achaeans and all the Greekes. 32 278 Cethegus. M. Baebius. 4534 3852 573 568 597 150 1 41 1. Ptolemaeus Phi∣lometor, and his brother Physcon, 35. 7 131 33 279 A. Posthumius Piso. 4535 3853 574569 598 150 2 42 1. Perseus 11. or 12. yeeres. 2 8 132 34 280 Piso. Manlius. An Eclipse of ☾ the 7. of Philo∣metor 573 yeeres and 206. dayes from the begin∣ning of Nabon. which agrees with this accompt. It was (by Iulian yeeres) the last of Aprill, about one of the clocke in the morning. 4540 3858 579 574 603 151 3 6 7 7 1. Antiochus Epi∣phanes, 12. 137 39 285 Sp. Posthum. Scae ola. 45413859 580 575 604 151 4 7 8 2 138 See L. 5. c. 6. § 11. Iason bu s the high Priesthood and after him More , 286 L. Posthum. M. Popilius. 4543 3861 582 577 606 182 2 9 The beginning of the warre of Perseus. 10 4 140 C. 6. §. 6. 288 P. Licmius. C. Cassius. 4545 863 584 579 608 152 4 11 12 Egypt inuaded by An¦tiochus vnder pretēce of helping one King against the other. 13 Antiochus comman∣ded out of Egypt by the Romans, spoiles the Temple. 14 6 142 290 Martius. Seruilius. A total Eclipse of the Moone, foregoing the ouer throw of Perseus in the yere of Na∣bonassar here noted. 4546 3864 585 580 609 153 1 12 Perseus vāqui∣shed and taken. 7 143 C. 6. §. 8 9, & 11. Gentius King of Illyria taken. 291 Persecutiō in Iurie for Religion. L. Aem. Paul C. Licinius. 4547 3865 586 581 610 153 2 Macedon made a Roman Prouince. 8 144 The capti∣uitie of all the best a∣mong the Greekes. triumphs in Rome. C. 6. §. 10. & 12 Paetus. Iunius. 4549 3867 588 581 612 153 4 16 10 146 1. Iudas Maccha∣baeus, 6. Torquatus. Octauius. FINIS AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE PRINCIPALL CONTENTS OF THE FIRST AND SECOND BOOKES OF THE FIRST Part of the Historie of the WORLD. Wherein the first number signifieth the Leafe, the second the Line. A ABRAHAMS age before Noah , 79. 18. He was the first of the , , and Aegyptians, in & know∣ledge, 202. 29 Was Contemporarie with Ni∣nus, 217. 54 iourney from Haran to , 220. 6. His first entrie into Canaan, 225. 4. Is childlesse, till about ten yeeres af∣ter his Canaan, ibid. 28. His age when he rescued Lot, 229. 10. Abacuc his Monument, seenely Saint Hierome. 382. 2. Abijah his victorie against Icroboam. 508. 30. , one of the Riuers that fall into Indus, where Alexander built his Fleet of Gallies. 67. 35. Acrtsius and . 424. 18. Adams free power in his first creation, described in the person of Pro∣teus. 32. 31. his Tyrannie. 313 25. Adrianus his against the Iewes. 412. 37. Aegyptians, at what time they first tooke that name, 155. 45. How they may be said to haue storie for 13000. yeeres, 156 12. Aegypt itselfe denominated from Aegyptus, the sonne of Belus, 161. 6. A Kingdome in the time of Abraham, 235. 29. Anciently called the Land of Ham, 240. 2. Aegyptians Gods for all turnes, 259. 9. Ae∣gyptian wisedome, 323. 3. &c. Babylon, not in the beginning of Nimrods Empire, 188 24. The manner of the ancient Aegyptian Kings gouernement, 238. 32. Aequinocating oaths, how dangerous. 328. 8. Aethiopia's distance from Arabia and Pa∣laestina. 62. 20. Against the ouer-much curiositie of some, in searching how God wrought in the creation of the world. 7. 1. Against the inexcusable excuses of this lat∣ter time. 283. 47. Agag, a generall name of the Kings of the Amalekites. 315. 25. Agenor his proceedings. 360. 41. Agamemnon and Menclaus at vari∣ance. 458. 33. Aide forraigne ill inuited. 580. 3. All formes are in the first Mouer. 14. 15. All Kings called Iupiters by the ancient. 88. 30. Aleppo, anciently called Magog. 37. 45. Alba longa, founded by Ascanius. 586. 29. Amphiaraus his destinie. 436. 4. &c. Amazia his disstmulation. 548. 21. His base Idolatrie, 550. 15. &c. His quarrell a∣gainst Israel, 551. 24. His ouerthrow, 552. 20. His , 555. 35. His flat∣terers, 556. 10. He is generally hated. 557. 16. Ambition, the first sinne. 432. 43. Annius, quite contrarie to Moses, in the situation of Henoch, 73. 46. His vanitie in planting Gomer in Italie, and Tubal in Spaine, in the twelfth of Nimrods raigne, 134. 8. Contradictorie to himselfe, 156. 43. How to be credited, 237. 6. His Philo. 533. 31. An answere to some few obiections against certain particulars in the fourth and fift chap∣ters of Genesis. 74. 13. &c. Answere of a German Prince to those that perswaded him to become a Lutheran. 297. 14. An Indian, presented to Solyman the Turkes Generall, in Anno 1570. who had out-liued three hundred yeeres. 78. 7. Andromeda her by . 376. 35. An enemies approbation, the best witnesse. 461. 44. Androclus, the Fcunder of Ephesus. 494. 17. Anastasius the Emperour by light∣ning. 589. 24. Antioch vpon the Riuer Orontes, whereof S. Peter was Bishop. 164. 37. Apollo his Temple at Delphos, consumed with fire from heauen vnder Iulian Aposta∣ta: with the ruines it suffered. 96. 40. &c. Armenia and Mesopotamia, first of all knowne by the name of Eden, 52. 42. Araxea, a Nation of Annius his making. 119. 43. Ararats misprision cleared. 125. 12. Aradus, a Citie in the Ile of Arados, where S. Peter preached (according to Clement ) and founded a Church in honour of our . 163. 53. Aram Naharaijm, now Mesopotamia. 177. 47. Argiues, how they came to be called Danai. 155. 38. Aristides his Ephemerides of . 206. 25. Armeus, otherwise Danaus, King of Ae∣gypt, thence by his brother Aegyp∣tus, 245. 37. Afterwards King of Argos in Greece. ibid. 40. Arad, King of the , surpriseth diuers Israelites. 298. 46. Archas, the sonne of Orchomenus, of whom Archadia tooke name. 317. 20. Arias Montanus deriuation of the name Heber. 331. 44. Arbaces destroyeth Niniue, 565. 46. His too much lenitie. ibid. 50. Aristodemus his blinde zeale, with the fruits thereof. 620. 52. Aristocrates his per fidie, 621. 45. Wor∣thily rewarded. 623. 27. Aristomenes his valour during the siege of Era, 621. 50. His strange escape out of prison, 622. 11. His death and burtall. 623. 33. Ascania, a Lake bordering Phrygia. 145. 16. Assur, the name thereof diuersly taken. 191. 21. Assyrians aide of Croesus. 230. 27. Astarte. 335. 40. Ascalus, one of the sonnes of Hymenaeus. 378. 34. Ascalon, the birth-Citie of Herod, Christs Persecuter. 378. 54. Repaired by Richard, King of England. 379. 2. Asclepius his practice to cure the Frenzie. 477. 42. Asychis his sharpe Law. 609. 47. Athos, an exceeding high Mountaine be∣tweene Macedon and Thrace: and how farre it casts shade. 123. 53. Athenians true Originall, 142. 52. Their pride. 458. 1. &c. Atlas, diuers of that name. 317. 1. &c. Athalia her practices, 524. 25. Her crueltie, 528. 20. Her sacriledge. 531. 20. Her and death. 540. 1. &c. Atossa her wantonnesse. 536. 47. Augustines answere to those that take the Tree of life allegorically. 66. 54. His dis∣course on the Arke, 110. 46. His Millanois, 206. 33. His opinion concerning Baal and Astarte. 335. 40. B BAbel was fortie yeeres in building, 117. 23. Not walled till Semiramis time. 194 48. Babylonians Done. 216. 2. Balonymus, inuested in the Kingdome of Zidon. 363. 21. Easan, an exceeding fertile Region. 396. 16. Bdellium, growing plentifully in Hauilah or Susiana. 58. 32. Before the beginning there was neither primarie matter to bee informed, nor forme to informe; nor any Beeing but Eternall. 1. 43. Belus (properly) the first, that peaceably and with generall allowance exercised soue∣raigne power, 187. 10. His Sepulchre. 194. 48. Bel, the signification thereof. 193. 38. Bellonius his report of the Pyramides in Aegypt. 216. 32. Bellerophon and Pegasus moralized. 422. 23. &c. Bel-zebubs Temple. 379. 43. Benhadad, twice ouerthrowne by Ahab. 404. 16. Beroaldus his solution of the doubts ari∣sing of the of the Text, that a Ri∣uer went out of Eden. 54. 26. Bersabe, why not named by Saint Mat∣thew. 489. 35. Bethsaida, the natiue Citie of the Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and Philip. 351. 54. Bethleem, the natiue Citie of Ibzan, , and CHRIST. 382. 43. , anciently Nysa, built by Liber Pater. 355. 26. Bozius his indiscretion. 367. 30. Boreas his rape of Orithya. 419. 7. &c. Brittaines Boats in the time of the Ro∣mans, 135. 1. Their manner of fight. 253. 52. moralized. 515. 2. &c. C CAbala, what it importeth. 79. 5. Cadmus, the first that brought letters into . 319. 3. Cain, his departure from Gods pre∣sence, not to be vnderstood literally. 71. 45. A vagabond, how to be vnderstood. 72. 47. Caponi his resolution. 554. 20. Cardans mortall Deuills. 208. 40. , anciently Tyrians. 335. 41. Carthaginian butcherie. 579. 10. Castle of Pilgrims. 354. 12. Cataractae Coeli, probably expounded. 107. 16. &c. Cause of Adam and disobedience. 70. 48. Cethim, afterwards called Macedon. 148. 11. Cedes, the natiue Citie of Barac. 350. 3. , Babylonia, Shinaar; three names of one Countrie. 49. 24. Chaldaeans, descended of Arphaxad. 170. 43. Chalybes, and their condition of life. 138. 20. Cham, intituled Iupiter Hammon by the Aegyptians. 92. 47. Charran, sometime called Charre, Haran, and Aran; are the same Charran in Mesopo∣tamia, 48. 29. Famous by the ouerthrow of Crassus. 49. 10. Chebar, mentioned by Ezechiel, but a branch of Euphrates. 59. 3. Chemmis his Pyramis. 608. 36. Cheops his Daughter. 609. 8. Chison, on whose bankes the idolatrous of Achab were . 354. 16. , a garment belonging to the Per∣sian Kings. 232. 14. Cimbri, whence so named. 139. 17. Cimmerians inuade Asia. 624. 28. Ciuill Law defined. 290. 1. &c. Cleanthes his description of God by his attributes and properties. 95. 30. Codrus his resolution. 493. 45. Collis Achillae, a steepe Mountaine. 303. 44. Commestors tale of Moses and Thar∣bis. 251. 5. &c. Coniectures on the time of Deucalions floud, and Phaetons conflagration. 100. 24. &c. Continencie, not a vertue, but a degree vn∣to it. 286. 25. Congo, diuerted from Christian Religion. 293. 25. Contemporaries with Iosua. 329. 54 and 330. Contemporaries with Othoniel. 416. 48. Coniecturall reason, why Succoth and refused to aide the Israelites their bre∣thren. 426. 27. Confidence in signes, in stead of the sub∣stance. 460. 40. Corall in the Red Sea. 261. 18. Correction of the Iulian yeere by Pope Gregorie the thirteenth. 257. 2. Cornclius Tacitus contradictorie to him∣selfe. 413. 43. Countesse of Desmondher long life. 78. 9. Creon his crueltie. 438. 37. Crueltie, the chiefe cause of the Floud. 71. 38. Cursing of Parents. 285. 5. Cush, the sonne of Ham, with his sonnes Sheba, Hauilah, &c. first seated in the Val∣ley of Shinaar: which Region was afterwards denominated after the name of Hauilah. 59. 37. Cush, and the Region of the , extended North from Aethiopia. 61. 10. Cush, mistaken for Aethiopia, prooued. ibid. 25. &c. Cush, being taken for Aethiopia, is the cause of much mistaking in Scriptures. 152. 50. Custome of Tanistrie in Ireland. 291. 21. Cyril his comparison of Cain and the Iewes. 72. 21. Cyaxares forceth Niniue, 635. 35. Is compelled to abandon Assyria, 636. 10. His extremitie and remedie. 642. 41. D DAGON, the Idoll of the Philistims, de∣scribed. 215. 6. Dalaqua, an Iland in the Red Sea. 261. 9. Dardania, built by Dardanus. 246. 28. Dauid his election to the Kingdome, 471. 26. His combat with Goliah, 472. 9. His many dangers in Sauls time, 477. 31. &c. His on the fellow that allowed himselfe to haue slaine Saul, 478. 30. His impreca∣tion against Ioab, 480. 12. His on Rechab and Baanah, for murdering Isbo∣seth, ibid. 38. His dancing before the Arke, and deriding by Micol, 481. 28 &c. Hee is prohibited to build the Temple, ibid. 41. His taking and demolishing of Gath, 482. 13. Endangered by Ishbibenob, ibid. 26. His destruction of the Moabites, ibid. 40. His ambassage to Hanum, 483. 39. &c. His victorie at Helam, 484. 13. &c. His crosses after his adulterie with , 485. 20. His extreme sorrow for the death of Abso∣lon, 486. 51. His reason for deliuering Sauls Sonnes or Kinsmen to the Gibeonites, 488. 1. &c. His loue to Ionathan, expres∣sed in sparing his sonne Mephibosheth. ibid. 6. His speech in Parliament, and the approbation thereof, 490. 1. &c. His ad∣uice to Salomon concerning Shimei, 491. 5. His Death, Personage, and internall gifts, ibid. 18. &c. His Tombe. 492. 31. &c. Debts of and mercie neuer left vn∣satisfied. 427. 1. &c. Deceit in all professions. 207. 49. Deioces his strict forme of Gouernement, 624. 39. Hee built Tauris, formerly called Ecbatane. 625. 1. &c. Derceto's Temple. 378. 40. Deucalion and , Contempora∣ries with Moses. 317. 35. Deuills policie. 206. 12. Diagoras his three sonnes. 577. 17. Difference of Translations about the signi∣fication of Gopher, whereof the Arke was made. 110. 6. Difference of Authours concerning the Mountaines of Ararat. 122. 44. Difference betweene Necromancers and Witches. 209. 28. Difference betweene Emath and Hamath, . 165. 10. , the Barre to Moses and Aarons entrie into the Land of promise. 302. 20. Diodorus his report for the Originall of the Gods. 90. 1. &c. Distance betweene the floud and birth of Abraham, 228. 19. And betweene the floud of Ogyges, and that of Noah. 99. 28. Distance betweene Tyre and Zidon. 334. 55. Diuers repaired from Age to Youth. 78. 15. Diuers computations of yeeres. 255. 32. Diuers appellations of the Red Sea. 260. 41. Diuers things in the Scriptures referred to the reading of other bookes, which by iniury of time are lost or . . 20. Diuers Mercuries. 318. 31. Dodanim, the fourth sonne of Iauan, the first Planter of Rhodes. 148. 23. Dogs, first brought by the into Hispagnola, changed into Wolues. 111. 47. Domitian his shamelesse spectacle. 427. 50. Doubts concerning the time of the Earths diuision after the floud. 172. 46. E EAsie to draw those men backe whom rage without reason hath . 433. 7. Eden of Paradise, described by the Coun∣tries bordering it, 50. 22. An of that name in Tygris, described, 53. 5. Knowne by the name of Geserta. ibid. 54. Education especially inuerteth influence. 16. 23. Effects of feare. 311. 36. Eglon subdueth Israel. 389. 50. Elius or Sol his Pedigree. 92. Emaus, ouerthrowne by Earthquake. 382. 27. Emims, Giants of huge stature. 307. 16. Enoch and Elius at the time of the floud could not bee in the Terrestriall Paradise. 44. 41. Enoch, the first Citie of the world, built by Cain. 72. 44. Epaphus, Founder of Memphis in Ae-gypt. 245. 19. Epaminondas, Author of the replantation in their old possessions. 624. 3. Ephori in Lacedaemon, the time of their beginning. 433. 23. Ephraemites quarrell with Gedeon. 426. 11. Epiphanius his answere to such as draw the truth of the storie of Paradise, to a Allegoricall vnderstanding. 37 42. Aera, by a . 622. . Errour of such as vnderstood the sonnes of God, Genes. 5. 24. To be . 81. 21. &c. Esay the Prophet his cruell death, 614. 30. Esiongaber, where Salomon built his . 301. 15. Euangelion, diuersly taken. 281. 32. Euphrates and Tygris, two guides to Eden, 46. 45. Being two of the foure heads, where∣into the Riuer of Paradise is diuided. 52. 50. Euphrates it selfe is diuided into foure branches. 55. 10. Eusebius his errour. . 14 Ezekia his godly beginning, 591. 9. Is be∣sieged by Sennacherib, 593. 25. Miracu∣lously deliuered. 594. 33. &c. His ouersight. 595. 33. F FIcus Indica described, 67. 37. &c. Alle∣gorized. 69. 14. &c. First or last naming in Scriptures, no proofe who was first or last borne. 224. 48. Fortescue his report of a iudgement giuen at Salisburie. 294. 9. Frederick Barbarossa his end and buriall. 379. 8. From the same place where Man had his beginning, from thence againe had Men their increase. 64. 10. G GAmala, a strong Citie, forced by Vespa∣sian. 397. 8. Ganges falleth into the Ocean diuers degrees to the Eastward from Indus. 57. 49. Gaza, a goodly Citie surprised by Alexan∣der Ianneus King of the Iewes. 397. 8. Gehazites and Simonians. 373. 38. Gehoar, Founder of Cairo. 603. 14. Gehon disproucd to be Nilus, 60. 26. So confessed by Pererius. 61. 20. Geometricall cubit not vsed in Scripture. 112. 13. Gergeseus, the fift sonne of Canaan, first Founder of Berytus (afterward called Foe∣lix Iulia) in Phoenicia. 163. 18. Geographers Maps. 573. 45. Georgians, from what place they take their names. 123. 37. Giants, men of huge stature and strength, to haue been before the Floud, proued by Scrip∣tures; and that there are the like now, by ex∣perience. 82. 11. Gedeon his ouer-sight and ouerthrow, 427. 18. His Contemporaries. ibid. 34. God foreknow and comprehended the be∣ginning and end before they were, 33. 6. He worketh the greatest things by the wéakest meanes, 251. 42. His first punishment of the Aegyptians, was in changing those Riuers in∣to bloud, whereinto formerly their Fathers had throwne the Hebrewes innocent children. 253. 1. &c. His secret hand in all manner of ac∣cidents, 310. 4. His punishment of places for the persons sakes. 413. 2. &c. Godly vse to bee made of praying towards the East. 37. 1. Gog and Magog; what is vnderstood by them. 136. 30. Good spirits not to be constrained. 209. 20. Golden age. 182. 48. Great slaughter of the Israelites. 300. 5. Greekes vanitie, in holding that no Floud preceded that of Ogyges. 99. 11. Their ma∣lice. 638. 14. Gyges obtaineth the Kingdome of Lydia. 598. 10. &c. H HAEDON, Iudge of Israel, in whose time hapned the destruction of Troy, 434. 49. Father of fortie sons, and thirtie grand-chil∣dren. 445. 25. Halon the Tartar forceth Damascus, 402. 7. Halyattes his reason for defending the against Cyaxares. 640. 47. Ham, father of the Aegyptians. 149. 23. Haran, the eldest sonne of Terah. 226. 13. Hauilah, one of Ioctans sonnes, seated in the Continent of the East India. 177. 17. , where Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob were buried. 382. 5. Helen the Empresse her sumptuous Chap∣pell. 353. 1. &c. Hellen and Melantho, sonnes of Deuca∣lion. 318. 15. Henoch was not dissolued as the rest. 80. 40. Henricus Mechliniensis his obseruations touching the generall floud. 105. 40. Hercules, natiue of , to whom the twelue labours are ascribed. 321. 51. Herod his Harborow. 358. 2. Herodium, a magnificent Castle, built by Herod. 383. 9. Herodotus his testimonie of Eden, and the Countrie adioyning. 56. 5. His argu∣ment; that Helen was not at Troy, during the siege. 453. 36. Hierusalem, how vncertaine the time is of her first building. 410. 30. Hippones his cruell iustice. 597. 45. Hiram his displeasure against Salomon, 341. 47. His policie in holding league with Israel. 366. 51. Historians, borrowers of Poets, 536. 18. Historicall caution. 599. 40. Homer and Hesiod, placed in hell (for their fictions) by Pythagoras, 93. 24. His partialitie in Achilles praise. 456. 30. Hookers definition of Law. 270. 7. Horatij and Curiatij their combat. 627. 24. How the Text, speaking of foure heads, (into which the Riuer of Paradise was diui∣ded) is to be vnderstood. 55. 33. How the Tree of life is vnderstood by the Hebrewes. 66. 25. How ridiculous their resolution is, that rec∣kon the Ages of the first Patriarchs, by Luna∣rie or Aegyptian yeeres. 76. 24. How farre the education and simplicitie of these times, differ from former Ages. 77. 7. &c. How the certaine knowledge of the Creati∣on came to Moses. 78. 35. &c. How the appointed number of creatures to be saued, might haue place in the Arke. 112. 42. &c. How the West part of America, to the South of Panama, came to be called Peru. 175. 30. Hus, the Countrie of Iob, how bounded. 171. 48. &c. Hyllus and Echenus their combat. 475. 20. I IApha, a strong place, forced by Titus. 352. 27. Idanthura his answere to Darius his let∣ters. 324. 20. Idle Chroniclers. 436. 4 &c. Idolaters vanitie. 196. 20. Iehoiada his godly care, 531. 45. policie, 538. 50. He prodaimeth Ioas, 539. 35. His honorable interment. 541. 7. Iehoiakim his impietie. 646. 37. Here∣uolteth from , 647. 47. His death and buriall. ibid. 52. Iehoram his crueltie towards his brethren, 521. 28. And was the first erected irre∣ligion by force, ibid. . Hee Lihna, 522. 4. &c. Is oppressed by the Philistims and Arabians, 523. 22. His wretched end. 524. 18. Iehoshaphat his great numbers of Soul∣diers. 2. Chron. 17. How to be vnderstood, 516. 5. &c. Is reprehended for aiding Ahab, 517. 10. Loseth his fleet by shipwracke. ibid. 24. In great extremitie for want of water, ibid. 50. His Monument. 518. 7. Iehu, and his proceedings, 526. 9 &c. His execution of Baals Priests, 530. 19. His in∣gratitude and punishment. ibid. 40. &c. Iephta his iust defence against the Am∣monites. 385. 8. Ieremie the Prophet his death and buriall. 651. 20. Iericho, one of the Toparchies of Iudaea. 407. 45. Ieroboam his wicked politie, 372. 1 &c. His end. ibid. 10. Iesrael, where Naboth was stoned. 357. 7. Iethro or Iothor, Raguel or Reuel, and Hobab, all one person, 267, 27. His depar∣ture from Moses. 298. 20. Iewish impietie. 425. 46. Improbabilitie of their coniecture, that place Paradise beyond the Ocean, 43. 11. &c. Improbabilitie of the confusion of tongues, at the birth of Peleg. 117. 19. Improbabilitie of the short time of tenne yeeres, allowed by some for the finishing of Ba∣bel. 133. 32. Improhabilitie of the waters standing vp∣right (like walls) in the Red Sea, as some Schoole-men haue . 263. 13. Image and similitude taken in one sense by S. Paul and S. Iames. 23, 33. Indus descent into the Ocean. 58. 6. India, the first peopled Countrie after the . 116. 37. In whose time it was that Moses led Israel out of Aegypt. 248. 13. Inuention of Alcinous Gardens, drawne by Homer from Moses his description of Pa∣radise. 38. 28. Inuention of Ethnick sacrifice ascribed to Cain. 86. 42. loab his iealcusie, of his place and dignitie. 480. 24. His speech to Dauid. 487. 3. Is opprest in his greatest securitie. 490. 40. Ioas, King of Inda, (in ) not the naturall sonne of Ahazia, 532. 41. Scrip∣tures making to this purpose, 533. 43. His forwardnesse to repaire the Temple, 541. 43. Is to buy his peace, 543. 5. His cowar∣dise, 545. 3. His death. 546. 4. Ioas, King of Israel his triumphant entrie into Hierusalem, 552. 38. His errer, 553. 40. His end. 555. 20. Iob his Sepulchre, 398. 26. Who he was, 399. 25. Whence were his friends, Elihu and the rest. ibid. 27. Iohn, the sonne of Leui, his commotions. 342. 6. Ionas, the stery of his prophecie. 564. 34. his happy resolution. 470. 10. Iones and Medes, from whom descended, 140. 24. &c. Iones expelied . 474. 10. Ioppain Iudaea, founded before the sloud. 99. 48. Burns to the ground by the Romans. 369. 20. Ioseph his reason in fauouring the Aegyp∣tian Priests, 241. 30. Esteemed the first Mercurie. 319. 51. Iosephys, the first Author of mistaking Pison for Ganges, 59 6. Mistaken in his owne tale, 150. 20. Condemned together with A∣pollinaris, for auowing Moses to haue mar∣ried both Tharbis and Sippora. 151. 26 Ioseph Scaliger his short answere, 570. 1, &c. His retractation. 571. 10. &c. Iosias his zeale to God, 629. 21. his . litie to the King of Babel, 631. 3 His death, ibid. 42. Iosua his remoue from to the banks of Iordan, 325. 22. His passage through it. ibid. 40. His skill in warre, 326. 41. His keeping faith with the , 327. 2. &c. His death, 329. 16. His , 370. 19. Iotapata, a strong Citie, for tified by Iose∣phus, 352. 6. Iotham, his Encomion by Iosephys. 578. 1. &c. Irreligious cauelling. 332. 36. Andirre∣ligious politie, 506 12. Isaac his birth, rather a miracle wrought vpon Sarah, then vpon Abraham, 222. 43 His prophccie, 521. 50. Iscah and Sarah, two names of one signifi cation, 225. 52. Isles of Elisa, mentioned by Ezekiel, 146. 54. Ismaelites and Amalekites, possest of the Countries betweene Hauilah and Sur, wasted afterwards by Saul, 59. 35. Israel punisht in Sauls time for slughter of the Gibenites, contrary to the faith long be∣fore giuen by Iosua, 328. 1, &c. Israelites ouerthrowne by the . 460. 19. Iupiter Belus, the sonne of Nimrod. 92. 45 Iupiter, renowned among the Greeks and Romans, borne not long before the warre of Troy. 93. 4. Iustice vendible. 463. 51. K KEnites and Madianites of two sorts. 267. 10. Kethura, wise to Abraham, the mater∣nall Ancester of the Kenites. 266. 44 Kingdome gained by an Asses losse. 466. 6 Kingdome of Argos transtated to Mycaena, 424. 10, &c. Kings, made by God and lawes diuine; by humane Lawes only so declared. 292. 33 L LACTANTIVS his iudgement of the first Mercurie, 320. 3, &c. Law amongst the Romans. 206. 26. Law humane desined, 289. 6. Law nationall defined, ibid. 43 Law abused grieuously punished, 465. 2. Law of Moses diuersly taken. 278. 27 Law-makers, no lesse beneficiall to their Countries, than the greatest Conquerours. 268. 34 Lawes, not imposed as a burthen, but a blessing. 287. 18 Lehabim, the sonne of Mizraim, called Hercules Lybius. 240. 35 Letters among the Chinois long before ei∣ther Aegyptians or Phaenicians. 115. 52 Licentious dtsorder, proued (vpon better ) no lesse Perillous than an vnindurable bondage. 179. 25 Lords of Thoron, whence denominated. 341. 25 Lucian his supposall concerning Helen, 453. 41. His errand to Hell to speake with Homer, 476. 38 Ludim, the eldest sonne of Mzraim, first Progenitor of the Lybians in Africa, 167 44 Lycurgus his Law, 273. 19. Lyda, (afterward Diospolis) where S. Pe∣ter cured Aeneas of the patsie. 168. 16 M Sepulchre, 377. 45 Machanaijm, where the Angels met Iacob for his defence, 393. 2. Macharus, a strong Citie and Castle, where Iohn Baptist was beheaded. 386. 8. Madianites staine by Gideon, 314. 30. Magdalum, the habitation of Mary Magdalen, 352. 4. Magick, according to Plato, 201. 8. Im∣properly termed Necromancie, 204 48. An helper in knowing the diuinitie of christ. 205. 4. Mahometan Arabians descended of the Is∣maelites. 62. 7. Man, wherin he chiefly resembleth God, or may bee called the shadow of God. 27. 4 &c. Manner of fight at the Troian Warre. 4561. &c. Many thousand Iewes ouerwhelmed in re∣building the Temple vnder Iulian Apostata. 97. 4. Many of the Species, which now seeme differing, were not at the time of the generall Deluge in rerum natura. 111. 35. Maresa, the natiue Citie of Michaeas. 381. 49. Margiana, where Alexander feasted him∣selfe and his Armie. 126. 33. Marus his Labyrinth. 615. 32. Meanes which the Greekes were forced to vse for maintenance of the siege before Troy. 454. 34 Medusa moralized. 421. 48 his inhumane cruelty. 562. 50 Menon (first husband of Semiramis) his death. 199. 4 &c. Mercator his conceit, That Nimrod and Ninus were one and the same person, answe∣red. 187. 40. Merchants of Eden traded with the Citie of . 47. 30. Mercurius Trismegistus his writings, in some places (probably) corrupted, 319. 40. His two last speeches, 320. 26. His many bookes. 324. 40. Merodach inuesteth himselfe in the King∣dome of Babylon. 596. 1. &c. Missene in Sicilie, by what occasion so na∣med. 623. 43. Minaeus and Menis, names or titles of dig∣nitie. 242. 52. Miriam her Sepulchre. 302. 3. , 205. 24. described, with his Sacrifice. 578. 49. Monie, not vsed in Greece in Homers time. 435. 46. Monuments of Iupiters Tombe in the Mount , remaining in Epiphanius his time. 89. 50. Mosal, or Mozal, anciently called Seleucia Parthorum. 52. 1. Moscoutans from whom descended, 142. 7. Their wooing. 643. 50. Moses Bar-cephas his opinion concerning the Tree of Knowledge. 67. 32. Moses did not number the generations be∣fore the Floud precisely, 75. 42. His preser∣uation, 250. 46. His birth-time. 264. 18. His compasse by the Riuers of Zared and Ar∣non, 304. 39. His message to Sehon King of the Amorites, 305. 25. His reason for not entring immediatly into Iudaea, after his vi∣ctorie against , 308. 1. &c. His death. 309. 16. Mountaines and Riuers, formerly named by the Ancient after their own names, or their Ancestors names: and the cause why. 148. 38 Mountaines of Paria, their length. 175. 49 Mourning for Thammuz. 335. 50 Mouse-Magick. 209. 48 Multiplicity of Gods. 197. 22. Myris, a great Lake in Aegypt. 604. 38 N NABOTH, the eldest sonne of Ismael 311. 30. Nabuchodonosor ouer throweth Necho, 645. 44. His peremptory message to Ie∣hoiakim, 646. 17. His conquest of Ae∣gypt 647. 6. Hee besiegeth Tyre. ibid. 14. Hee puts Iehoiakim to death, ibid. 52. He besiegeth Hierusalem, 649. 13. And for∣ceth it, ibid. 50. He destroyeth the Temple. 650. 30. Nahas, a cruell King of the Ammonites. 395. 21. Nebo, the Idoll-Oracle of the Moabites. 387. 7. Nectar and Ambrosia, alluding in the Poets to the Tree of life. 67. 12. Nestorians, part of their generall Epistle to the Pope. 53. 24. Nimrod, seated in the confluence of those Riuers which watered Paradise, 64. 10. The first founder of Niniue, 131. 54. His buil∣dings. 912. 10. Ninias, sonne to Semiramis, an effeminate Prince. 232. 30. Niniue formerly called Campsor. 213. 40 Ninus his time of gouernment, after the Floud, 158. 3. &c. His conquests, 173. 15. The first notorious sacrificer to Idols. 191. 21. Noah his sundry appellations, 107. 44. Analogically conferred with Ianus, 108. 10. A Citie of that name vpon the bankes of the Red Sea, 109. 5. Hee neuer came so farre Westward as Babylon, 118. 6. Is no more re∣membred in Scripture after his sacrifice; and the cause, 118. 45. His children came not all together to Shinaar. 121. 20. Nobilitie in Parchment. 184. 49. Noema, or Naamath, the sister of Tu∣balcain, expounded by Saint Augustine. 86 46. Numa his Law, 196. 14. His graue, 626. 50. His bookes. 627. 3. O OAke of Mambre. 303. 41. Obedience to Princes commaunded without distinction. 182. 3. Occasion of obscurity in the Aegyptian , 236. 47. And of the supplicatory let∣ters of the Nestorians to the Pope, in the yeere 1552. 53. 5. Oceanus and Hesperus, Contemporartes with Moses. 316. 53. Of the Masse, indigested matter, or Chaos, created in the beginning. 5. 41. Offences punished without forme of iudge∣ment, cause the offenders to seeme innocent. 513. 40. Ogyges, Contemporary with Iacob. 99. 19. Olympiades, whence so called. 575. 18. One of the Pillars erected by Seth the third from Adam, was by Iosephus testimo∣nie to be seene in his dayes. 41. 27. Ophir, one of Ioctans sonnes, seated in the Moluccas in the East India. 175. 6. Opinions concerning the length of Mans life, 77. 42. &c. And concerning Iupiter, the sonne of Saturne and Ops, 88. 33. &c. And concerning Moses his birth-time, 247 20. And concerning Nimrod. 146. 83. Oracles of Amphiaraus. 205. 36. Origen his Sepulchre. 379. 11. Orosius his report of Pharaohs Charriot wheeles. 263 42. Orpheus his instruction to Musaeus con∣cerning God. 94. 40, &c. Orus the second, (or Busiris) Author of the Edict for drowning the Hebrew children. 244. 4. Osiris, the eldest sonne of Cham. 239 49 Oysters growing on trees. 68. 14. &c. P PACUVIVS his wise carriage with the Commons in Capua. 574. 40. Painters wiues Iland. ibid. 20. Palme trees, whereof the people make Bread, Honie, Wine, Vineger, and fine Flax. 56 20. Paradise of Eden, truly taken for the pro∣per name of a place, 35. 46. By knowing the place whereof, wee may better iudge of the be∣ginning, 40. 15. A Citie of that name in Coe∣lesyria. 47. 19. Paternall authority in transferring birth∣right. 496. 19. &c. Paternitie and Eldership, the Gouern∣ment. 178. 34. Patience wounded. 460. 2. &c. Pelasgus, King of Arcadia. 315. 54. Pelusium, a great Citie vpon the branch of Nilus, next Arabia. 153. 38. People in the Indies, neere farre greater water-fals then the Catadupae of Nilus, are not deafe at all. 44. 30. Periander, a cruell Tyrant. 644. 32. Petra, the natiue Citie of Ruth. 388. 13. Pharaoh his Sorcerers Frogs, 210. 17. His Armie wherewith hee pursued the Israe∣lites. 254. 1. &c. Pharaoh his deuillish policie, 250. 8. The ground of his crueltie. ibid. 30. Pharaoh Vaphres, Father-in-law to Sa∣lomon. 242. 31. Pheron, sonne to Sesostris, assumeth his Fathers name, 243. 12. Is strucken blinde, ibid. 25. Recouered. ibid. 28. Philistims, destroyed with thunder, 463. 15. Their in not prosequuting the vi∣ctory after Sauls death. 478. 50. Philosophers ignorant in nature, and the wayes of her working. 13. 49. Philostratus in vita Apollonij Tianaei found true, though fabulously exprest. 115. 37. Phineus, and the Harpies. 430. 1 &c. Phoenicians nauigation about . 632 30. Phraortes, ouerthrowne in his attempt of Niniue. 635. 30. Phunon, sometime a principall Citie of the Edomites. 304. 50. Phut, the third sonne of Ham, first plan∣ted in Lybia. 161. 21. punished. 609. 17 Pineda his miracle. 500. 47. Pison, falsly taken for Ganges; and , falsly for Nilus. 43. 8. Pison and Tigris ioyning vnder , retaine one name of Piso-Tigris, to this day. 58. 44 Plato his differing from Moses in that place where God made answere by his Angel: Existens misit me ad vos, 93. 52. iudgement concerning God. 95. 48 Pluto his Rape of Proserpina. 418. 37. Power, secured from , pernicious. 464. 49. Pride, foolish and wretched. 550. 43. Princes ruling in diuers parts of the world, at the time of the Law giuen in . 276. 20. Probabilitie that Nahor and Haran did not persist in idolatry, 223. 40. And that Iob liued in the time of Moses, 252. 22. And that the Greekes lay not before Troy the first nine yeeres. 454. 42. Prodigie, preceding the floud of Ogyges: with a discourse thereon. 100. 28. Prometheus his Vulture moralized, 104 28. &c. His Fire. 316. 10. Proteus, what he was probably. . 12. Psammiticus, abandoned by his owne fol∣lowers and Countrimen, 616. 50. His long siege of Azotus, 617. 19. His prouident course to diuert the Scythians from Aegypt. 612. 3. &c. Ptolomaeus Lathurus defeateth Alex∣ander King of the Iewes. 356. 20. Pygmalion, King of Tyre, in whose time Dido sailed into Africk, and built Carthage. 364. 25. Pythagoras his Eagle, 209. 31. His golden precept. 274. 7. R RAbba, where Vrias was . 394. 33. Ramases, a Citie in Gosen, from whence the made their first march towards the Red Sea. 254. 23. Ramesses or Aegyptus, vnder whome Moses was horne. 246. 4 Reasons why the Iewes omitted Circumci∣sion during their abode in the wildernesse, 325. 45. And prouing the Tyrians to haue beene originally Idolaters, 367. 25. And reasons moouing the Ammonites to make warre vpon Iabes Gilead. 467. 30. Recem, now called Crac and Mozera, a Citie, where the Soldans of Aegypt kept . 388. 1 &c. Red colour obserued by the Aegyptians. 253. 26. Reges Arabum & Saba, in the 72. Psalme, expounded according to the Hebrew. 50. 15. Regions lying betweene Armenia and Scy∣thia. 120. 36. his conceit of the names of Troes, Tucri, and Thraces. 447. 39. Romulus his description. 589. 43. Ruth and Ianus Contemporaries. 140. 22. S SABA, the sonne of Ioctan, seated in In∣dia. 174. 46. , the birth-Citie of Zebedaeus, Al∣phaeus, Iames, and Iohn. 352. 35. Sages of Greece, in whose time flou∣rished. 575. 30. Saint George his Sepulchre. 369. 25. Saladine dishonourably repulsed, 341. 40 Hee acquireth the Soucraignetie of Aegypt. 605. 35. Salomon anointed King, 490. 18. His education, 495. 36. His reasons for Ado∣nijabs death, 496. 3. Wherein the chiefe ex∣cellencie of his wisedome consisted, 497. 7. His letter to Hiram, ibid. 50. The answere to it, 498. 10. His Garrisons, 501. 14. His Ring dissossessing euill Spirits, 504. 4. His frailtie. ibid. 47 Samaria, founded by Amri, or Homri, 368. 36. by the sonnes of Hir∣canus, ibid. 45. Where Helisaeus, Ab∣dias, and Iohn the Baptist were buried. ibid. 47. Samaritans, a perfidious nation. 164. 23. Sanar, the first bringer of the Turkes into Aegypt. 600. 10 Saul, elected (probably) by lot, 466. 47 His disobedience, 470 43. His crueltie, 472. 22. His end, and dishonour after his death, ibid. 40. Schoole-men, all grosse in holding the Countries vnder the Aequinoctiall vninha∣bitable. 46. 21. Scorners rewarded. 591. 20. Scriptures more ancient than all other An∣tiquity. 130. 40. Scultet his calculation. 590. 46. Scythia Saga, or Sacae, vnder the Moun∣taines of Paropanisus, 119. 50. Scythia intra Imaum, bounded by Marius Niger. 120. 20 Sehon discomfited. 307. 47 Seleucia, anciently called Chalanne. 48. Semiramis her policie in obtaining the Empire, 214. 20. Her Armte against Stau∣robates, 215. 36. Her ouerthrow. ibid. 54. Sennacherib his expedition against the Iewes; according to Herodotus. 612. 8 Seneca his iudgement of Nature, Fate, or Fortune. 20. 5. Sephora and Thua, famous Mid- . 250. 12. Sephoris, the Citie of Ioakim and Anna, the Parents of the Virgin Mary. 352. 37. Sesostris, endangered by his Brother strea∣son 243 9. His Coach. 504. 47. Seth, worshipped by the Aegyptians. 87. 51. Setheitica, a principall Prouince in Aegypt ibid. 53. Sheba and Rama border the Persian Gulfe. 47. 49. Shishak his policie in entertaining Adad and Ieroboam. 371. 45. Simon Magus his end. 208. 46. Sinai and Horeb, but one Mountaine. 267. 42. Single Combats. 479. 20. Sixtus Quintus his answere to a Frier. 537. 4. Slaue, why so called. 494. 4 &c. Socrates suffred death for acknowledging one onely powerfull God. 43. 39. Spaniards pride in America, 172. 29. Their plantation in the East at Manilia. 499. 39. Spartans . 620 39. Spring perpetuall in the South of Arme∣nia. 56. 43. Starres and other celestiall bodies incline the by mediation of the sensitiue appetite. 35. 34. Statues erected by the woman, whom Christ cured of the issue. 346. 17. Sterculius, mentioned by S. Augustine. 583. 39. Strange execution of the Citizens of Gada∣ra committed on themselues. 396. 48. Strato, King of Zidon, expelled by Alex∣ander Macedon, 362. 50. Another of that name, slaine by his owne wife. 363. 10. Sugar mode by the Sunne. 343. 38. Susa, in the Prouince of Elam; sometimes the seat-Royal of the Kings of Persia. 170. 15 Syrta described. 331. 8, &c. T TAlus, destroyed by Medaea. 431. 34. Tamberlain his Trophee of victory. 402. 23. Tanais and Volga, whence they truely a∣rise: with the vanity of the Riphaei and Hy∣perborei Mountaines. 120. 50. Tantalus moralized. 420. 1. &c. Tarichia, a Citie, forced by Vespasian. 353. 31, &c. Taurus, where on the Arke rested. 128. 18. Taurus his stealth of Europa. 360. 17. Telassar, inhabited by the Edenites, 50. 30. Called Thiluthe by Am. Marcellinus, some∣times a garrison Towne against the Assyrians. 51. 3. Teman, the Citie whence Eliphaz came to reason with Iob, where situate. 366. 2, &c. Temper of the lower part of Eden. 64. 35. Teneriffe in the Canaries, the highest moun∣taine knowne in the world. 124. 18. Tereus his Rape of Philomel. 419. 10. Testimonies of the Ancient concerning Moses. 322. 22. Tharsus in Cilicia, the natiue Citie of Saint Paul, founded by Tharsis the second sonne of Iauan. 147. 42. That which seemeth most casuall and sub∣iect to fortune, is yet disposed by the ordinance of God. . 38. That the floud made no such alteration as is generally receiued. 42. 20. That the Starres and other celestial bodies, incline the will by the meditation of the sensi∣tiue appesite. 35. 34. The meanes that Dauid grew rich by. 492. 7. Theseus his worthy exploits. 434. 4. Thirst of . 463. 50. Thought vnsearchable to the Diuell. 206. 16. Three generall opinions of Paradise. 39. 1. Three things especially are the naturall causes of a long and an healthfull life. 78. 20. Three causes why Moses sorbare to con∣duct the Israelites through Arabia. 258. 34. Thua and Sephora, famous Midwiues. 250. 12. Thulis an Aegyptian King, of whom strange matters are reported. 606 36. Thuoris, supposed to be Proteus. 606. 3. Thuras, the first Mars. 195. 6. Tiber, whence it tooke the name. 587. 4. Tiberius restraineth humane sacrifices. 438. 3. Tigris, separated from Danubius by the Sea of Hellespont, and all Asia the lesse, 58. 40. it ouerflowed Niniue. 559 &c. Time, wherein men might attaine to bee such as they ought, oft-times mis-spent in see∣king to be such as they are not. 556. 50. Tiras, father of the Thracians. 144. 38 Tohu opprest by Hadadezer, and succou∣red by Dauid. 477. 10. Token of libertie with the wicked, despise the seruice of God. 542. 23. Torniellus his paines to proue the Booke of Iudith Canonicall. 625. 39. Tostatus his opinion of Ophir. 176. 26. Traditionall oblations. 180, 22. Treacherie rightly rewarded. 623. 17. Treason in fashion. 485. 40. Treasure anciently vsed to be buried with the dead. 492. 28. Trees of life and knowledge. 66. 18. Tree of life, how vnderstood by the He∣brewes. 66, 25. Tree of knowledge, so called of the euent. 70. 2. Tribute denied, causeth Senacherib to make warre on Ezechias. 593. 18. Troy, when destroyed. 445. 24. Two sorts of Kenites and Madianites. 267. 10. Two Edens. 47. 9. Tydeus his quarrell with Polynices; and the issue thereof. 436. 33. Tyrannie of Saul towards Ionathan. 470, 26. and towards Abimelech. 472. 23. Trust in worldly prosperitie, how vaine. 526. 20. Tyrants are the last that heare of any mis∣chiefe against them. 539. 13. Tyrannous dominion of the Scythians in Asia. 642. 30. Tyre besieged by the Chaldaeans. 647. 14. Tyrrhenus, the first bringer of Vines in∣to France. 121. 46. V VAgabond, how to bee vnderstood. 72. 47. Valour of the Cymmerians. 638. 2. Vanitie of Homer, in description of the fight betweene Hector and Achilles. 456. 30. Vanitie of superstition. 460. 48. Vanity of many great of warre in va∣lewing themselues too highly. 491. 1. Vanitie of Becanus his Gigantomochia. 81. 41. Vanitie of Chronologers, in taking Am∣raphel for Nimrod. 227, 6. Vanitie of the Greeks vsed in the Olym∣pian Games. 577, 15, &c. Vaphres, father in law to Salomon. 607. 37. Vanitie of opinions concerning the rape of Helen. 451. 35. &c. Vasco de Gama, the first finder of the Cape of good Hope. 632. 32. Vatablus his opinion concerning Eden. 51. 20. Vengeance cast vpon Israel for the ingrati∣tude of Iehu. 530. 40. Vertue truely heroicall. 551. 4. Vertue of Iosias in his childhood. 629. 20. Venetians, probably descended from the Troians. 458. 10. Venetus his report of Iapan. 116. 16. Victory of Iephta, enuied by the Ephrae∣mites; and the issue thereof. 439. 40. Victorie begetteth securitie. 484. 45. Victorie of Nabuchodonozor against Necho. 645. 43. Violence towards parents, punished with death. 285. 5. Virgils opinion touching the originall of the Troians. 446, 27, &c. Vncertaintie of Authors, about the time when Homer liued. 476. 2. Vnwarlike people hardened by custome of danger. 635. 26. Voluptuousnesse of Sardanapalus. 559. 1. Vriah his death, considered with the slaughter done by Salomon vpon his elder brother. 465. 19 Vrim and Thumim of the Iewish Priests 466. 48. to be made of praying towards the East 37, 1, &c. Vse of letters found out before the Floud. 79 22. Vses of the Morall, Ceremoniall, and ludi∣ciall Lawes. 283. 10 Vzzia punished by God, for medling with the Prtests Office. 564, 1, &c. W VV Antonnesse of Atossa. 536. 47. Warines of the Romans in establish∣ing Rome for the Seat of the Empire. 566. 52. Warre concluded vpon vneuen termes, eft∣soones breaketh out with greater violence. 621, 6. Way attempted to bee made for passage of ships, from Nilus into the Red Sea. 632, 10. West part of America, how it came to bee called Peru, 175. 30 &c. What Saint Paul may probably be thought chiefly to intend, in the account of time, from Israels comming out of Aegypt to the diuision of the promised Land. 444. 12. What kinde of Prophets they were, with whom Saul encountred and prophecied. . 34. What yeere of the Lord Dauid died in 492. 7. What Cinaei they were against whom Ba∣laam prophecied, Ios. 19. 33. 163. 48. What kinde of Kings those fiue were, men∣tioned, Gen. 14. 230, 32. What part of the Red Sea Moses past tho∣row. 261. 35. What might bee the cause of Iehosaphats taking his sonne to be partner in his kingdome 519 20. Whence the report came, that oysters grow on trees in India. 68 14. Whence that conceit of Orpheus and He∣siodus sprang, That Giants were the sonnes of Heauen and Earth. 81. 52. Whence the fable arose, of diuiding the world betweene the three sonnes of Saturne. 86. 50. Whence the word (Slaue) had its originall. 494. 4. Where it was that Christ remained, whilest Ioseph and Marie feared Herod. 249. 14. Which Magog Ezechiel had reference vnto. 137. 36. Which Hauilah it is that Pison compas∣seth. 177. 20. Which Belus was the more ancient. 194. 42. Who they were that first institated the Ne∣maean Games. 437. 7. Who were supposed to be the first Inuenters of Nauigation. 134 30. Wholesome seueritie rather desired, than . 624, 40. Why the Babylonians gaue a Doue in their Ensignes. 216 2. Wickednesse quickly planted, but not rooted vp againe. 633. 37. Wicked instigators. 524 33. William of Tyre his report, concerning the Aegyptian Caliph. 600. 4. Wine and strong drinke prohibited to tee∣ming women. 459. 21. &c. Wisedome better than all worldly riches. 496. 42. Wisedome of man, blinde in looking into the counsaile of God. 535, 50. Wise at home, and foolish abroad. 551. 44. Witches transportations. 209. 1. Woman, giuen to man for a Comforter, not for a Counsailer. 70 43. Women, with Idolatry peruert Salomon. 504. 12. Wonder of a Nation. 624. 1. Wondering at any thing in this world, is folly; considering the folly of the world. 537. 4. &c. Words of Image and similitude, taken in one and the same sense by Saint Paul and Saint Iames. 23. 33. Worldly men, and their condition 468. 20. Worlds first written receiued Law. 276. 22. Worship done to Christ by the Magi: with aprobable coniecture whence they came. 166. 10. Wretched pride. 550. 42. Writers on the place of Paradise, diuersly conceiued. 33. 40. Y Y Oke of Iacob, broken by Esau. 521. 50. Z Z ALEVCVS his mild Law. 644. 43. Zeale waxetls cold, when troubles cease 484. 48. Zeale of Dauid and the Israelites towards the building of the Temple. 490. 12. Zedekias his iournie to Babel, 648. 31. is besieged in Hierusalem, 649. 3. is taken prisoner, 650. 5. and hath his eyes torne out, and is carried captiue to Babylon. ibid. 20. Zerah his terrible inuasion of Iudaea. 509. 30. Zoan, a Citie in Aegypt, where Hiere∣mie the Prophet was stoned to death. 248. 42. in whose confines Onias built a Temple for the Iewes. 249. 7. Zoroasters birth, 199. 52. his Oracles. 202. 52. AN ALPHABETICALL LIST OF THE PRINCIPALL CONTENTS OF THE THIRD, FOVRTH, AND FIFT BOOKES OF THE FIRST Part of the Historie of the WORLD. Wherein the first number signifieth the Leafe, the second the Line. A ABROCOMAS his cowardize. 113. 39. Achaemenes his assoctation with Arbaces. 28. 40. His progenie. 30. 1, &c. Acrocorinthus, a strong Citadel of Corinth. 398. 30. Adherbal his notable victorie at Sea a∣gainst the Romans. 365. 19. Aduantage of absolute Lords, aboue such as are serued by Voluntarics. 95, 50. Aduersitie is alwayes sure to heare of her er∣rors. 376. 10. It rectifies the vnder standing. 533, 16. Aduisednesse and rashnesse. 435, 2. &c. Aegira, taken by surprise, and lost againe through greedinesse of . 589, 21. &c. Aemylius Paulus his great circumspection 445, 33. His encouragement to his Souldiers 448, 18. His care to preuent the mischiefe imminent, through the head-strong conduct of his vaine-glorious Colleague. 450. 45. Is staine in battaile. 455, 48. Aetolians ingratitude. 402, 5. &c. Their pride abated. 689, 20. Who being the first drawers of the Romans into Greece, are the first whose necks are galled with their yoke. 702, 46. Agathocles his degrees, whereby he obtai∣ned the Kingdome of Syracuse. 341, 40. Hee ouerthroweth the Carthaginians. 343, 12. Is himselfe shortly after besieged by them; with the strange course hee takes to raise the siege, ibid. 30. His perfidie toward Ophellas, 345 15. His in making timely peace with the Carihaginians, ibid. 32. His amazed slight into Sicil, 346, 4. &c. His bloudie na∣ture, ibid. 12. His wretched end. ibid. 50. Agesilaus his sacrifice thrown downe from the Altar. 134, 18. He deludeth Tissapher∣nes, ibid. 39. He driueth Pharnabazus out of his campe. 136. 8. He wasteth Boeotia. 139. 14. His disloyaltie. 154. 26. His death, ib. 40. Agis his great care for the good of Sparta, vnworthily recompenced with the lamentable death of himselfe, his Mother, and Grandmo∣ther. 402, 35. &c. Alcetas his vnhappie end. 230. 25. Alcibiades his cunning dealing with the Spartan Embassadours. 97, 31. Is forced to banish himselfe. 99, 22. and seeketh reuenge vpon owne Citizens, ibid. 39. he is reuo∣ked srom banishment. 101, 35. his great fa∣uour with Tissaphernes, ibid. 48. againe exiled. 103, 24. his friendship and good counsaile is reiected. 105, 5. &c. his death. 106. 9. Alexander, the sonne of Amyntas King of Macedon, his magnanimitie and prudence. 50. 40. Alexander M. chosen Captaine Generall of the Greekes, 169, 16. Hee winneth Thebes, 170, 20. &c. his clemencie to the race of Pin∣darus. ibid. 36. his crueltie to his Mother-in∣lawes kinsmen. 171, 15. his gracious dealing with the Cities of his first conquest in Asia. 173. 36. his policie in sending the Persian tar∣gets to the Cities of Greece, 175. 6. his easie passage through the straits of Cilicia, 176. 22. his many good fortunes at once, 180. 21. his answere to Darius his letter after the of issus, 181. 4. be releaseth Apollo, ib. 34. his vision in Dio, 182. 41. his affectation of Deitie, 183, 49. his passage ouer Tigris, 184. 50. his answere to Darius his Embassadors, 187, 22. the number of his Armie, 188, 13. hath Arbela, with a great masse of treasure, yeelded vnto him, 189. 13. waxeth contemp∣tible amongst his followers, 192. 11. his hap∣pie temeritie. 197. 36. his stratageme to win the passage of a Rocke, ibid. 47. his grosse af∣fectation of flatterie. 199. 44. &c. his passage ouer the riuer Oxus, 201, 50. his crueltie to a colonie of Greeks, 202, 10. his munificence to Omphis, 206, 20. he loseth most part of∣his Armie, 209. 10. his marriage with Sta∣tira, 210, 3, &c. his lamentation for Epbe∣stions death, ibid. 36. his last draught, ibid. 40. Alterations of time. 621. 23. Alliance between Hannibal and the Cam∣pans. 460. 10. Altinius his treason worthily punished. 498. 32. Amasis his entrie to the Kingdome of Ae∣gypt. 23. 9. Ambition making haste to her owne ruine; 434. 12. Ambition of diuers Consuls, to wrest the ho∣nour of the warre in Africk, out of Scipio's . 580. 51. &c. Ambition, malignant of others vertue, is a in a great counsailor. 643, 43. Amilcar, father of the great Hannibal, inuadeth and wasteth Italie. 368, 24. he resi∣neth his charge to Gesco, 372. his passage ouer the riuer Bagradas, 387, 42. his first vi∣ctorie ouer the Mercinaries, 388, 7, &c. his humanitie towards his prisoners, affrights the Captaines of the Mutiners, 389, 1, &c. his notable entrapping of the Rebells; and the ter∣rible execution done vpon them, 392, 2, &c. he besiegeth Tunes, ibid. 40. is made Generall in the Spanish Expedition, 395, 51. his singu∣lar vertue acknowledged by his most deadly e∣nemies, 396, 3, &c. his death. ibid. 11. Amyntas (almost) expelled out of Macc∣don. 142, 13. Amyrtaeus obtaineth the Kingdome of Aegypt. 107. 35. Andronodorus his subtletie in resigning his Protectorship, 510. 18. his close dealing to attaine the , 512, 33. his death. 513. 15. Angra, a strong Fort. 365. 19. Antigonus the Great, his politick escape from Perdiccas, 223, 39. is made Generall of the Macedonian Armie. 229, 1, &c. his bar∣barous vsage to the dead corps of Alcetas, 230, 31, &c. his reasons for not entring Ma∣cedon, 238, 36. his politicke surprize of Eu∣menes his carriages, 249, 20. his subtile plot in betraying Eumenes, 250. 20. his iust payment of the traitors, 251. 2. his prepara∣tion against Ptolemie, 253. 24. he enforceth Tyre, by famine, to render it selfe, 254. 40. his iournie into Phrygia, 257, 45. he forceth Cassander to retire into Macedon. 258, 40. his intent to marrie with Cleopatra, sister to Alexander, 270, 12, &c. his fleet in great extremitie, 276, 17. his departure out of Ae∣gypt, 277, 10. &c. his vaine ostentation, 279, 51. his vnwonted sadnesse, 281. 17. his end and conditions. ibid. 46. Antigonus the yonger, the sonne of De∣metrius, is King of Macedon, 303. 38. his fond oftentation to the Gaules Embassadors 304, 1, &c. is forced to abandon his campe, ibid. 16. is forsaken of his owne Souldiers, and expelled his Kingdome, 305, 30. hee rai∣seth a new Armie against Pyrrhus, 306. 44. and re-obtaineth his Kingdome, 307, 44. his policie in getting Acrocorinthus. 398. 43. Antigonus, surnamed Tutor, made Pro∣tector to Philip the sonne of Demetrius, 399 6. his Expedition into Achaia, 407, 41. is made Generall ouer the Achaeans, and their Confederates, 408, 33. hee van∣quisheth at Selasia, 410, 20. his death. 411, 43. Antiochus the Great marcheth against Molo, his Rebell, 645, 30. Winnes the vi∣ctorie by his name and presence, ibid. 44. he winneth Seleucia from the Aegyptian, 646, 35. hee sueth to Ptolemie for peace, after his ouerthrow at Raphia, 648, 24, &c. hee taketh Sardes, 649, 15. his Expedition against the Parthians, 651, 53. his passage to the Indi∣ans, 652, 52. he reedifieth Lysimachia, 657, 12. his Embassage to the Romans, 668. 44. his vaine brags, 681. 18. his Embassage to the Achaeans, 682, 26. he is driuen out of Grecce, 688, 28. and is vtterly defeated by the Ro∣mans. 699. 27. Antipater sends to Craterus for succour, 216, 35. is besieged in Lamia, 217, 30. to the aid of the campe, 219, 48. his subtile dealing with the Greekes in the treatie of peace, 220, 23. changeth the Gouernement of , 221, 1, &c. hee returneth with the King into Macedon, 229, 1. his qualities. 231, 10 Apelles his deuice to supplant Aratus, 593, 50. happily discouered, 594, 22. his conspiracie against the King, 595, 12. his ar∣rogancie, and treacherie towards the King, 598, 7. hee is dasht out of countenance, and forsaken of his company, by a simple checke from the King, ibid. 26. and is imprisoned, where he dies. ibid. 48 Apollo's Oracle concerning Cyrus, 10, 20 Apollonides his treacherie. 229. 30 App. Claudius arriues at Messana in fa∣uour of the , 318, 3. hee giueth an ouerthrow to the Carthaginians, 320, 1, &c. Apries, King of Aegypt, put to death by his subiects. 15, 45 Apsus, or Aous, a great Riuer in the of Epirus. 625, 36 Aratus expelleth the Tyrant of Sicyon, 400, 7, &c. and surpriseth the Citadell of Co∣rinth, ibid. 17. Being led with priuate pas∣sion, he makes a bad bargaine for his Countrie, 405, 9. his violent opposition against the League with , 406 44. his against all the gentle offers of , 407, 27 his many disgraces by Antigo∣nus, 408, 45. his reuenge taken on Manti∣naea, 409, 2, &c. is ouerthrowne by the , 586, 44. hee procureth Philip to in∣uade , 596, 1 &c by his good counsaile hee diuerteth Philip from his practice vpon Messene 604, 32. and is afterwards by Philip. 605. 23 Arcadians to Athens and , 150, 10 Archimedes his strange engines in defence of Syracuse, 517, 25. his death and sepulture, 521, 25 Argiues at dissention among themselues, 98, 49 Argos, the name of an Altar in Greece, 640, 19 his weakenesse. 215, 32 Aristagoras surpriseth the Persian fleet, 54, 43. is assisted by the Athenians, 55, 6 he surpriseth Sardes, and burneth it, ibid. 10 is ouer throwne by the Edonians. 56, 4 his integrity. 70, 47 Aristodemus his flattery. 275, 10 Art of quarrell. 546, 33 Art of Tyrants. 632, 1, &c. Artabazus his bootlesse counsaile, 59, 25. he into Thrace, 73, 30. is together with his whole family put to death by exquisite tor∣ments. 81, 39 Artabazus fauoured by Alexan∣der, for his fidelitie to Darius, 194, 49. and is made Gouernour of Bactria, 201, 45 Artaxerxes his vaine ostentation, 115, 30 his message to the Greekes, 116, 18. his base minde. 117, 43 Artemisia, her sound aduice to Xerxes, 67. 37 Asdrubal, the son of Amilcar, his strange towards 482, 21, &c. his terri∣ble entrie into Italie, 533, 28. his maine o∣uer sight, 534, 48. his death and commenda∣tions. 537, 40 Asdrubal, the sonne of Gisco, is chosen Generall of the , 558, 23, &c. is fired out of his Campe by Scipio, 561, 11. and flieth to Carthage, ibid. 38. he raiseth new forces, 562, 9. and is put to by the Ro∣mans. ibid. 34 Assembly of the Graecian Estates, vpon the Treatie of peace with Philip. 636, 4, &c. constancie, 70, 20. they send a fleete into Egypt, against the Persian, 82, 35. they enforce Aegina to render vpon most base conditions, 85, 14. they inuade Sames, 87, 8. and subdue Mytilene, 90, 20. Their rough answere to the Spartan Embassadours, 96, 21. their peruerse obstinacie, 99, 43. their against Syracuse, 329, 47. they besiege it, 330, 29. their obstinacie in the of , ibid. 45. are beaten at Sea by the Syracusians, 331, 11. their last Sea-fight in Sicil, ibid. 50. the miserable end of their whole Armie. 333. 20 Atilius M. his victorie by Sea, against the Carthaginians. 353. 11. Aulis in , a goodly Hauen. 134. 12. B BAbylon, the greatnesse thereof. 37, 38 Bagoas his malicious crueltie. 209, 43 Balthafar, not the sonne, but the grand∣child of Nabuchodonosor, 7. 40. miserably slaine by his owne people. 37. 7. Bantius his easie nature. 463. 38. Barbarous resolution. 123. 3. Battaile of Metaurus. 536. 25, &c. Battaile of Nadagara. 577. 3, &c. Battaile of Magnesia. 698. 15. &c. Benefit and Grace. 34. 11. Benefits arising from wrongs done, make not iniustice the more excusable. 521. 16 their owne Land, and re∣couer their liberty. 86. 44. Brauery, of all qualities, is the least vnto Soueraigne command. 458. 33 Britomarus, slain in single fight by Mar∣cellus. 420. 10. Britons policie against the French. 313 37 Brutus his ouer-great seueritie. 293. 26 Burrough his waftage of the English tho∣row the Straits of Elsenour. 304. 44. C CAlamities of warre, in some cases, rather enable than weaken Kingdomes. 496. 26. Calpas, a goodly Hauen. 127. 49. Callinicus his bloudie entrie to the King∣dome of Asia: and his vnfortunate raigne. 641. 43, &c. Cambyses his chiefe reason, in bindering the building of the Citie and Temple of Hie∣rusalem. 40. 30. hee marrieth his owne sisters, 41. 16. his cruelty to the dead, 44. 42. his at∣tempt against the Temple of Iupiter Am∣mon, 45. 12. his dreame: and the issue ther∣of, ibid. 24. His death. 46. 10 Camillus F. his , 295. 24. Vn∣iuslly banished, ibid. 35. his notable seruice against the Gaeules, 296. 19 Campanians submit to the Romans. 296. 42. Captaines vnhappie, but happie Clerkes, 714. 10. Care taken to auoide good admonition. 376. 3. Carthage described, 314, 50. The speciall causes of her destruction. 315. 20. Carthaginians policie to separate the Syra∣cusians from the . 333. 33. their sacrifice to Saturne; with the euent thereof, 345. 40, &c. Their wofullouer sight, 373. 16 Their consternation, 563. 10. They assayle the Romanes in the hauen of , 564. 8. their great ioy vpon a small occasion. ibid. 26 their dishonour able embassage to Scipio, 567 47. their impatience loseth them many helps, 574. 35. their bootlesse sorrow, 583. 33, &c. their enuy to the Barchines, repayed with ad∣uantage. 725. 1, &c. Carthalo his fortunate successe against the Romans. 366. 30. Cassander his secret conference with An∣tigonus, 232. 25. His entrie into Firaeus, 235. 48. hee reduceth Athens to obedience, 236. 50. hee builds Cassandria; and reedifies Thebes, 243. 32. his politick dealing with A∣lexander, the sonne of Polysperchon, 256. 10. hee vanquisheth Glaucius King of the , 257. 2. hee putteth Roxane, and her sonne, to death, 268. 7. His cruelty repayed on his owne house, 287. 1, &c. C. Cassius his wise answere. 100. 42. Cato his general conclusion in Senate, 468 38. his conastion. 707. 2, &c. Ceraunus repaireth to Seleucus, 290. 41 His trecherie against him, 291. 13. his good successe in Macedon and Thrace, 301. 10. his perfidious loue to his sister, ibid. 36. his foolish pride and miserable end. 302. 1. Cetaphim, or Hagiographa, of the lewes. 3. 46. Charidemus his good counsaile to Darius ill rewarded. 179. 3. &c. Charles the fift his aduice to his sonne Philip. 353. 20. Choice ill made. 728. 25. Cimon, Generall of the Athenians. 80. 24. He reduceth Phaselis to their subiection. ibi. 41. he obtaineth two victories in one day. ibi. 50. hee ouerthroweth the Phanicians flecte, 81. 1, &c. and is sent with a strong Nauie, to take in the Ile of Cyprus, 83. 9. his death, 85. 29. Cincinnatus his notable Expedition a∣gainst the Volscians. 295. 9. Cleadas his bootlesse perswasion. 170. 29. Cleander and his Complices, worthily . 209. 30. Clearthus driueth the Persians out of their Campe, 117. 32. his confident message to the Persian, ibid. 40. his ouer-much credu∣litie, 119. 28. his death. 120. 4, &c. Cleomenes his victory against Aratus, 404. 4. hee restoreth the ancient discipline of Lycurgus, ibid. 18. his great spirit, and good carriage in mannaging his affaires, ibid. 33. his great victorie at Dymes, 406. 21. &c. his winning of Argos, 407. 10. is enforced to a∣bandon . 408. 19. his bold af∣front giuen to Antigonus. 410. 2. is put to flight by Antigonus; and louingly entertay∣ned by Ptolemie Euergetes. 411. 1. &c. his vnfortunate end. ibid. 19. Clypea, a Port towne on Africk side. 354. 20. Cocles his admirable resolution. 293. 45. Combats of kindes. 544. 47. &c. Commoditie of a retrait, is a great aduance∣ment to flat running away. 432. 11. Conditions of truce betweene the Atheni∣ans and Lacedaemonians. 91. 30. Concolitanus and Aneroestus, with a mightie Armie of Gaules inuade the Romans 416. 45. But are ouerthrowne, together with the greatest part of their forces. 419. 10. &c. Congruitie of natures in a rare couple. 617. 47. Conon his famous retrait. 130. 46. Conquest of reuenge, what it is truly. 547. 42. Consultation rightly Creticall. 650. 16. Contempt vsed against Princes, lesse pardo∣nable than ill deedes. 337. 29 Contradictions in the Roman historie, about the warres of the two Scipio's in Spaine. 471. 39. Conuenience and inconuenience of an Ar∣mie, consisting of diuers Nations and Lan∣guages. 373. 11. Coriolanus his dangerous warre against the Romans. 294. 38. Counsaile preuaileth nothing, where oppor∣tunities are neglected. 417. 17. Courage not answerable to goodwill. 519. 45. Court warres. 394. 32. Cowardize and Courage strangely inter∣mixed. 400. 36. Craft of the Romans in obscure couenants. 472. 12 Craterus his malice. 199. 12. Is sent back into Macedon, and made Lieutenant therof, 210. 21. he ioyneth with Antipater, 220. 5. mariage with the daughter of Antipater. 222. 7. &c. Hee reduceth the Aetolians into hard termes, ibid. 18. his ouer-much haste to encounter Eumenes, 226. 27. Is deceiued in his expectation, 227. 5. &c. his death, ibid. 32. Cratippus his answere to Pompey. 33. 4. Croesus his cause of enmitie with the Me∣des. 28. 7. His Pedigree. 32. 2. His many conquests. ibid. 17. His securitie and delu∣sion. ib. 26. Contemnes Sandanes his good , ibid. 40. Flyeth to Sardes, 33. 17. Is there besieged. ibid. 36. Crueltie in Lords, begetteth hatred in Sub∣iects. 379. 36. Curtius and Trogus mistaken, in Alex∣anders arriuall on the bankes of Tanais. 202. 46. Custome of conquered Nations. 472. 33. Cyna, mother to Eurydice. 228. 17. Cyneas, a principal Counseller to Pyrrhus 298. 25. Is sent Embassador to the Romans. 300. 10. Cyrus his first militarie seruice, 22. 44. He ouerthroweth the Assyrians. 28. 9. His name made reuerend by his goodnesse. 31. 24. His policie in pursuing Croesus. 33. 30. his great mercy. 34. 7. his warre in Scythia, 34. 48. his siege of Babylon. 35. 10. his forcible entry into it, 37, 1, &c. His Supulchre and E∣pitaph. 38. 50. Cyrus, brother to Artaxerxes, his poli∣cie in leuying Souldiers, 112, 35. his vnfor∣tunate valour. 114. 41. &c. D DAMARATVS, the paternall Ancestor of the Tarquinij. 292. 8. Danger in constituting two Generalls of contrary factions. 390. 4. &c. Danger at hand neglected, through vaine hope of future victorie. 560, 22. Darius, the sonne of Hydaspes, his mes∣sage to the Scythians, 49. 50. Strangely answe∣red. ibid. 53. his difficult escape. 50. 10. his iealousie of Histiaeus. 56. 20. Darius Seizeth the Kingdome of Persia. 107. 32. &c. Hee recouereth all, that his Father and Grandfather had lost in Asia, 108. 1. &c. His death. ib. 18. Darius his vaine insolencie, 171. 25. his Armie, and their condition, ibid. 40. Is dis∣comfited at Issus. 180. 26. hee offereth condi∣tions of peace to Alexander, 186. 50. His retrait into Media: 189. 9. his hard destinie, still to follow the worst counsaile. 193. 7. his wofull deiection. ibid. 14. his last speech to Polystratus. 194. 7. Deceipt, ouer-reacht by fraud. Decius Magius his constancie Romans. 60. 19. Delay, the sharpest Enemie to aninuading Armie. 175. 2 . Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus the elder, his loue to Eumenes, 250. 38. his vaine iournie into Cilicia, 259. 22. he taketh Cilles, with his Campe and Armie, 263. 13, &c. his wantonnesse well punisht, 271. 42. Sicyon, and calleth it Demetrias, 279. 26 his haplesse successe, 281. 32. hee obtaineth Cilicia, 283. 32. his gentle dealing with the vngratefull Athenians, 284. 53. his weake∣nesse most apparent in his most Greatnes, 287 6. his vnprincely sentence, ibid. 52. hee re∣pelleth Pyrrhus, 288. 5. his hard escape from Pyrrhus, 289. 1. Is hardly pursued by Agathocles, ibid. 36. his passageouer Ly∣cus. ibid. 45 Demetrius, the sonne of Antigonus Go∣natas, expelleth Alexander the sonne of Pyrrhus, out of Macedon and Epirus, 398. 26. Decayed in vertue, after hee became King. 399. 2. Demetrius Pharius, expelled his King∣dome by the Romans, and entertained by King Philip, 590. 35. he procureth Philip to make a League with Hannibal, 600. 28. A cun∣ning obseruer of Philips humours, 603. 37 Is slaine in attempting Messene. ibid. 42. Demosthenes his temeritie corrected, 331. 1. his good reiected, 332. 15. Is abandoned by Nicias, 333. 6. and basely murdered. ibid. 10. Desire of Rule, belongeth to the nobler part of Reason. 383. 23. Desperation derided by obduratenesse, 615. 6. Dieneces his resolute answere. 63. 40. Dion, banisht for his good meaning, 338. 30. hee returneth with an Armie, and en∣treth Syracuse, 339. 20. is againe expelled, ibid. 34. his death; with the reuenge thereof. ibid. 50. Dionysius the elder, aspireth to the king∣dome of Syracuse, 334. 30. his reuenge taken on his reuolted followers, 335. 10. Is exclu∣ded, and recouereth Syracuse, ibid. 30. His powerfull Nauie, 336. 10. His perfidious dealing with Himilco; pattern'd, 336. 43. He sacketh Tauromenium, 337. 7. his siege of Rhegium, ibid. 10. His death; and his con∣dition. 338. 1, &c. Dionysius the yonger his barbarous cruel∣tie, 338. 12. his hard dealing against Dion, 339. 16. is expelled Syracuse, ibid. 27. hee recouereth it againe, ibid. 53. hee surrendreth the same to Timoleon. 340. 35 Disease common to Princes and priuate persons. 349. 42 Dissension betweene Commanders. 344. 40 Doctrine of policie. 169. 31 Dreames sometimes too true. 345. 4. Duilius his policie in fighting with the Carthaginian Gallies, 350. 28. hee raiseth the siege of Segesta. 351. 35 Dutie out of season. 651. 12 E ELoquence dearely bought. 166. 9. Emperour of Congo his Guard. 196. 35 Emporioe, a Towne of great importance in Spaine. 469. 18 Enterchange of victories betweene Hanni∣bal and Marcellus. 526. 20, &c. Enuie of the Spartans. 140. 10 Epaminondas driueth his Enemies from their fortifications, 146. 38. hee inuadeth Pe∣loponnesus, 148. 48. his politick dealing with the Spartans and Mantinoeans, 150. 40. his notable prowesse, 152. 25, &c. his death. ibid. 50 Epicides his crafty dealing with the Le∣ontines, 514. 1. his costly feasting of the Sy∣racusians. 519. 20 Error of mans iudgment, in valuing things according to common opinion. 384. 3, &c. Errors that are especially to be auoided by a Generall. 435. 25 Euergetes, and the cause of such his deno∣mination. 644. 1, &c. Eumenes is made Gouernour of Cappadocia, 218. 15. his open dealing, 226. 8. His policie in preuenting Craterus, ibid. 32. hee killeth Neoptolemus in single fight, 227. 13 his wisedome in redeeming the loue of his peo∣ple, ibid. 47. the condition of his Armie, 229 19. his admirable resolution, ibid. 40. Is set at liberty by Antigonus, 237. 30. his Coun∣trie and condition, 239. 10. his profitable vse of afained dreame, 244. 30. his passage into Persia, ibid 40. hee fortifieth the Castle of susa, 245. 12. his singular dexterity in or∣dering his Armie. 246. 2. his politike delu∣sion of Antigonus, ibid. 50. his prouident circumspection, 247. 16. his mecre vertue the sole cause of his ouerthrow, ibid. 51. his vnfortunate end. 250 44. Eumenes King of Pergamus his policie to animate his souldiors, 609. 24. hee waxeth contemptible, 731. 24. his voyage to Rome to complaine against Perseus. 731. 51. Eurydice her and murder, 159. 21. Eurydice her title to the Empire of Macedon after Alexanders death, 212, 23. calleth Cassander to her succour, 240. 16. is abando∣ned by her owne followers: ibid. 25. Expectation is alwayes tedious, when the e∣uent is of most importance. 448. 48. F FABIVS his aduised temporizing, 440. 40. he diutdeth the with Minu∣tius, 443. 48. his graue counsaile to Aemy∣lius; with his answere thereunto, 448. 1. &c. his vnanswerabie obiection to Scipio. 471 35. his try all of his sonnes , 498. 24. &c. his recouerie of Tarentum, and by what meanes, 527. 16. &c. his at the growing vertue of Scipio, 553. 22. his opi∣nion touching Hannibals departure out of Italie, 573, 15. hee dieth much about the same time. ibid. 39 Faith of the Petilians towards the Romans. 484. 13. Fayal taken by the English, 362. 3. &c. Feare pretended where warre is intended 663. 5. Flaminius his costly . 437. 30. Flatterers the basest of . 385. 28. Flatterie basenesse. 401, 21, &c. Flight is sometimes commendable, 433. 16. Fons Solis of a strange nature. 184. 21. Fortitude is a diligent preseruer of it selfe. 547, 33. Friends for enemies. 5061 &c. Friendship sought after a strange manner. 656. 13. Fruit of popular iealousie. 438, 38. &c. Furie of a multitude. 546, 19. G GAdes is yeelded to the Romans. 552. 17. Gams report to the 5. at the bat∣taile of . 451. 39. &c Gaules, their furious inuasion of Rome, 295, 39. ouer throwne by Antigonus. 304. 28. Gelon, Prince of Syracuse, 326, 15. his victorie against the Carthaginians, ibid. 35. &c. his . 327 6. his prouident course in transpor∣ting the Armie from to Carthage, 372. 8. is sent to pacifie the , 374. 24. is detained prisoner by them, 375 50. GOD a man of halfe his vertue that day, when hee casteth him into bondage. 386. 29. Greekes terrible to the Barbarians, 113. 17. Gracchus his victorie at , 494 1. &c. Gylippus commeth to the reliefe of Sy∣raeuse, 330. 26. hee winnes the Fort, ibid. 41. hee taketh Nicias prisoner, 333. 12. H HANNIBAL his great valour and wise∣dome, 422, 44. &c. his hereditarie ha∣tred against the Romans, 426, 34. his passage Rhodanus. 427. 50. and ouer the Alpes, 428 . hee the Taurini, and forceth their Towne, 430. 44. his Rhetorick, 431. 25. his politike dismissi∣on of the , 433, 27. his taking of Cla∣stidium, ibid. 50. his perill among the , 436, 12. his dealing with the Ro∣mans after a tricke of their owne. 438. 4. &c. his Stratageme in passing the Hills of Callicula and Casiline, 441. 12. his encou∣ragement to his souldiors, 451. 6. his order in the marshalling of his Armie at the of , ibid. 50. his intelligence in Nola, 464. 10. his siege of Casiline. 465. 20. his at , not so effeminate as is supposed, 466, 2. his bootlesse attempt vpon , 493, 1. the feare of the Romans at his approach to their Citie, 505. 21. he dis∣lodgeth from before it, 507, 1. his ouer-much credulitie, 525. 22. his victorie against Cn. Fuluius. 526, 1. his stratageme against Fa∣bius discouered, 528, 10. his politike sur∣prise of Marcellus, 530, 30. his notable com∣mendations, 539, 30. hee rayseth an Altar, with an inscription of his victories, 554, 25. his Speech at his departure from Italie, 572, 41. at Leptis; and winneth to his partie, 574, 12. his Speech to Sci∣pio vpon their meeting in Afrike, 576. 11. his resolued dealing with a vaine Oratour, 581, 39. his laughing in a generall calami∣tie, 583. 35. his escape from Carthage, 661, 33. his conference with the Romans, 676, 33. his free to Antiochus, 693. 8. his death. 715. 1. Hanno, Admirall of the Carthaginian fleet, 369, 25. is and ouerthrowne by Catulus, 370, 1, &c. hee is a bitter enemie to Amilcar, 373, 42. his ill conduct of the Carthaginian Armie, 387, 12, &c. his ma∣licious iests at Hannibals victories, 467. 10. his vniust accusation of Hannibal, 469, 2. Hardinesse is vnworthie the name of va∣lour, which hath no regard of honestie or friendship. 401. 49. Helpe purchased at a . 407. 14. Hermias his vnreasonable counsaile to Antiochus, 644, 25. his deadly hatred to Epigenes for his counsaile to Antio∣chus, contrary to his owne liking, 645, 30. his treasons are discouered, and himselfe spee∣dily dispatched. 646. 9. Hermocrates his policie to detaine the A∣thenians, 332, 34. his vniust banishment and death. 334, 2. Hicroms woman-Cow. 21, 46. the elder chosen King of Syracuse, 317, 30. his League with the Carthaginians for exterminating the Mamertines out of Sicil, ibid. 50. his great ouer sight in encoun∣tring with Claudius, 319, 40. he from Messans. ibid. 50. Hieron the younger relieueth Carthage, 391, 32. his wise fore-cast in relieuing the and Romans, when they were oppressed. 446, 45. Hieronymus, the last King of , his , 510, 42. his death. 512, 12. Himilco many Townes in Si∣cil, 335, 52. hee besiegeth Syracuse, 336, 13. his trecherous peace with Dionysius repayed with like . ibid. 34. Hippocrates his counterfeit Epistle, with the successe thereof. 515, , &c. His Maiesties prudence and Kingly power, 549, 43. his Iustice, 550, 21. his great boun∣tie and honour conferred vpon martiall men. 718. 10. Histiaeus his practices against the Persian. 54, 31. his escape from Darius his Lieute∣nants, and death. 56, 8. Historians generall affection. 450, 23. Hollanders passage by the mouth of the Duke of Parma's Cannon. 365, 1, &c. Honour without trust, 190, 34. Honour that is acquired by detracting from others worth, seldome thriueth with the possessor, 445, 40. I ICETES his craftie dealing with the Co∣rinthians, 340, 3. hee besiegeth them in the Castle of Syracuse, ibid. 40. is taken by Timoleon, and put to death. 341, 17. Impudence of Roman falsehood, 468. 21. Inarus, King of Lybia, hanged by the Per∣sians. 84, 34. Incoherences in the relation of the Roman Historie. 457, 34. of rigour. 462, 20. Infidelitie findes no sure harbour. 643, 9. Iniuries newly receiued, abolish the memo∣rie of old good turnes. 627, 40. Insolencie well rewarded. 357, 10. Insolencie of a matincus Armie, 374, 2. Inter-regnum among the Romans, and the nature thereof. 445, 47. Iohn Lord Talbot and Aemylius Pau∣lus paralelled. 455, 51, &c. Ioiachim the High Priest the Feast of . 86, 8. Isaurians desperate resolution. 223, 8, &c. K KIng Iames his prudence, and Kingly power, 549, 30. his Iustice, 550, 21. his bountie and honour conferred vpon mar∣tiall men. 718, 10 Knowledge in a Commander, what his E∣nemie ought to doe, is a speciall meane to pre∣uent all hostile attempts. 370, 6. L , their patient valour, 72, 41. their condition of life, 88, 10. are driuen to hard termes, 92, 9. their o∣uer-weening, ibid. 48. they lose their old true friends for new false ones, 93, 45. their Embassie to Corinth. 95, 1 Laodice her malicious reuenge, 641, 33. worthily punished. ibid. 52 League betweene the Romans and . 486, 40 League betweene the Lacedaemonians and Aetolians. 588, 44 Lemnia, a Curtizan, notable resolu∣tion. 53, 15 Lentulus his speech to Aemylius at the battaile of Cannae; with the Comment. 455, 23 Leonatus departeth out of Babylon, 214, 33. and is slaine in fight against the Atheni∣ans. 219, 40 Leonidas his admirable prowesse. 63, 28 Leontius his quarrell with Aratus; and the issue thereof, 596, 40. he rayseth sedition in the Armie, 597, 46. being detected, is put to death. 598, 40 Leosthenes leuyeth an Armie against the Macedonians, 216, 30. he ouerthroweth An∣tipater, 217, 15. is at the siege of La∣mia. 219, 15 his great losse at Sea. 336, 5 Letters from the Carthaginians in Capua directed to Hannibal, intercepted by the Ro∣mans; with the issue thereof. 507, 16 Leutychides his successefull stratageme, 74, 20 Libertie in counsaile. 179, 26 Libertie chayned. 709, 1. &c. Lie: from what ground it is become so terrible a word, 546, 10. their conditions that are most tender in taking it, ibid. 42. Lyers by Record. ibid. 50 Ligurians, their Nature and Condition, 670, 28 Loray-Law. 545, 51 Loue purchased by mild Gouernors, with∣out empayring a of Maiestie. 382, 40 Lycidas, the wofull end of himselfe, his wife, and children. 70, 48 Lycophron expelled Thessalie. 163, 22 Lycurgus buyes his election to the King∣dome of Sparta, 589, 6. he expelleth his fel∣low King, and establisheth his owne tyrannie, 592, 8. &c. Lysimachus murdereth his sonne in law, 286, 52. is taken prisoner by the Thracians, 287, 21. his City Lysimachia ruined by earth∣quake; and himselfe, with his whole family, shortly after extirpate. 291, 1, &c. M MACHIAVEL his obseruation vpon mercinary Souldiers, 380, 7. his lesson to Caesar Borgia. 711, 16 Magnificence of the . 72, 17 Mago commeth to succour Icetes, 340, 44. abandons him through feare, and hang∣eth himselfe. 341, 1, &c. Mago, the brother of Hannibal, his ioy∣full message of the victory at Cannae, 466, 20. his departure from Gades towards Italy, 552, 12. he winneth Genua, 554, 6. he figh∣teth a battaile with a Roman Pro-consull, wherein he receiueth deaths wound, 571, 50, &c. Mamertines trechery to the Messanians, 316, 52. are besieged in Messana, 318, 1. &c. their impudent request to the Romans, i∣bid. 47 his Monument. 207, 33 Mandonius rebelleth against the Romans, 551, 14. and being ouerthrowne, is gently pardoned. 552, 6 Manlius his victory against the . 509, 44 Marcellus repelleth Hannibal from the siege of Nola, 464, 13, &c. His dishonou∣rable aduantage taken vpon Casiline, 497, 36. he taketh Leontium, 514, 30. hee besie∣geth Syracuse, 516, 8. his profitable circum∣spection, 518, 22. his vnder-hand dealing against the Syracusians, during treatie of peace, 520, 25. his winning of Syracuse, 521, 19. his death. 530, 46 Mardonius, Generall of Xerxes Armie against the Greekes, 59, 51. his fearfull flat∣tery, 69, 18. his Embassage to Athens, ibid. 50 he inuadeth Attica, 70, 30. he burneth Athens, 71, 37. is with many thousand I ersians. 73. 5 Marshall of England, his power to preserue euery ones fame and reputation. 548, 43 Martius his miraculous victories, 478, 30 proued idle dreames. 481, 38, &c. Martyrs. 547, 37 Masanissa proffereth his seruice to Scipio against the Carthaginians, 552, 10. the cause of his Reuolt from them to the Romans, 556, 20. is driuen out of his Kingdome by Sy∣phax, 557, 1. he Hanno and his company, 558, 42. hee pursueth Syphax, 562, 51. is restored to his Kingdome, 564, 30. hee leadeth Syphax vnto Cirta, where he marryeth Sophonisba, 565, 30. his heauy Message and Present vnto her, 566, 12. is highly magnified by the Romans, and proclaymed King. ibid. 50 Masistes and his wiues vnfortunate ends. 76, 39 Matho his mutinous Oration against the Carthaginians, 374, 45. is chosen by the Mutiners for one of their chiefe Captaynes, 375, 37. his surious Sally vpon the Cartha∣ginians, 392, 50. is vtterly defeated, and ta∣ken prisoner. 393, 32, &c. Mazcus his treacherous cowardise, 189, 24 Megasthenes his report of Nabucho∣donosor. 9, 36 Meleager proclaymeth Aridaeus King, 214, 20. his plot against Perdiccas is disco∣uered, ibid. 38. his death. 215, 41 Men that lye in wait for others, are sel∣dome heedfull of what may befall themselues, 622, 5 Menedemus and his Armie ouerthrowne by Spitamenes. 203, 25 Menelaus his great indiscretion, 273, 18. is besieged in Salamis, ibid. 43. is forced to yeeld vp the Towne and his Armie, 274, 49 Metapontines and Thurines yeeld to Han∣nibal. 502, 22 Midias his detestable murder. 131, 30 Miltiades good seruice ill rewarded, 58, 30 Minos his pursuit of Daedalus, 323, 1, &c. Molo rebelleth against Antiochus, 644, 28. is forced to retyre towards Media, ibid. 51. vpon aduertisement returnes, and by surprize ouer-throweth Xoenetas and his whole Armie, 645, 11. is abandoned by his followers, and layeth hands on himselfe, ibid. 44 Murder by guile. 550, 5 Muster of the Macedonians, with the an∣cient manner thereof. 720, 15 Mutines his good seruice procures him . 521, 41 His wrongfull disgrace by the Carthagini∣ans, loseth them Sicil. 522, 40 N NABIS defeated by Philopoemen, 675, 47. and is slaine by treacherie of the Aetolians. 678, 23, &c. Naburzanes his insolent behauiour to∣ward Darius. 191, 38 Nature . 24, 35 Necessity, and other reasons, of employing Mercinaries in the Wars of the Netherlands, 381, 27 Neoptolemus his dissimulation with Eu∣menes, 225, 41. is shamefully beaten, 226, 1. &c. Nicanor timely put into Athens by Cas∣sander, 233, 32. hee surprizeth Piraeus, 234, 10. his victory at Sea against Clitus, 236, 40 Nicias abandoneth the Athenian Gallies, 332, 25. is entangled in his pissage to Came∣rina, 331, 1. yeeldeth himselfe, and is barba∣rously murdered. ibid. 12 Nitocris a Magnificent Princesse, 24, 11. O OBseruations of celestiall bodies, the surest markes of Time. 262, 19 Obseruations in the change of Empires, 585, 2 Offenders are alwayes afraid of their fel∣lowes, if more innocent than themselues, 389, 35 Office of the Roman Censors. 495, 35 Olympias, enemy to Antipater, 216, 49 is reuoked into Macedon, 231, 31. her inhu∣mane cruelty, 240, 40. is condemned to death, 242. her great Estate, and peruerse condi∣tions. 243, 6 Orchards in the Ayre. 20, 21 Orestes murdered by his Tutor Aeropus, 159, 4 Ostentation checked by vnexpected neces∣sity. 511, 44 P PACUVIVS CALAVIUS an ambitious Nobleman of Capua, 458, 40. his politike course taken to oblige both the Senate and People of Capua vnto him. 459, 8 Panick terrors. 506, 30 Panormus, now called Palermo, by whom founded. 323, 31 Papyrius his encouragement to the Ro∣mans against the Samnites. 177, 40 Parsimonie without thrift. 469, 28 Passion in extremitie. 33, 43 Patience of the Spaniards. 367, 25 Patience of awayting a conuenient season, is of great importance for obtayning victory. 448, 40 Pausanias aduanceth to succour the Athe∣nians, 71, 28. he recouereth Bizantium from the Persians, 79, 40. is condemned as a Traytor, and dyeth in banishment, 138, 10 Perdiccas his nature and quality, 213, 40. his fond ouer-weening, ibid. 48. he ioy∣neth with Leonatus, 214, 50. his policy to entrap Meleager, 215, 9. is made the Kings Protector, and Commander of his forces, ibid. 48. he conquereth Cappadocia, 218, 9 his vnfortunate passage ouer Nilus, 224, 26 Persepolis burnt at the request of an Har∣lot, 30, 31. an opulent Citie. 191, 37 Perseus is sent by his Father against the Dardanians, 620, 38. his timorous nature, 724, 30. is blamed by the Romans for redu∣cing his rebellious subiects to obedience, 726, 30, &c. his iourney to Delphi, 729, 34. a good Treasurer for the Romans, 742, 34, &c. resolueth to fight with the Romans, 755. is there ouerthrowne, and the first that fled thence, 757. he takes Sanctuarie, 758. his fond conceit in preseruing his treasures, ibid. is coozened by Cretians, 760. his base deiection before Aemylius, 761. is led Captiue to Rome; where he dyes miserably, 773 Persians ouerthrowne by their owne policie, 75, 40. their barbarous cruelty toward their prisoners, 191, 21. their slauish subiection, 265, 30 Petellia, a strong Citie in Italy. 382, 41 Peucestes affrighted at the of Antigonus, 246. 44. his base retrayt from the Armie, 249, 10. worthily rewarded for his treachery to Eumenes. 251, 51 Phalanx of the Macedonians. 633, 21 Phalaris his inst Tyrannie, 325, 49. his death. ibid. 33 Pharnabazus assisteth the Thracians a∣gainst the Greekes, 128, 19. hee repelleth A∣gesilaus, 134, 44. his politike dealing a∣mong the Greekes, 138, 43. he marrye: h one of Artaxerxes his Daughters. 141, 18 Pharnus and his seuen sonnes. 25, 46 Phidippides his familiar Deuill, 57, 25 Philadelphus the first of the Aegyptian Kings that made league with the Romans, 641, 30 Philetaerus his fortunate mishap, 609, 2. Philip of Macedon is left for an with the Illyrians, 160, 14. his escape thence, ibid. 44. he vanquisheth Argaeus, 161, 15 his politike of Pydna to the Olynthains, ibid. 54. he deliuereth Phe∣res from the tyrannie of Lycophron, 162, 3. ouer-throweth Onomarchus and his whole Armie, 163, 17. he Olynthus, ibid. 50. his arbitrement for the Kingdome of Thrace, 164, 15. his policy in ayding the Boeotians, ibid. 26. he inuadeth Asia, 166, 36. his last feast, ibid. 44. his diuersissues, 168, 6 Philip, King of Macedon, sonne of De∣metrius, expelleth Attalus out of Opus, 488, 30. his gallint demeanour towards the Achaeans his Confederates, 489, 3. his Embassage to the Romans, 582, 12. is for∣ced to quit Aetolia for the defence of his owne Countrey, 590, 32. his successefull Expedition against the Eleans and , 591, 2. is forced to rise from Palaea, by the treason of one of his owne Captaynes, 595, 30. hee wasteth Aetolia, and carryeth away a great bootie, 596, 11. &c. hee graunteth peace to the Aetolians, 600, 12. and enters into league with Han∣nibal, ibid. 28. his double-hand dealing with the Nobility and Commons of Mes∣sene, 603, 42 by his vn-iust courses makes his his Enemies, 604, 48. his odious dissimulation, 610, 50. stra∣tageme in the winning of Prinassus, 611, 38. his , or vnaptnesse, to retayne old friends; and his forwardnesse in seeking new enemies, 612, 48. hee sub∣dueth the of Athamania, 687, 4. his magnanimity construed by the Ro∣mans, as want of reuerence to their Estate, 709, 31. is enforced to abandon diuers Townes by him conquered, with leaue of the Romans, ibid. 40. his cruelty towards the Maronites, 710, 42. hee growes iealous of his sonne Demetrius, 713, 19. whom hee puts to death, 721, 40. his end, 723, 10, &c. Philistus, a notable Parasite, 338, 35. is taken and executed. 339, 31 Philopoemen his first action, 410, 30. his great dexteritie and sufficiency in Warre, 606, 30. he killeth Machanidas the Tyrant of Lacedaemon, 608, 29. he was a bad Sea-man, 675, 5. his policy to ouer∣throw Nabis, ibid. 50. his lamentable end. 714, 10, &c. Phocion is made chiefe Ruler in A∣thens, 221, 41. his iust dealing, 234, 5. is depriued, and compelled to flye for his life, ibid. 30. his Commendation, 235, 24 Phyllides his Stratageme, 143, 1. &c. Pisistratus his diuers changes of , 52, 24 Polybius his impartiall dealing, 437, 19. his worthy reprehension of Fabius the Roman Historian. 470, 8 Polysperchon is made Protector of the King and Empire of Macedon, 231, 5. his vnthankefull nature, 232, 50. his cruel∣ty to his old friend, 235, 15. his disho∣nourable departure from Megalopolis, 236, 13. his Treachery vnto his Soueraigne, 240, 14. and to young Pupill, 269, 30 Polyxenidas surprizeth the Rhodian Fleet. 694, 15 Porcius Cato his condition, 707, 2, &c. Porus his manly answere to Alexander, 206, 30. is restored to his Estate, with a great enlargement. 207, 5 Power of the Medes. 27, 50 Poyet, Chancellor to Francis the first, worthily punished for his falshood, 550, 31 Praenestines honest resolution, 465, 3 their admirable patience. 465, 40 Preferment by courting the mul∣titude. 419, 38 Pride beaten with her owne weapons, 462, 10. and punisht with contempt. 522, 16 Prouisions of Warre, and absolute power of commaund, are of greater vse in neede, than the willing readinesse of friends, 89, 45 Psammones his gentle reprehension of Alexander. 184, 33 Ptolemie Lagus his subtile dealing, to debarre all claime to the Macedonian Em∣pire, 213, 10. is greatly beloued of the Ae∣gyptians, 223, 24. hee sideth with Antipa∣ter, ibid. 48 his happie compassion, 224, 46. hee scoures the Sea with his Fleet, vn∣der the conduct of Seleucus, 254, 46. hee subdueth Cyprus, 259, 15. hee surprizeth , and taketh Tyre and , 260. 32. hee retyreth into Aegypt, 263, 43. hee ob∣taineth and Corinth, 268. 47. po∣litike course against Antigonus, 276, 46. hee besiegeth Salamis, 285, 10. his vertues, 290, 35 Ptolemie Euergetes, King of Aegypt, takes part with Cleomenes, 406, 15. &c. Publicola his sinceritie. 293, 21 Punick Faith. 342, 40 Purposes intended by men, but disposed by GOD. 406, 36 his hard beginning, 286, 10. his personall valour, 287, 36. is made Patron of the Athenians, 289, 21. is for saken by the Macedonians, 290, 50. is called into Italy by the Tarentines, 398, 17. his offer of peace to the Romans; with their answere, 299, 10. his Tyrannie in Sicil, and departure thence, 303, 8. hee recalls his sorces out of Italie, 305, 37. his excuse sor his dissembling with Sparta, 306. 13. his fatall surprize of Ar∣gos. 307, 13. &c. Python employed against the Rebels in Asia, 218, 16. is deluded, and slaine by An∣tigonus. 251, 27 Q QVINTIVS his quipping answere to Philip, 630, 10. his profitable obser∣uation, 633, 31. his checke giuen to the in∣solent Aetolians, 636, 47. his triumph, 668, 24. his griefe mixed with gladnesse, 682, 26. his peremptorie command and power. 691, 2. R REasons moouing the Romans to vnder∣take the Warre in Sicil. 319, 6 Rebellion of diuers Prouinces against the Persian. 148, 2, &c. Rebells confidence in the multitude, how vaine a thing it is. 599, 15 Rechlesnesse of the Campanes. 501, 28 Regulus his encounter with a monstrous Serpent, 354, 35. he forceth Tunis, ibid. 50. his death. 356, 26 Retreat in the head of an Enemies Armic, how dangerous. 418, 26 Rhodians recouer from the Macedo∣nian, 635, 32. their stout message to Antio∣chus, 656, 23, &c. are slighted by the Ro∣mans. 732, 50 Romans, their admirable courage and indu∣strie, 358, 24. their great losse by Sea, ibid. 32, their whole losse by Sea during the first Punick Warre, 371, 1, &c. their answere in Senate to one of Priuernum, ibid. 37. their policie to picke a quarrell, 396, 50. their con∣federacie with the Saguntines, 397, 20. &c. their great forces at the time of Concolita∣nus his inuasion, 417, 10, &c. their Embas∣sage to Carthage, 425, 15. their praecipitate affection, 446, 8. their magnanimitie in the middest of their greatest troubles, 447, 8. their miserable condition immediately after the battaile of Cannae, 461, 6. the shifts they were driuen to, 462, 7. their policie in vpholding, in their seuerall Prouinces, the greatnesse and reputation of such (and their families) as had first subdued them vnto their Empire, 509, 34. their generall affection to the good of the Commonweale, 524, 40. are abandoned by twelue of their owne Colonies, 528, 29. their imaginarie Prerogatiue, 567, 30. their cuflome when they tooke a Towne by assault, 575, 25. their colourable thankes to the Athenians, 615, 37. their first vse of Elephants in fight, 621, 20, &c. their answere to the Embassadours of Attalus, 625, 21. their imperious answere to An∣tiochus his Embassadours, 639, 10. their reasons not to bee sorry for Hannibals c∣scape. 662, 16 Rome nothing so tyramnous as Carthage. 379, 22 Rowing after a strange fashion. 350, 2 Roxane payed with her owne coyne. 268, 10 Rule of the husband ouer the wife, and of parents ouer their children. 384, 21 Rumors cast out of purpose, to giue an ho∣nest colour to the Warre against Philip. 612, 34. S SAguntines feare of Hannibal. 423, 11 Saguntum recouer ed by the Romans. 477, 30 Saguntum found out in Athens. 615, 25 Samnites and Hetrurians become Tribu∣tarie to Rome. 297, 3 , neare Garnsey, taken by the , and againe recouered. 203, 51 Scaliger his opinion concerning Naboni∣dus. 9, 36 Scipio P. is sent Proconsul into Spaine, 480, 20. hee winneth Carthagena, 481, 12. his victorie against Hanno and Ma∣go, 540, 30. his wary vse of his Spanish friends, 541, 23. hee expelleth the Cartha∣ginians out of the Continent of Spaine, 542, 40. his exemplaire iustice vpon his muti∣nous Souldiers, 551, 38. is chosen Consul, 552, 32. is furthered by the people in his African voyage, against the liking of the Se∣nate, 555, 1, &c. he Locri, ibid. 20. the politike vse he made of Syphax his Embassage, 557, 26. hee landeth in Afrike, ibid. 47. the manner of his Winter-Campe, 559, 6. his stratageme to fire the Camps of Syphax and Asdrubal, 560, 10. his fight with the Carthaginians in the Hauen of Vti∣ca, 563, 53. his dislike taken at Masanissa, his marriage with Sophonisba, 566, 4, &c. his Embassage to the Carthaginians, 570, 4. his courteous vsage of the Carthaginian Em∣bassadours, 575, 20. his answere to Hanni∣bal vpon their meeting in Afrike, 576, 49. his triumphant returne through Italie to Rome, 584, 4, &c. is enforced to abandon Rome, through the malice of the Tribunes, 706, 40. his death. ibid. Seleucus flyeth to Ptolemie, 252, 32. he surprizeth Nicanors Campe, 261, 50, &c. hee ouer throweth Antigonus, 381, 36. his marriage with Stratonica, 283, 10. his iea∣lousie of Demetrius, 290, 13. his pretence of quarrell against Lysimachus, ibid. 47. his short ioy. 291, 7 Sempronius recalled with his Armie from hts determined voyage into Afrike, for the defence of Italie. 431, 14 Senones, a people of the Gaules, expelled out of their Countrey by the Romans, 416, 17 Sicil, whence so named. 322, 31 Slaues in Nature, though not in Law. 385, 7 Sophonisba her tragicall end. 566, 21 Spaniards smothered to death. 198, 3 Spendius, a principall Ring-leader of the Carthaginian Mutiners, 374, 35. he takes the field against Amilcar, 390, 44. is cruci∣fied before Tunes. 392, 40 Sphodrias his fond attempt vpon the ha∣uen of Athens. 143, 37 Spitamenes murdered by his wife, 204, 46 Spoyle and riches of most force with the common Souldier. 178, 22 Spoyle diuided before victorie gotten, 412, 24 State of great spirit, but small force, 133, 23 Stedfastnesse in taking reuenge, is wrong∣fully held a point of honor. 389, 42 Stipendiaries of Tyrants fight more cou∣ragiously than those of free Cities or States, 607, 36 Stratageme of the Capuans against those of Cumae. 492, 10 Styx. 613, 5 Sulpicius the Roman Consul inuadeth Macedon, 615, 35. forceth Antipatria, 619, 4. is enforced to retyre to Apollonia, 622, 45 Superstition of the Persians. 44, 47 Syphax entreth into league with the Ro∣mans, 543, 49. but afterwards sideth with the Carthaginians against them, 557, 10. hee bringeth ayde to Carthage, 559, 3. his rech∣lesse manner of encamping, ibid. 43. is fired thence by Scipio, 560, 45. is driuen home into his owne Kingdome, 562, 45. he fighteth a battaile with Masanissa & Laelius, where∣in he is taken prisoner, 564, 53. his exclamation against Sophonisba, 565, 44. and is sent prisoner to Rome. 568, 39 Syracusians Petalisme, 327, 39. their vn∣fortunate expedition against Ducetius, 328, 3. their Warre with the Athenians, ibid. 35. they locke vp the Athenians Fleet in their Hauen. 331, 30. T TAnistrie Custome in Ireland. 544, 38 Teleutias surprizeth the Athenian Nauie. 141, 8 Temeritie of the Roman Consuls. 358, 3 Terentius Varro his base of himselfe towards the Campan Embassadours, 460, 1 Teuta, Queene of Illyria, her insolent handling the Roman Embassadors, 413, 40. is enforced to begge peace of the Romans. 415, 10, &c. Thankes ill bestowed but in way of policie. 461, 32 Thebans send Embassadours to Athens, 137, 44. their Armie before Sparta, 145, 15 Thebes glad to be rid of her Founder, 258, 48 Themistocles his policie to alienate the Ionians from the Persians, 64, 53. his sharpe answere to an vnbeseeming taunt, 66, 40. his predominating vertue, 69, 10. his po∣licie torid Xerxes out of Greece, ibid. 34. is sent on Embassage to Lacedaemon, 78, 46. his Plane-tree. 532, 35 Theocles his discouerie of Sicil, 324, 33 Theramenes enforced to drinke poyson, 109, 10 Thimbro the Ionians against the Persian, 129, 33. is slaine by Struthas, 140, 25 Thrasybulus surprizeth Phila, 109, 10. and taketh Piraeus, 110, 7. he taketh part with the Thebans, 137, 40. recoue∣reth Bizantium from the Lacedaemonians, 139, 43. and is slaine at , 140, 29 Thrasybulus his iust punishment, 327, 20 Tiberius his vaine curiositie. 20, 3 Timoleon is sent to the ayde of Syra∣cuse, 340, 10. his Stratageme to free him∣selfe from the Carthaginian Gallies, ibid. 20. hee surprizeth Icetes his Armie, ibid. 32. hee the Castle of Syracuse, 341, 4. his great victorie against the Carthaginians, ibid. 10. hee freeth of all her Tyrants, ibid. 24. Tissaphernes his dealing with Cyrus, 111, 42. becomes for his base conditions, 112, 28. his trecberous Embassage to the Graecian Armie, 119, 45. he burneth the Countrey about the Greekes, 121, 2. his cowardize, 132, 43. is finally ouertaken by his owne cunning. 135, 9 Tithraustes his wise course against the Greekes. 136, 50 Treason obtruded vpon guiltlesse persons, through the false accusation of a principall Conspirator. 511, 10 Treatie betweene Philip of Macedon and T. Quintius, 629, 14. and betweene the Romans and Antiochus. 658, 27 Trust reposed in knowne Traytors, well worthy to be betrayed. 413, 4 Truth of good tidings many times not presently enquired, through the suddaine ioy of a vaine report. 485, 32 persecuted by its owne power, 376, 40. properly defined, ibid. 49. it is a distinct vice from all others, 383, 20. the true names thereof. 384, 10. V VAlour of small force without aduised∣nesse. 391, 10 Valour scornes to bunt after opinion, 549, 30 Vanitie for a Prince to engage himselfe in a businesse of dangerous importance, vpon the promised assurance of a State meerely po∣pular. 681, 37 Varro T. his against Fabius, 443, 18. his vaine boasting, 446, 30. his obstinacie against his Colleagues good coun∣saile, 449, 11. his manner of embattailing the Roman Armie, 452, 49. his chiefest wise∣dome in timely flight. 455, 6 Vermina, sonne of Syphax, ouer∣throwne by the Romans. 580, 32 Vertue (vnfortunate) contemned. 94, 22. Vertue iustly termed Heroicall. 385, 38 Victorie neuer friendlesse. 340, 33 Victorie, to generous mindes, is onely an inducement to moderation. 636, 28 Victorie beyond hope. 648, 27 Violence of great Armies is often broken vpon small Townes or Forts. 589, 44 , a goodly Citie in Afrike. 387, 1. W WAnt of money findes many blinde excuses. 462, 30 Water of Styx. 613, 5 Wisedome with the latest, 33, 46. Wise men are not mooued with euery rumour. 440, 50. Wisedome often taught by , 532, 40 Wretchednesse of subiects liuing vnder the gouernment of a tyrannicall Citie. 379, 1 Wrongs that are insolent, are the most . 378, 15. X XANTIPPVS made Generall of the Car∣thaginians, 355, 20. hee vanquisheth the Romans. 356, 6 Xoenetas is sent with forces by An∣tiochus to suppresse Molo, 644, 34. his politike passage ouer Tigris, ibid. 48. but is made fruitlesse through his owne follie. 645, 1, &c. Xenophon his wise answere to the Em∣bassadors of Tissaphernes, 119, 52. his pro∣uidence for safetie of the Armie, 120, 47. hee conducteth the Armie ouer the Riuer Cen∣trites, 121, 38. hee defeateth Teribazus, 122, 24. his aduised answere to the Sinopi∣an Embassadors, 124, 19. his speech to his Souldiers, 128, 38. hee ransacks Bithy∣nia. 129, 2, &c. Xerxes his barbarous ingratitude, 60, 34. his resolution on a wrong ground, 62, 20. his distraction, beholding the Greekes resolution, 63, 20. hee refuseth the counsaile of Arte∣misia, and followeth worse, 67, 37. his dis∣honorable returne to Persia, 69, 26. is for∣tunate against the Aegyptians, but not against the Greekes, 77, 6. his dishonorable peace with the Greekes, 81, 7. his owne sonne exe∣cuted for his death, which was contriued by another. ibid. 35. Z ZOPIRVS his deare loue to Darius, 48, 31. Ztoberis, a great Riuer in Par∣thia. 194, 40. FINIS. FOR THOV SHALT LABOR PEACE PLENTIE printer's device of William Stansby LONDON Printed by William Stansby for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paules Church∣yard at the signe of the Crane. 1617.